                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PRIVATE EQUITY AND FINANCIAL STABILITY:
             EVIDENCE FROM FAILED BANK RESOLUTION IN THE CRISIS

                                      Emily Johnston-Ross
                                           Song Ma
                                          Manju Puri

                                       Working Paper 28751
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28751


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021

This version: April 2021. First Version: September 2019. For helpful comments, we thank
Haelim Anderson, Christa H.S. Bouwman, Michael Ewens, Edith Hotchkiss, Filippo Mezzanotti,
David Robinson, Paul Soto, James Weston, and Ayako Yasuda. We also thank seminar and
conference participants at AFA Annual Meeting, Corporate Finance Conference at Washington
University in St. Louis, Econometric Society World Congress, MFA Annual Meeting, Southern
California PE Conference, Texas A&M University Young Scholar Symposium, Bank of Italy,
Boston College (Carroll), CAFRAL (Reserve Bank of India), Duke University, European
Stability Mechanism, FDIC Center for Financial Research, Florida (Warrington), Georgia Tech
(Scheller), Luxembourg School of Finance, Michigan State, New York Fed, Northwestern
(Kellogg), UBC (Sauder), UMass-Amherst (Isenberg), Utah (Eccles), Villanova, Virginia
(Darden). Xugan Chen, Gen Li, and Yi Wang provided excellent research assistance. We are
grateful to subject matter experts at the FDIC, including Joshua Christie, Lynn Shibut, Jane
Slattery, and many others, for sharing their knowledge of institutional details. Any errors are
entirely our own. The analysis, conclusions, and opinions set forth here are those of the author(s)
alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Emily Johnston-Ross, Song Ma, and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity and Financial Stability: Evidence from Failed Bank Resolution in the Crisis
Emily Johnston-Ross, Song Ma, and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 28751
May 2021
JEL No. E65,G18,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the role of private equity (PE) in failed bank resolutions after the 2008
financial crisis, using proprietary FDIC failed bank acquisition data. PE investors made
substantial investments in underperforming and riskier failed banks, particularly in geographies
where local banks were also distressed, filling the gap created by a weak, undercapitalized
banking sector. Using a quasi-random empirical design based on detailed bidding information, we
show PE-acquired banks performed better ex post, with positive real effects for the local
economy. Overall, PE investors had a positive role in stabilizing the financial system through
their involvement in failed bank resolution.

Emily Johnston-Ross                             Manju Puri
FDIC                                            Fuqua School of Business
550 17th St NW                                  Duke University
Washington, DC 20429                            100 Fuqua Drive
emjohnston@FDIC.gov                             Durham, NC 27708-0120
                                                and NBER
Song Ma                                         mpuri@duke.edu
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
song.ma@yale.edu
1. Introduction

Private equity (PE) has become an important component in the financial system. An extensive
literature explores the effects of private equity buyouts on firm-level outcomes, such as
employment, productivity, product quality, and innovation, with some papers arguing that such
buyouts positively affect the operations of target companies. 1 At the same time, the private equity
industry generates much controversy. Critics of the private equity industry often argue that private
equity transactions involve heavy financial engineering schemes that introduce a substantial debt
burden on the target companies and default risks to the banking sector (Andrade and Kaplan, 1998;
Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). This concern could be exacerbated during an economic downturn
due to the cyclicality of private equity investment (Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti, 2019).

     How does private equity interact with and affect the stability of the financial system, especially
during periods of crisis? Despite its importance, there has been little research on the matter. In this
paper, we investigate this question by examining private equity investors' engagement in the failed
bank resolution process in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis. This is a novel setting to study private
equity and financial stability. To begin with, bank failures and their resolutions are a salient feature
of financial crises, and have a significant real effect on the economy (Bernanke, 1983; Granja,
Matvos, and Seru, 2017). Indeed, banks are central to the functioning of financial markets and
have important externalities (Gorton and Winton, 2003). As a result, our setting allows us to
examine private equity investors' role in one of the most crucial steps in stabilizing the financial
system in a crisis. Moreover, the setting is unique compared to most of the PE literature, and thus
demands a separate investigation. Compared to industrial firms in which private equity investors
often intervene, banks are subject to more stringent regulation, 2 and require unique expertise and
human capital. This non-bank involvement in banks also generates a lot of controversy.

     The role of PE in failed bank resolution is a priori unclear. There are concerns that PE
investors could exert negative influences on financial stability. PE investors may take advantage
of the fragile banking sector and target high-quality assets under fire sales. Banks have safety nets


     1
       See, for example, Kaplan (1989), Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990), John, Lang, and Netter (1992), Boucly, Srear,
and Thesmar (2011), Lerner, Sorensen, and Stromberg (2011), Davis et al. (2014), Bernstein et al. (2016), and
Bernstein and Sheen (2016).
     2
       For example, a list of federal banking regulations can be found here: https://www.stlouisfed.org/federal-
banking-regulations/.

                                                           1
and backstops that may also be exploited by PE investors. Further, PE acquisitions may be value
destroying if PE investors are not well prepared to operate a bank.

    On the other hand, PE investors could have a unique advantage in stabilizing the financial
system through acquiring failed banks. First, PE investors have a higher risk appetite, and this may
allow them to target riskier and lower quality failed banks that are less appealing to traditional
bank acquirers. Under this line of reasoning, PE investors complement the bank acquirers through
the "selection" of failed banks. Second, during those financial downturns, PE investors may have
relatively more stable funding (Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti, 2019), bringing in new capital
in times of capital scarcity. Third, PE investors have the expertise to turn around distressed firms
in adverse economic situations (Hotchkiss, Smith, and Strömberg, 2011; Jiang, Li, Wang, 2012;
Cohn, Hotchkiss, Towery, 2020).

    This paper exploits detailed, proprietary failed bank acquisition data at the FDIC. We observe
information on failed banks, bidding, and acquisition activities. We identify PE investors who
participated in failed bank resolutions, both as bidders of the failed bank's assets in failed bank
auctions and as acquirers of the failed bank's assets when awarded the winning bid. We further
augment the data with bank operation data extracted from the Consolidated Reports of Condition
and Income "Call Reports," the FDIC Summary of Deposits (SOD) and the FDIC Reports of
Structure Change. We also supplement our data using PE-level information from Preqin.

    Who do PE investors acquire? PE acquisitions are significant, totaling about a quarter of all
failed bank assets acquired in the period 2009­2014. We find that PE investors bid for, and
eventually acquire, failed banks that are of poorer quality and higher risk compared to those that
were acquired by banks. PE-acquired banks, on average, are larger and more undercapitalized,
evidenced in their lower tier 1 risk-based capital ratio (measuring a bank's core equity capital).
They tend to have a lower ratio of core deposits (which measures a stable source of funds for the
bank). PE-acquired failed banks also have lower profitability prior to failure, captured by the net
interest margin. PE-acquired banks also hold larger proportions of riskier loans. For example,
during the crisis, construction and development (C&D) loans had higher levels of
underperformance leading to an increase in credit risk ratings. PE-acquired banks, on average, hold
27 percent more C&D loans, relative to the 17.9 percent C&D loans to total loans in bank-acquired
institutions.


                                                   2
    PE investors also focus on banks that are less likely to immediately synergize with healthier
existing banks. Granja, Matvos, and Seru (2017) show that bank acquirers are more interested in
purchasing failed banks that are geographically close to themselves to realize informational
benefits and economies of scale. Hence the natural acquirers of failed banks are healthy local banks.
We show that failed banks whose neighboring banks are in worse health are more likely to be
acquired by PE investors--when neighboring banks have lower tier 1 capital, higher proportions
of C&D loans and higher proportions of other real estate owned (OREO), which can reflect larger
amounts of distressed real estate properties held by the bank due to foreclosure.

    This evidence together points to a sorting pattern of failed banks with their plausible acquirers:
PE acquirers complement banks in this market by bidding and ultimately acquiring lower-quality
and higher-risk failed banks. In doing so, PE investors help channel capital that can fill the gap
created by a weak, undercapitalized banking sector and help meet the huge needs for new capital.
The PE presence allows more failed banks to avoid being liquidated and the local financial system
to be preserved. Comparing our data with a simple counterfactual world without PE investors
acquiring any banks, 25 (5.5 percent) more of the banks that failed during this time would have
been liquidated, and another 37 (8.1 percent) would have gone to a higher-cost bidder. In total, we
estimate that PE acquisitions allowed the FDIC to reduce resolution costs by $3.63 billion.

    We next ask: how do PE-acquired banks perform post acquisition? Filling the gap in the failed
bank resolution process left by undercapitalized bank buyers, as documented above, is valuable.
However, if PE interventions introduce excessive risks and long-term underperformance into the
financial system, the overall impact of PE would have to be viewed with caution. The empirical
challenge to isolate the effect of PE on post-acquisition performance of banks is the very
acquisition selection pattern that we present above. Banks and PE investors target a different
segment of the failed bank market, making any post-acquisition pattern a combination of treatment
and selection.

    To better identify the effect of PE acquirers, an ideal experiment would compare the post-
acquisition performance of two otherwise similar banks of which one is quasi-randomly allocated
to a PE investor and one to a bank. Our empirical strategy leverages the proprietary FDIC failed
bank bidding data to generate a quasi-random sample. We proxy the ideal experiment by focusing
on a set of banks that were bid on by both PE investors and by banks (i.e., selectable to both PE


                                                    3
investors and banks) and whose bidding values were close (below five percent of the total bank
assets). Essentially, the exercise compares banks that were (marginally) won by bank acquirers
and those (marginally) won by PE investors. This comparison allows us to significantly mitigate
the confounding selection problem and more cleanly isolate the direct effect of PE intervention.
Reassuringly, in this quasi-random sample, PE-acquired banks and bank-acquired banks look
statistically identical along dozens of characteristics, and the winning probability of PE investors
and banks in those auctions are nearly identical (52 percent vs. 48 percent).

     Armed with this empirical strategy, we explore several different performance metrics. First,
we track branch closures of acquired failed banks. PE-acquired failed bank branches are less likely
to close than bank-acquired failed bank branches. This result is robust to our preferred specification
in which we compare two bank branches that belong to two banks that failed in the same year and
the same state. For these branches, the only difference is whether it was quasi-randomly won by
another bank or a PE investor. It is important to note that the lower branch closing rate of PE-
acquired banks is not due to the fact that bank mergers often lead to consolidation of local branches,
which would make the higher closing rate in bank acquisitions mechanical. In fact, we also find a
higher probability of exiting a county altogether in bank-acquired banks, which cannot be
explained merely by consolidating local branches. Next, we find that PE-acquired banks
experience a significantly higher increase, roughly 35 percent higher growth across different
specifications, in branch-level deposits compared to other failed banks. Given deposits are the base
for profits, lending capacity, and market power, we interpret this as a positive indicator for PE-
acquired banks.

     The ability to maintain the scale of operation and a robust deposit base is an important
indicator of bank health and performance. More importantly, providing stable access to credit by
operating a local branch has important consequences for local businesses and the recovery from
the financial crisis (Nguyen, 2019). The positive performance patterns of PE-acquired failed banks
lead us to hypothesize that those acquisitions facilitate the regional economic recovery from the
crisis, and this is the basis of our next test.

     We adapt the same quasi-random framework to a county-level analysis. In this analysis, we
compare two counties--each county has a failed bank branch, but one is acquired by a PE investor
and one is acquired by a bank. These counties are statistically identical prior to the acquisitions.


                                                    4
During the post-acquisition period, however, those counties with PE acquisitions experience
stronger recovery from the crisis--faster employment growth and increased total and per capita
income. One potential channel for this is the sustained lending activities supported by the acquired
bank branches. Compared to bank-intervened counties, PE-intervened counties witness higher
growth in small business lending, both in terms of the number and amount; those loans are also
made at a lower interest rate.

    The documented positive performance may be partially attributable to the expertise of the
management team that PE investors bring into failed banks. Using hand-collected data on CEOs
appointed at banks after PE acquisitions, we show that PE investors hire ex-bankers who, on
average, have nearly 30 years of experience in the banking industry, and more than half of them
were CEOs of other banks before being appointed at the failed banks. More than 60 percent of the
CEOs had experience in the local area of the failed bank, more than a third specialized in
turnaround management and troubled and distressed assets, and about a third had previously
founded a bank that eventually merged with a larger buyer.

    Taken together, our results suggest that private equity plays an important role in failed bank
resolution in a time of crisis. PE investors provide much needed capital in acquisitions, which
helps fill the gap of a weak banking sector at a time when the natural potential acquirers--local
banks--are themselves in distress. PE acquirers also help turn around the acquired failed banks,
preserving their branch structure, helping deposit growth, and managing the loan portfolio losses,
with positive effects for the real economy. While there are natural policy concerns in allowing PE
firms to form bank holding companies and in bringing in non-banks into banking in general, our
results suggest that, despite these concerns, private financial investors can play a positive role in
resolving distressed banks in a crisis.

    This paper connects to several strands of literature. It is related to an extensive literature that
studies the role of private equity in the economy (e.g., Kaplan, 1989; Lichtenberg and Siegel, 1990;
John Lang and Netter, 1992; Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2011; Lerner et al., 2011; Cohn,
Hotchkiss and Towery, 2013; Davis et al., 2014; Bernstein et al., 2016; Bernstein and Sheen, 2016;
DeYoung et al., 2018), and particularly in some regulated industries in recent work (e.g., Eaton,
Howell, and Yannelis, 2019; Kirti and Sarin, 2020; Gandhi, Song, and Upadrashta, 2021; Gupta
et al., 2021). These studies mostly focus on firms and almost exclusively on normal times, while


                                                    5
our focus is on the distressed state of the world. The paper on PE that is closest to ours is Bernstein,
Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019), which studies PE investment in industrial firms in the crisis and
shows that PE investors did not exacerbate the negative shock to firms. However, the behavior of
PE investors in a highly regulated and sensitive industry such as banking is likely different from
PE's behavior elsewhere. Our key contribution is to tackle the role of PE on financial stability by
directly examining the interaction between PE and the central actors--banks, particularly failed
banks that can result in significant costs to the financial system.

    This paper also relates to an emerging body of work examining the behavior of financial
institutions during the financial crisis (e.g., Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010; Ben-David, Franzoni,
and Moussawi, 2012; Berger and Bouwman, 2013) and the resolutions of failed banks and their
impacts (James and Wier, 1987; James, 1991; Vij, 2020). The closest bank failure paper to our
work is Granja, Matvos, and Seru (2017), which provides a key economic insight that poor
capitalization of local banks, who are the natural buyers of failed banks, results in substantial costs
to the FDIC's resolution efforts for failed banks. Our paper contributes to this new area of research
by introducing PE investors as financial buyers into the picture, a source that surprisingly buys 24
percent of the failed bank assets acquired in the resolution process during this period. We show
that PE investors operate as a complementary source of funding in the resolution of bank failures
at a time when the local bank buyers are themselves undercapitalized. Further, PE acquisitions do
well and also benefit the real economy. From a policy perspective, our findings are supportive of
the policy innovation of the OCC and the FDIC that allowed financial buyers to participate in the
resolution of failed banks.



2. Institutional Background

    In this section, we introduce background knowledge of how the FDIC resolves bank failures
and, more importantly, how PE investors can become a qualified player in this process. Roughly
five hundred banks failed during the financial crisis, putting a large strain on the financial system.
This fact can be seen clearly in Figure 1, which plots the number of bank failures (Panel A) and
the total assets at failure (Panel B) from 2000 onward.

    When a bank fails, the FDIC is appointed receiver by the failing institution's chartering
authority. To address bank failures, the FDIC used the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) resolution

                                                     6
method in roughly 95 percent of the cases during 2009­2014, and these are the transactions studied
in this paper. 3 In a P&A transaction, the FDIC uses a process that resembles a first-price sealed
bid auction to sell some or all the assets and liabilities of the depository institution. Granja, Matvos,
and Seru (2017) provide a detailed description of how the process of failed bank resolution works;
we review relevant points here and refer interested readers to their paper and to the FDIC's
Resolutions Handbook 4 for further details.

                                                [Insert Figure 1 Here.]

     To sell a failed bank, the FDIC first generates a broad list of potential bidders that have
expressed interest in bidding for failed institutions and that satisfy a list of requirements, such as
satisfactory capital and supervisory ratings. Upon signing a confidentiality agreement, interested
parties may be granted access to a virtual data room for the review of available information, which
can include loan reviews, schedules representing the value of items on the failed bank's balance
sheet, and operational information. Interested parties can place sealed bids for the failed bank based
upon standard transaction terms, resembling a first-price sealed bid auction. Using its proprietary
least cost test, 5 the FDIC selects the bid whose terms entail the least-estimated cost for the Deposit
Insurance Fund (DIF) if those costs are below the reservation value set by the FDIC, which is
unknown to bidders. The bank is then closed, and the FDIC transfers assets and deposits to the
acquirer. 6

     In the past, private investors have generally been excluded from bidding on failed institutions
because they themselves were not chartered banks. However, in 2008 the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC) began making it easier for PE investors to participate in failed bank
auctions by creating a "shelf charter" program. A shelf charter allows investors to bid on failed
banks despite not being affiliated with an existing bank. The OCC also made available an

     3
        The remaining failures were resolved by the FDIC through depositor payouts and asset liquidation.
     4
        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2019. Resolutions Handbook, Revised January 15, 2019.
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/reshandbook/resolutions-handbook.pdf.
      5
        The least cost test evaluates the liquidation cost of the failed institution against the cost of alternative resolution
options. A few details are worth noting here: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA)
of 1991 requires that the FDIC select the bid that results in the least costly resolution to the Deposit Insurance Fund
(DIF). As a statutory requirement, this process for bid selection does not vary from bank to bank. Additionally, the
FDIC's valuation of liquidation, the valuation of submitted bids, and the details of the least cost test itself are all
unknown to bidders.
      6
        Since failed banks are often smaller in size, concerns like "too big to fail" or antitrust issues generally do not
come under consideration by the FDIC when managing the bidding process and picking the winner.

                                                                 7
"inflatable charter," which allows PE investors to buy a small, non-failing bank with the intention
of growing it quickly through subsequent failed bank acquisitions. There were twenty distinct
charters, obtained by nineteen PE consortia (more on "consortia" below), used to acquire failed
banks by PE in the crisis.

                                        [Insert Figure 2 Here.]

    In the charter approval process, PE acquisition plans are subject to a high degree of regulatory
scrutiny. Potential PE investors must submit details such as the proposed bank management team
qualifications, the sources and amount of capital available to the bank, and the business plan
describing intended operations of the acquired bank. The information gathering, application, and
approval process typically occurs well in advance of any specific acquisition opportunities that
may arise. In addition, because PE firms engage in non-banking activities, they must also apply to
the Federal Reserve Board for preliminary approval to form a bank holding company (BHC).

    Most PE investors apply for a bank charter and form a BHC as a consortium together with a
number of other PE firms, often in the form of an LLC with PE firms as shareholders. This can
allow greater access to capital and help to leverage relevant expertise and connections. From a
BHC regulatory perspective there are advantages as well--firms with less than a 25 percent share
of voting securities or up to one third of total equity (provided that this includes less than 15 percent
of voting securities) are not subject to BHC regulation by the Federal Reserve Board. Applying as
a consortium can help limit the equity investments of individual PE firms below these regulatory
thresholds. For example, a number of PE firms might form an LLC with equity shares of the
individual PE firm participants below the threshold. The LLC is then used for the proposed BHC
and serves as the actual acquiring entity. Thus, while the holding company formed by the PE firms
is exposed to BHC regulation, the individual PE firms themselves are typically not.

    PE acquirers did not have restrictions on what they could bid on, aside from the usual criteria
applied to other bank bidders, such as available capital and financial health. However, PE acquirers
did have additional requirements imposed by the FDIC for operating the bank. Notably, PE
acquirers were required to maintain a tier 1 common equity to total assets ratio of at least 10 percent
for at least three years after the time of acquisition. They also had to maintain continuity of
ownership for at least three years after the time of acquisition, absent FDIC approval. Further, they
were not permitted to engage in any credit transactions with affiliates, meaning that they could not

                                                      8
use the bank as a platform to lend to their affiliated companies or investments. 7 Additional PE
requirements included: pledges of cross-support if investors own 80 percent or more of two or
more banks; no ownership by entities in bank secrecy jurisdictions; no opaque ownership
structures; no investors having 10 percent or more equity in the same bank before failure; and
required disclosure about investors and ownership to the FDIC. 8

                                                  [Insert Figure 3]

     As shown in Figure 3, PE investors acquired about 8.5 percent of the banks in 2009 (11 out
of 129). That number is larger in money terms, with PE investors acquiring 25.2 percent of the
total failed bank assets that were acquired in the resolution process in that year. 9 PE investors
remained active in acquiring failed banks through 2014, and through all those years, they acquired
13 percent of all failed banks acquired, or 24 percent in terms of assets acquired in resolution.
After 2014, PE investors stopped acquiring failed banks. This might be due to two reasons. First,
bank failures returned to pre-crisis levels (below 10 every year in number), leaving limited room
for PE investors to pursue these investments. Second, PE funds formed during the crisis to pursue
the strategy of failed bank acquisitions reached the latter part of their typical 10- to 14-year life
cycle, and thus started to focus more on operations and exit. Our main analytical sample covers
the period of 2009­2014. 10



3. Data and Sample Overview

3.1 Banking Data
3.1.1 Failed Bank Data
     Between 2009 and 2014, there were a total of 482 bank failures resolved by the FDIC. Private
equity acquirers purchased 62 of these failed banks, while existing banks purchased 393 failed

     7
        This explicitly prohibits lending to affiliates in which the PE firm has invested equity, ruling out the kind of
cross-selling behavior documented in Fang, Ivashina, and Lerner (2013).
      8
        For more details, see the Final Statement of Policy on Qualifications for Failed Bank Acquisitions, Federal
Register, Vol. 74, No. 169, September 2, 2009.
      9
        We removed liquidated banks in this analysis. Also, because the FDIC often retains a sizable portion of failed
bank assets not purchased by the acquirer, the total assets acquired do not necessarily match to the total assets of the
failed banks (as in Figure 1).
      10
         It is worth noting that it is uncommon for troubled banks close to failure to restructure (e.g., be acquired by a
healthy bank) outside of the FDIC resolution process. We do not find that PE investors participate in acquisitions of
troubled banks outside of the FDIC resolution process.

                                                               9
banks. 11 There were 25 failed banks with no least cost bid that were liquidated by the FDIC;
another two provided correspondent banking services to client banks only and were temporarily
run by the FDIC as bridge banks after failure. We exclude these 27 banks from our analysis
following Granja et al. (2017). Details on bank failures and their resolutions come from the FDIC.
These include public information conveying the timing of failure and acquisition, the location and
size of the institution at failure, the amount of assets passed to the acquirer, and the terms of the
failed bank transaction (transaction type, loss share coverage, and so on). We also have proprietary
FDIC information on the identity of the acquirer and on all the bidders and details of their bids.

    Additionally, we utilize proprietary FDIC cost estimates used in evaluating failed bank bids.
This includes the FDIC's estimated liquidation cost for the failed bank and the valuation of the
winning and cover bids from the internal least cost analysis. We use these estimations to identify
close bids of the same failed bank, which are useful for creating a quasi-random empirical design
to isolate the effect of PE intervention. These data are also useful for making back-of-the envelope
calculations of the difference in cost savings had PE investors been excluded from the auction
process.

    Finally, we use confidential FDIC data containing details on loan performance in loss share
portfolios. Loss share participants are required to submit regular reports to the FDIC on the
performance of loans covered by shared loss agreements and details on any losses incurred.
Because acquired banks are typically absorbed into healthy existing banks, it is difficult to track
the performance of failed bank assets once they have been acquired. However, the loss share
performance data allow us to observe the performance of those assets over time, even after
acquisition. This provides us with a unique and important window into the management of failed
bank assets by PE and bank acquirers.

3.1.2 Bank Characteristics
    We obtain data on the operational financial characteristics of failed banks and their acquirers
from the FDIC's quarterly Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports) and from
Thrift Financial Reports for institutions regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) prior




    11
         One bank was split between two acquirers but was technically a single failed bank.

                                                            10
to 2012. These reports contain details of the income and balance sheet characteristics for all the
banks in our sample.

     The Summary of Deposits (SOD) database provided by the FDIC allows us to obtain bank
branch location data for each commercial and savings bank and the level of deposits. The SOD
database contains information on the geographical coordinates, address, and deposits of each
branch of every commercial and savings bank operating in the United States. We also complement
this data using the FDIC's Reports of Structure Changes. These reports provide information on
branch office openings and closings. Together, we use these sources to analyze the closing of failed
bank branches, and to track changes in deposits at the county level within the footprint of the failed
bank.

     This geographic information on bank branches also allows us to capture the characteristics of
the neighboring banks of each failed institution. Granja, Matvos, and Seru (2017) show that
neighboring banks' financial health is an important determinant of the failed bank resolution
process. Consistent with their paper, we define local banks as banks whose branch network
overlaps in at least one zip code with the branch network of the focal failed bank.

3.2 Private Equity Data
     Our classification of PE acquisitions comes from the charter used to bid on failed banks--
namely, acquisitions that were made by non-bank bidders that obtained a shelf or inflatable charter
for the purpose of failed bank bidding. While most of the funds raised by those non-bank acquirers
are from PE firms, they sometimes include non-PE sources such as asset management companies,
institutional investors, and family offices. However, private equity firms are the key participant in
this process. For example, based upon information in SEC registration statements and FDIC
depository insurance applications, we estimate that PE sources account for more than 70 percent
of the ownership for each consortium on average, based upon major consortia participants
identified with five percent holdings or more. Additionally, the vast majority of acquisitions
conducted by those private investor consortia were led by private equity firms. 12 In the Online
Appendix, we show alternative definitions of PE-acquired banks based on the level of PE


      12
         A few exceptions include two small failed banks in our sample that were single acquisitions primarily acquired
through family offices and a community development bank largely acquired by institutional investors. We group these
failures with PE acquisitions rather than those acquired by banks because non-bank investors made the acquisitions
through the same shelf charter process used by PE. All analysis results are similar if we do not include those cases.

                                                            11
ownership (e.g., PE shares being larger than or equal to 75 percent), and our results are not affected
by the definitions.

    We collect additional information about those individual PE funds from several different
sources. First, we hand match those PE funds with information from Preqin. Preqin collects the
quarterly aggregated investments, distributions, and net asset values (NAVs) of PE funds as
recorded by U.S. pension funds and obtained via routine Freedom of Information Act requests.
For funds covered by the Preqin data, we collect information on the size of the fund, the vintage
year, and the background of the PE firm. We also supplement this by searching additional
information from PitchBook, Crunchbase, and a general internet search.

3.3 Real Economic Effects
    To obtain local employment and startup creation information, we use data from the U.S.
Census Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) to compute total employment by firm age and by
county. The QWI is derived from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)
program at the Census Bureau. It provides total employment in the private sector in each county
and employment tabulated for different firm age categories. Income data at the county level comes
from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Statistics of Income and is measured in calendar years
(i.e., January to December of each year).

    For local access to small business credit, we use the small business lending data obtained from
the Small Business Administration (SBA). We use contract-level information on 7(a) loans, one
of the largest SBA programs, delivered through various methods (Certified Lenders Program,
Preferred Lenders Program, SBA Express, etc.). We focus on both the quantity and pricing of SBA
loans made in each region-year.

3.4 Summary Statistics
    Table 1 provides summary statistics from the PE side. In the upper panel, we provide statistics
at the consortium level, which is the relevant unit for failed bank purchases. As described above,
typically multiple PE funds join forces to form a consortium and obtain a bank charter at the
consortium level. On average, each bank acquisition consortium consists of around 3.4 PE
investors, counting only those having shares of five percent or more. They, on average, bid on 5.2




                                                    12
failed banks, 13 and "win" 3.26 of them. Their bidding strategies are quite focused, and most of
these consortia purchase banks within one state. Interestingly, 58 percent of the PE consortia
include at least one PE firm that has actively participated in the distressed investment space as
identified in Hotchkiss, Smith, and Strömberg (2011) and Jiang, Li, Wang (2012), suggesting that
these PE firms have some experience in distressed investments and turnarounds.

                                             [Insert Table 1 Here.]

     In the bottom panel, we provide summary statistics at the individual PE level, conditioning on
data availability from Preqin. On average, each PE firm joins 1.13 consortia. In other words, only
around 10 PE firms joined more than one consortium. In some cases, multiple funds in the same
PE firm joined the same consortium. Those PE investors are traditional independent PE investors
and are not affiliated with other banks. Importantly, most of the investing funds are of recent
vintages. The median fund vintage is 2007, and more than 25 percent of the PE funds are formed
in or after 2009. This suggests that those funds were likely raised for the purpose of participating
in failed bank resolutions, and that they had relatively adequate funding for such actions. Most of
these funds are not first-time funds, so they have accumulated networks and human capital from
prior activity in the PE markets.

                                             [Insert Table 2 Here.]

     Table 2 reports summary statistics of failed banks as of the last quarter prior to failure. Most
failed banks in the crisis were small community banks. The median bank size was just above $200
million, but with a very long right tail in the size distribution. Unsurprisingly for banks that failed,
the tier 1 risk-based capital ratios just prior to failure were very low--far below the average for
other neighboring banks that did not fail. Liquid assets were just under 17 percent of total assets
on average, and core deposits comprised almost 84 percent of total deposits. These banks tended
to be heavily involved in CRE lending, making up almost 39 percent of the total loans on their
balance sheets. They also held a large amount of C&D loans, comprising almost 19 percent of their
total loans on average. The ratio of C&I loans to total loans was smaller at 10 percent, and the ratio
of consumer loans to total loans was just over 2 percent. Residential lending averaged 25.9 percent
of total loans. In addition, both the noncurrent loans to total loans and the OREO assets to total

     13
       These are PE bids above the liquidation value. The average is only slightly higher at 5.7 when also including
PE bids below the liquidation value.

                                                           13
assets at the failed banks were much higher than at other neighboring banks, indicating portfolios
in distress. Two-thirds of the banks were resolved using loss sharing agreements with the FDIC.



4. Private Equity in Failed Bank Resolution

    We first investigate which segment of the failed bank market was targeted by PE investors,
and which was targeted by banks. The result of this analysis would indicate whether PE investors
are complementary failed bank buyers to incumbent banks.

4.1 PE-Acquired and Bank-Acquired Failed Banks
    We start by performing the analysis using a logit regression framework:

               ( = 1) = ( +    +    +  +  ).                                                     (1)

The analysis uses the cross-sectional sample of all failed banks that were eventually acquired by a
bank or a PE investor. The dependent variable is a dummy that takes a value of one if the failed
bank was eventually acquired by PE, and zero otherwise (acquired by a bank). We control for the
size of the bank using the logarithm of the total assets at failure. Year-quarter fixed effects are
included to account for the time-varying economic, market, and regulatory environments that
could affect the failed bank resolution process.

                                       [Insert Table 3 Here.]

    Table 3 Panel A presents the results, reporting marginal effects calculated at the sample mean.
Column (1) concerns the tier 1 risk-based capital ratio. Tier 1 capital includes the most loss-
absorbing forms of capital, and therefore is an important representation of bank financial strength.
The marginal effect of -0.013 suggests that, for a one standard deviation decrease in the tier 1 risk-
based capital ratio, there is a 3.5 percentage point increase in the probability that the bank is
purchased by PE. This is a 25.8 percent increase from the base rate of 13.6 percent. Bank size
positively and significantly correlates with the probability that the bank is acquired by PE,
indicating that PE investors may have had an advantage over existing banks in raising larger
amounts of capital for these purchases.

    In column (2) we switch to another measure of the stability of banks' sources of funding,
namely the core deposits to total deposits ratio. Core deposits are made in a bank's natural


                                                    14
demographic market and offer advantages to banks, such as predictable costs, low sensitivity to
short-term interest rate changes, and lower run risks. The core deposits to total deposits ratio is
negatively associated with PE acquisition. For a one standard deviation decrease in core deposits
to total deposits, the coefficient of -0.220 translates to a 23.4 percent increase from the base rate
of PE acquisition.

    Column (3) shows that low-profitability failed banks are more likely to be acquired by PE
investors. We use the net interest margin, which measures how much a bank earns in interest
compared to how much it pays out as a ratio of interest-earning assets, as an indicator of bank
profitability. This helps to mitigate the potential measurement noise for failing banks in other
possible profitability measures like ROA or ROE. For example, interest-earning assets should be
less wildly variable than total assets used in ROA calculations in the face of large, discrete charge-
offs in nonperforming assets; it is also not uncommon for average equity to reach negative values
in banks that are failing, in which case ROE is not reported. In addition, the net interest income
should be less variable than the total net income used for calculating ROA and ROE, due to the
provisioning behavior for loan and lease losses (which are treated as an expense to net income on
the bank's income statement) at failing banks.

    Columns (4) and (5) examine the loan composition of banks. Banks with riskier asset
portfolios--captured by a higher proportion of C&D loans and OREO assets to total assets--were
more likely to be acquired by PE investors. C&D loans can be more sensitive to economic or
market conditions than other loan types for several reasons. For example, projects may experience
budget overruns or a lack of timely progress, market conditions can change drastically in the
intervening time between loan approval and project completion, and lenders may have greater
difficulties extracting collateral value from an incomplete construction project in default. In the
crisis, C&D loans turned out to be particularly problematic. As the FDIC describes in its history
of the crisis (FDIC, 2017), "Most banks that failed or became problem banks did so because of
large concentrations, relative to their capital, of poorly underwritten and administered commercial
real estate loans and (especially) ADC [acquisition, development & construction] loans" (p.179).
Similarly, a higher proportion of OREO assets is often a sign of a loan portfolio in distress.

    Overall, Panel A suggests that PE investors capture a set of banks that tend to be riskier in
terms of asset composition, more undercapitalized, less profitable, and may require larger capital


                                                    15
injections due to their size. Moreover, these banks have lower profitability as indicated by their
net interest margin. Those are all likely undesirable features in the eyes of incumbent banks. In
this sense, PE investors target banks that other banks may be less willing or less able to take over.

4.2 Local Banking Market Conditions
    Next, we further strengthen the argument that PE investors acquire a segment of banks that
are unlikely to be taken over and operated by other incumbent banks. In recent work studying
failed bank resolution in the crisis, Granja, Matvos, and Seru (2017) show that healthier banks are
more willing to bid on and pay higher amounts for failed banks that could potentially create
synergies with themselves. A primary source of synergistic benefit is in the form of geographic
clustering: a large literature shows that the transmission of soft information depreciates with
geographic distance (Petersen and Rajan, 2002; Stein, 2002). Moreover, geographically closer
banks may be better able to harvest the economies of scale to achieve operational efficiencies. The
implication of this work is that failed banks without a set of healthier banks in nearby geographic
regions face greater challenges in the resolution process. This is particularly true when, as shown
in Table 3, Panel A, certain failed banks had worse-than-average performance and held riskier
asset portfolios that other banks may not have desired.

    Is PE participation particularly important for those banks without a potential bank acquirer?
We explore this question in a similar setting as in Eq. (1), except that the key explanatory variables
are the conditions of the local banks. We create a set of measures to capture different dimensions
of local bank conditions, in which "local" are those banks whose branch network overlaps in at
least one zip code with the branch network of the focal failed bank.

    Table 3, Panel B presents the results. In column (1), we focus on the neighboring banks' tier
1 risk-based capital ratio, which is calculated as the mean of this ratio for all the banks local to the
failed banks. We find a negative and significant coefficient, which means that when a failed bank's
neighboring banks, which are often considered the most likely acquirers, are in worse financial
health, the failed bank is more likely to be acquired by private equity. The economic magnitude is
in fact quite large. A one standard deviation decrease in the average neighboring bank tier 1 risk-
based capital ratio is associated with a 2.92 percentage point increase in PE acquisition probability,
which is a 21 percent increase from the base rate. This is consistent using other bank health
measures like noncurrent loans (column (2)) and OREO (column (3)).


                                                     16
    In column (4), we consider another factor that could affect the capability of acquisition by
local banks--the size of these banks. Even if a neighboring bank remains healthy, it is unlikely for
it to obtain enough capital to purchase anything that is at its size or larger than its size. In other
words, banks that are considerably larger than the failed bank may be more likely to make the
purchase. We show this using a variable No. of Local Banks (>3xSize), which is the number of
local banks that are at least three times the size of the failed bank in terms of total assets. The larger
this number is, the more likely that the bank will be sold to another bank and less likely to a PE
acquirer.

    In column (5), we examine the number of failed banks in the region. If a failed bank is in a
region where a lot of other banks failed at the same time, they are more likely to be acquired by
PE. This could be due to other local banks being on average less healthy and less capable of making
the purchase and also because it is hard for any acquirer to purchase a large number of banks if too
many fail in the same region. We show that the total number of failed banks in a state is associated
with a higher probability that the bank is acquired by PE. In other words, PE investors inject new
capital in regions where banks on average are in deeper distress. In the Online Appendix, we show
that both the failed banks' own characteristics and their neighboring banks' characteristics matter
when they enter the analysis simultaneously.

    Overall, this evidence provides additional support that PE investors are complementary to
existing players in the banking sector in acquiring failed banks. PE investors target a segment of
the failed banks in which many traditional banks are unlikely to be interested or capable of
acquiring. Specifically, they acquire underperforming banks that are riskier, particularly when the
failed bank is in a region where neighboring banks experience deeper distress and thus are unlikely
to be able bid.

4.3 Further Evidence on Failed Bank Acquirer Sorting and Matching
    Results so far are based on the final bidding outcomes. But is there evidence that PE investors
are actively pursuing this strategy, or are PE investors just passively bidding on all banks and only
winning the low-quality ones?

    Table 4 presents evidence that is consistent with the PE investors actively pursuing such a
strategy. We gather this evidence by examining not only the winning PE acquisitions, but also the
bidding histories of each PE. To do so, we leverage proprietary data on all bidding histories in

                                                      17
FDIC failed bank auctions. We create a variable, PE Bid, which indicates whether there was any
PE bidding on the specific failed bank, whether it achieved the winning bid or not. The indicator
captures PE bids that are above the liquidation value and non-public details on those that fall below,
so it reflects all bidding activity by PE acquirers. This PE Bid variable is then analyzed as the
dependent variable by using the same framework as in Eq. (1).

                                        [Insert Table 4 Here.]

    All the variables that are associated with the final acquisition outcomes, as shown in Table 3,
also have similar effects in explaining the bidding activities of PE investors. Clearly, both the
decision to bid and the outcome of winning are equilibrium outcomes accounting for the value and
costs of the failed banks to different potential buyers and to the FDIC. Nevertheless, the evidence
quite clearly suggests that PE investors actively, not passively, participate in the process.

    In Figure 4, we push the argument further by visualizing the sorting and matching between
acquirer types and bank characteristics. The graph compares the characteristics of failed banks and
their neighboring banks across banks that are targeted by different acquirers--those bid on and
acquired by PE investors, those bid on by PE investors but may eventually be won by a PE entity
or an incumbent bank, and those that are only bid on and eventually acquired by other incumbent
banks. For each of the characteristics, we separately show the mean across the three groups.

                                        [Insert Figure 4 Here.]

    Figure 4 shows a clear pattern of sorting. Panel A shows sorting on failed bank characteristics.
PE investors bid on and successfully acquire the weakest banks (left bars) whether measured by
tier 1 capital ratio, core deposits, net interest margin, or real estate owned. PE investors also target
some slightly stronger failed banks over which they compete with other banks, and they may win
or lose in such cases (middle bars). Banks, on the other hand, on average focus on the healthier
banks in the failed bank set (right bars)--and PE investors are not even bidding in this segment.
Panel B shows sorting on neighboring bank characteristics. Again, both PE bids and PE
acquisitions are more likely when the neighboring banks are weak (whether measured by tier 1
capital ratios, nonperforming loans, real estate owned, or the number of failed banks in the state).
This again confirms that PE investors complement bank acquirers in the market. This result also
suggests that even though neighboring banks are likely the best potential buyers for failed banks
operation-wise, they may be hesitant to bid and/or purchase when the bank is particularly risky or

                                                     18
in deeper distress. PE investors have an edge in such cases due to their higher risk appetite and
more abundant funding.

4.4 The Value of PE Participation: A World Without PE Bidding?
    Evidence so far suggests that the value of PE investors in the financial crisis first comes from
their participation and their unique focus in the failed bank market which is complementary to
incumbent banks. In a world without PE investors selecting those lower-quality and riskier failed
banks, they would either be acquired through lower-valued bids or be liquidated by the FDIC.

    How economically important is this PE participation? We perform a simple back-of-the-
envelope calculation using proprietary FDIC cost estimates used for evaluating auction bids from
all failed bank deals. The FDIC estimates its cost for each submitted bid in determining the least
cost resolution strategy. Starting with the total gross assets at the failed bank and taking details of
each submitted bid into account, it subtracts the expected losses on assets and expected expenses
from the receivership, as well as any claims on the receivership. The bidder's proposed premium
on deposits or discount on assets are included as well. We use these proprietary estimates in our
calculation to build on the counter-factual world in which no PE acquisitions occurred.

    For all PE-acquired cases, we suppose one of the following two cases happen: (1) if there is
at least one non-PE bidder, the best non-PE bidder wins, where the "best" means the lowest FDIC-
estimated cost of resolution; (2) if there is no other non-PE bidder, the bank is liquidated by the
FDIC, which as receiver must pay off insured depositors and dispose of the assets. The additional
cost incurred to the FDIC without PE-acquirer participation thus can be roughly estimated by
calculating the gap for PE acquirers and the counter-factual world outcomes. For case (1), there
are 29 failed banks for which we calculate the difference in estimated FDIC resolution costs for
the winning bid compared to the runner-up. In addition, we observe 8 further cases in which the
runner-up bid in a PE acquisition was also from a PE bidder. For these, we measure the gap in cost
between the winning bid and the next best non-PE bid. The aggregate savings are estimated to be
around $2.34 billion. For case (2), we observe 25 failed banks that had no other non-PE bids with
a cost below the liquidation cost and would have had to be liquidated by the FDIC. The total
savings to the FDIC of those PE acquisitions over liquidation costs is estimated to be $1.29 billion.

    How big is the economic magnitude of the $3.63 billion ($2.34 billion + $1.29 million)
estimated? The FDIC estimated that the total cost to the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) of bank

                                                    19
failures during the crisis was about $73 billion.14 This means that PE participation helped the FDIC
reduce the cost of failed bank resolution in the crisis by nearly five percent.

    One caveat here is that in this simple back-of-the-envelope calculation, we implicitly assume
that bank bidding behaviors remain the same in a world without PE. Given that the failed bank
bidding process is a sealed-bid auction without even disclosing the potential bidders, removing PE
investors from the bidder set should, arguably, have at best a mild impact. Additionally, this
assumption likely leads us to underestimate the benefit of PE participation--without PE
competition, banks will likely bid with even lower prices, expanding the wedge with PE bidding
prices.



5. Bank Performance Post PE Acquisition

    The natural next question is: are PE investors able to successfully turn around the failed banks?
In this section, we examine the post-acquisition performance of failed banks that are acquired by
PE and by other banks. We also study the real effects by examining the economic recovery of
regions in which the failed banks are acquired by PE investors. The performance of PE acquisitions
compared to bank acquisitions is a priori unclear. On the one hand, PE investors do not have bank-
specific operational experience or sources of synergies, which may lead to poorer performance.
On the other hand, PE investors' experience in distressed investment and turnaround operations
(Hotchkiss, Smith, and Strömberg, 2011), together with the steadier financing source (Bernstein,
Lerner, and Mezzanotti, 2019), may be well-suited for the turnaround of failed banks in crisis.

5.1 Quasi-Random Empirical Design
    To study failed banks' performance changes post acquisition by different buyers, a basic
regression would simply compare the performance proxies in PE-acquired and bank-acquired
banks post the acquisition event. This specification would be informative but masks the
combination of i) the sorting of acquirer-target, as documented in the previous section, and ii) the
treatment effect of PE acquisitions on the acquired banks.




    14
      Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2017. Crisis and Response: An FDIC History, 2008­2013.
Washington, DC: FDIC. p.xiii-xiv.

                                                      20
      An ideal experiment to isolate the effect of PE investors on post-acquisition performance
would focus on a set of banks that are of interest to both PE investors and banks and for which the
allocation to a PE investor or a bank is nearly random. We approximate this ideal experiment by
exploiting a small set of banks where acquirer allocation can be viewed as quasi-random. We start
from the sample of banks that were bid on by both PE investors and banks. We narrow down this
sample to two sets of banks--those won by PE and at least one bank bid, and those won by a bank
and at least one PE bid. We further require that in the auction the margin of victory of the winning
PE/bank bidder over the closest losing bank/PE bid is small, within five percent to be precise. 15
Our empirical strategy compares failed banks that were just won by the PE investors and those that
were just won by the banks in this quasi-random sample.

     In our main specification, we use a local linear regression approach (Gelman and Imbens, 2019):

              ,,, =  +    +    + × +  .                                                                          (2)

 is the performance of a branch , located in region , of bank  , that failed in year
.  is an indicator variable that equals one if the PE bidder won the auction and acquired the
failed bank. × are region-by-time fixed effects controlling for the local time trends and are
captured at the state-failed year level. Finer regional geographic delineation, say county-year,
renders a very limited number of observations per group (on average 2.3 in each county-year unit),
challenging the ability to correctly estimate the model. The analysis will later be adapted to other
analytical units (like bank-level or region-level) by implementing the same logic, and aggregation
details will be provided in subsections as we introduce the analysis.

                                             [Insert Table 5 Here.]

      The key identification assumption is that, for the specific subset of competitive auctions that
we consider, whether a PE bidder wins or loses the bidding is "as good as" random. At first glance,
out of the 48 acquisition deals that fall into our quasi-random sample, 25 were eventually acquired
by a PE investor and 23 were eventually acquired by a bank--which suggests a fairly random
pattern. Table 5 presents a balance test. We first examine whether bank-level characteristics differ
between the bank-acquired and the PE-acquired samples. Among those characteristics shown to


15
  This approach is standard in the literature (Lee and Lemieux, 2010; Fisman et al., 2014; Colonnelli, Prem, and Teso,
2020).

                                                            21
matter in broader selection, none seem to matter in this quasi-random sample. We also compare
the variables that later will be used as performance proxies--these include branch, bank, or
regional level information. Again, we do not find any significant differences across bank-acquired
and PE-acquired samples.

     In our quasi-random sample approach, our empirical strategy improves upon common
approaches in the PE literature that tackle the identification challenge through building counter-
factual cases using matching methods. 16 Instead of assuming a matched firm that is equally
selectable by PE, we leverage on the bidding setting in which PE bids and bank bids reveal their
interests in selecting a publicly known target. Focusing on the sample of banks that are selectable
and tightly bid on by both PE and banks further controls the selection effect.

     One caveat is that even though this approach exploits a very tight control group, it is not a
fully-specified regression discontinuity design in which we would better control for the micro-
level variations in the bidding gaps (i.e., the running variable), which are unobserved by us. In our
sample, the continuous bidding gap is coded to three categories by the FDIC--below five percent,
five to ten percent, and above ten percent, while the underlying continuous variable is kept
proprietary.

5.2 Banks: Branch Closure and Deposits
     We first study bank performance post acquisition. The analysis focuses on the branch level
for data observability reasons. Failed banks acquired by other banks are integrated into the
acquiring institution, and it is thus difficult to observe standalone performance measures from
standard sources such as the call reports. To overcome this problem, the approach in this section
focuses on the performance of bank branches that can be tracked prior to and after the acquisitions.

     Our first performance analysis concerns the closing of bank branches. Bank branch closure
has important consequences for access to credit in the local economy and thus for financial stability.
Nguyen (2019) shows that access to credit is very local, and bank branch closings lead to a
persistent decline in local small business lending. This effect is particularly strong during the
financial crisis.



     16
       See, for example, Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011); Davis et al. (2014); Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti
(2018); Fracassi, Previtero, and Sheen (2020).

                                                          22
     Our sample includes all bank branches owned by a failed bank at the time of failure. For the
key outcome variable, we code whether the bank branch is closed within three years post
acquisition using the FDIC Reports of Structure Changes. 17 Control variables include those that
have strong power in explaining PE investors' selection of acquisition--tier 1 risk-based capital
ratio, core deposits to total deposits, C&D loans to total loans, and OREO to total assets. Fixed
effects are included at the failed year by state level. Standard errors are clustered at the level of
failed bank acquirers, who make strategic decisions for bank operations.

                                            [Insert Table 6 Here.]

     Table 6 reports the results. Columns (1) and (2) are our preferred specifications using the
quasi-random sample. In column (1), we consider a thought experiment in which two bank
branches are located in the same geographic region (at the level of state) and whose parent banks
failed in the same year. In this way, we take out the potential impact of timing, i.e., banks may
have a different operational strategy during different periods in the crisis. We also take out the
potential impact of the branch location, since branches located in regions hit harder by the crisis
may be more likely to close. The -0.148 coefficient in column (1) means that bank branches
acquired by PE investors are 14.8 percentage points less likely to be closed. This is a 73.6 percent
decrease from the base branch closing rate of 20.1 percent across the full sample.

     This result is particularly important for us to understand the role of PE acquisitions in
stabilizing the local financial system, considering our earlier findings that PE-acquired banks tend
to be located in regions with an unhealthy financial sector, as shown in Table 4. To better articulate
this point, in column (2) we explore a new dependent variable to capture the cases of closing and
exit from a county. This variable is coded as one if a PE-acquired bank branch closes and there is
no other branch of the bank serving the county; alternatively, it is also coded as one if a bank-
acquired bank branch closes and there is no other branch of the bank nor an acquirer branch serving
the county. The -0.070 coefficient suggests that PE acquired banks are less likely to close and exit
a county they serve.

     Column (2) also provides an opportunity to assess another potential force that could drive PE-
acquired banks' lower closing probability, which is that bank-acquired failed banks are more likely

     17
        The results are robust to coding the closure variable over alternative time horizons. Most closures happen
during the first three years.

                                                          23
to close to retain limited branches in a region. In other words, bank acquirers may shut down an
acquired branch because they already own one in the local area (i.e., consolidation of branches).
The result in column (2) suggests that branches of bank-acquired failed banks have a higher
frequency of closing, even for cases when the closure means a complete exit from the county.

     In columns (3) and (4), we also report the regression with all bank branches as robustness
checks. The results are similar. The point estimates for the PE effects are smaller in magnitude,
which is consistent with the fact that PE investors, on average, acquire lower quality failed banks.
Failing to account for this would underestimate the value-added by PE investors.

     Next, we examine bank performance using the growth of deposits in local branches. Deposits
are an important measure of bank performance, as they are related to the ability to lend and
ultimately the ability to generate profit. Conceptually, the analysis appears to be simple to design--
we would just compare the deposit growth of branches acquired by PE investors with those
acquired by other banks. The challenge, however, is the active closing and consolidation of the
bank-acquired branches. For example, assume there are two failed bank branches, A and B, in
Durham County, NC, and that they are acquired by PE and another bank, respectively. Assume
this acquiring bank has its own branch, labeled as C, in Durham. Branch B and C could have
complex interactions post acquisition that make it inaccurate to simply track deposit levels at B or
C. For example, branch C could completely absorb B, which would cause us to underestimate the
level of deposits that B attracts.

     Our first approach is to perform the analysis at the local county level and consider B and C
jointly when evaluating the deposit growth. Specifically, our unit is at the bank-county level. The
dependent variable is a failed bank's deposit change in the county region following the acquisition.
For PE-acquired banks through shelf charters, this deposit change is for all branches in the local
region; for bank-acquired banks and for PE acquisitions through inflatable charters or with
multiple acquisitions, the deposit change is calculated using both the failed bank branches and the
branches originally owned by the acquirer bank in order to account for the measurement issues
that may arise from reorganization. 18




     18
       Note, we only keep counties where the failed bank did not completely exit, in which case the deposits would
be ­100 percent and which we have studied separately in Table 6.

                                                          24
                                       [Insert Table 7 Here.]

    Table 7 presents the results. In columns (1) and (2), using the quasi-random sample, we show
that within one year, there was little difference in the deposit-level changes--this makes sense
given that changing failed bank operations takes time. This also provides additional assurance for
our quasi-random experiment since there are not observable differences between PE- and bank-
acquired branches ex ante. As time goes by, the effect becomes stronger. In column (2), the
comparisons are made by two failed banks' operations in the same county through the same period.
PE-acquired banks have a higher three-year deposit growth by a magnitude of 35.6 percentage
points. This economic magnitude is quite striking if we compare the three-year changes to the
unconditional mean. Depending on the sample that we focus on, the averages of the deposit growth
variables are negative as a national trend or only mildly positive.

    In columns (3) and (4), we report results estimated using the full non-quasi-random sample.
The results are qualitatively similar with milder quantitative magnitudes. As discussed in the
branch closure analysis above, this is likely due to the fact that PE's acquisition strategy focuses
on weaker banks to begin with, making it harder to detect a performance difference if such
selection is not controlled for.

    Of course, for most of the failed banks, the operations of the failed banks are combined with
the acquirer's pre-existing bank operations (i.e., using the example, B and C are jointly considered).
An alternative approach we take is to focus on a smaller sample of bank-county combinations in
which the acquirer bank does not own an existing branch in the acquired failed bank's region. In
other words, following the example, we study cases in which there is not a branch C. We report
the results in Table 7 columns (5) and (6). After isolating the performance of the failed bank
branches themselves, the PE-acquired banks still have higher deposit growth.

5.3 Bank Lending and Local Recovery
    The banking sector plays an important role in the local economy. PE's ability to maintain
branch operations and attract deposits thus leads to a natural hypothesis on whether the positive
changes in bank branch operations also lead to better local economic recovery. We perform
analysis at the county level using a model adapted from Eq. (2) but aggregated to the county level.

    Essentially, we compare two counties with a failed bank branch in the same year (both of
which were bid on by PE investors and banks), yet one bank branch was quasi-randomly allocated

                                                   25
to an incumbent bank acquirer and one to a PE acquirer. The quasi-random design in this setting
helps alleviate concerns about better performance arising mechanically because PE investors made
purchases in worse-hit areas, and so a return to more "normal" conditions would look more
dramatic for them. To cleanly identify the results, we also focus our sample on only counties that
have one pure treatment, i.e., if a county has both bank acquisitions and PE acquisitions, we leave
them outside the sample for empirical purposes.

                                       [Insert Table 8 Here.]

    Our first set of measures is about small business lending. Small business lending is an
important function of local banks and creates important spillover effects for local economic growth.
The analysis exploits both the extensive margin of small business lending and its intensive margin.
Table 8 presents the results. In Panel A we use our preferred quasi-random sample. In column (1)
we show that within the three years after a PE entity acquires a local bank, the number of small
business lending deals experiences 32 percent faster growth compared to other counties. In column
(2), we show that the increase in the total amount of small business lending is also higher in
counties where the failed bank was acquired by PE.

    The increase in the amount of small business lending could be partially related to the pricing
of the loans. In column (3), we show that on average, the SBA loans are priced lower when PE
investors intervene with the banks. The economic magnitude is roughly 32 basis points, which is
five percent lower than the non-conditional mean of 6.4 percent as reported in Table 5. In column
(4), we show that the average deal size increases only mildly, suggesting that the effect is more
through the extension of credit to a larger number of small businesses rather than giving larger
loans to a small set of small businesses. In Panel B, we report results using the full sample.

                                       [Insert Table 9 Here.]

    In Table 9 we present another set of regional variables that focus more on the recovery of local
economic conditions. The analysis uses the same regression framework as in Table 8, and we also
report analysis using both the quasi-random sample and the full sample. In columns (1) and (2),
the outcome variables are job creation rates. We find that both the total number of jobs created and
job creation in the startup sector are significantly higher in regions where the failed banks are
acquired by PE investors. In columns (3) and (4), we move to examine the level of personal income.


                                                   26
We find that the change in personal income is higher, both in terms of total personal income and
the level of per capita income.

5.4 Aggregate Loss Share Claims to the FDIC
    Another angle from which to examine the value of PE acquisition is by studying the cost of
failed bank resolution incurred by the FDIC. Specifically, we are interested in whether PE-acquired
banks claim more losses to the FDIC. The loss sharing agreements with the FDIC typically grant
the failed bank acquirers a time window to claim a portion of losses from loan portfolios of the
failed banks. Commercial loan portfolios have five years of loss share coverage, with an additional
three years of reporting to share any recoveries. Single-family loan portfolios have 10 years of loss
share coverage.

    If PE-acquired banks perform more poorly in managing the loans in their covered portfolios,
we would expect these banks to claim more losses to the FDIC. To test this, we use proprietary
data from the FDIC on the total losses claimed by each acquirer with a loss sharing agreement on
the failed bank portfolio. We aggregate the claim amounts made and paid out during the coverage
period of the loss share agreement. This aggregated amount is then scaled by the total assets
covered by the agreement to give us a measure of total claimed loss rates comparable across
different banks.

                                       [Insert Table 10 Here.]

    Table 10 presents the results. After controlling for the fact that PE investors acquired less
healthy banks using the selection variables, the estimated differences in claimed losses are virtually
zero. In other words, PE investors do not appear to be costlier than other acquirers for the FDIC.
We include results for both the total reported losses on the portfolio and the amount of the losses
incurred by the acquirer net of loss sharing payments made to the acquirer by the FDIC. Note that
when using our quasi-random sample for the analysis (columns 3 and 6), the number of
observations drops to 38 banks that fall into our criterion and have loss coverage on their loan
portfolios. As a result, the analysis has low power, but it is reassuring that the economic
magnitudes confirm prior results using the full sample.

5.5 Exit of PE-acquired Failed Banks
    Private equity, as financial investors, are not in the business of permanently running a bank
even though they were able to stabilize the acquired failed banks during the crisis period. How do

                                                    27
they exit these investments, and how do these PE-acquired banks re-integrate into the banking
sector? We hand collect information on the exit of PE-acquired banks from FDIC structure reports
on bank merger activity. We obtain details on merger deal values, IPO activity, and any additional
rounds of acquirer funding from S&P Global Market Intelligence. Note that this analysis is more
informative at the acquiring bank level (consortium level) because different failed banks are
consolidated into one bank after being acquired by the same consortium under the same charter.

                                         [Insert Table 11 Here.]

     Out of 19 banks/consortia, 15 have been acquired or consolidated by other commercial banks,
two went IPO, one is still under PE operations, and one was liquidated. 19 We also report the bank-
level counts that reflect the number of acquired failed banks in the acquiring consortia. Out of the
17 banks that were acquired or went IPO, PE investors held failed banks for 6.5 years on average.
Interestingly, of the 15 acquisitions, 60 percent were acquired by a local bank--that is, a bank that
overlaps with the footprint of the acquired bank at the zip code level. The number is even higher
if we consider the banks to overlap at the county or state level.

     This finding is consistent with the overall interpretation of what PE investors help achieve in
this process. PE investors acquire failed banks that are too risky to acquire for incumbent banks
who themselves may be in distress. Thus, PE investors fill the funding gap and turn around those
banks with their hired expertise. These banks are later more suitable for a bank acquisition and
return to traditional bank ownership. Slightly more than half of them are acquired by local banks,
who were the natural buyers but were not necessarily in a good position at that time to make these
acquisitions themselves.

   We calculate the return by comparing consortium funds raised with exit prices. Ideally, we
would hope to use the total cash disbursement, which is unobservable in some cases of our data.
When these data are not available, we instead rely on the total committed capital to proxy for that
cash disbursement component in IRR calculation. Given capital disbursement is lower than
committed capital, our IRR calculation provides a lower bound of return calculation. We also
supplement this with data on reported additional private placements or offerings from S&P Global
Market Intelligence, particularly when additional funds were raised to contribute to additional

     19
        One bank was liquidated by the acquirer after deposit insurance was terminated due to unsound banking
practices.

                                                       28
failed bank purchases. Merger announced deal values are obtained from S&P Global Market
Intelligence as well. We find that the deal multiple is 2.11 on average and 2 at the median. We also
calculate a rough IRR of 12% after accounting for the holding period, with adjustment for the
interim additional funding. This is a good PE return: based on recent estimates from Brown et al.
(2015), PE funds of similar vintages earned an IRR below 8%.

5.6 Management of PE-Acquired Failed Banks
    Taken together, evidence thus far paints a positive picture of the role of PE investors in
stabilizing the financial system through participating in the process of failed bank resolution. A
final question that we ask is: PE investors are not bankers, so how can PE intervention bring about
those positive changes to the acquired failed banks? We attempt to answer this question by
exploring the management human capital of the PE-acquired failed banks. We collect CEO
backgrounds of the PE-acquired failed banks by hand from publicly available information on the
internet, such as company bios, professional profiles, and featured articles.

                                      [Insert Table 12 Here.]

    Private equity investors hire ex-bankers to manage the acquired failed banks. Those bankers,
on average, have nearly 30 years of experience in the banking industry, and more than half of them
were CEOs of other banks before being appointed at the failed banks. More than 60 percent of the
CEOs had experience in the local area of the failed bank, and nearly 70 percent of the hired bankers
had experience working in a community bank. Interestingly, more than a third of the hired CEOs
specialized in turnaround management and troubled and distressed assets.



6. Conclusion

    This paper studies the role of private equity in stabilizing the financial system in the 2008
crisis through failed bank resolution. Using detailed and proprietary failed bank data from the
FDIC combined with information on private equity investors, we provide the first empirical
investigation of PE investors' role in failed bank resolution--an economically important but
potentially controversial role.

    An extensive literature explores the effects of private equity on firm-level outcomes, such as
employment, productivity, product quality, and innovation. However, whether or not PE should

                                                   29
be allowed in banking, one of the most central sectors in the financial system, has been an
unexplored question. Our paper suggests that understanding the role of PE in the economy should
take into broader account how the industry interacts with and affects the stability of the financial
system. Further, our paper sheds light on the policy debate on whether to introduce private
investors into the process of failed bank resolution.

    We find that PE investors acquired failed banks that were generally underperforming and
riskier than bank-acquired banks were. PE investors also acquired failed banks when the
neighboring banks were also in distress and therefore had a lower ability to make failed bank
acquisitions. Thus, our findings suggest that PE investors fill the capital gap in scenarios where
the natural local bank buyers are themselves distressed or capital constrained. Using a quasi-
random empirical design, we find that PE-acquired failed banks recovered as well as those
acquired by banks despite being underperforming ex ante, and we show some evidence of them
outperforming other distressed banks in various dimensions. Our quasi-random empirical design
further shows positive real effects on the local economy of PE failed bank acquisitions. Overall,
our results suggest a positive role for PE in helping to stabilize the financial system in the crisis
through their participation in failed bank resolution.




                                                   30
References

Acharya, Viral V., Hyun Song Shin, and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2011. Crisis resolution and bank
   liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 24: 2166­2205.
Acharya, Viral V., and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2008. Cash-in-the-market pricing and optimal
   resolution of bank failures, Review of Financial Studies 21: 2705­2742.
Berger, Allen N., and Christa HS Bouwman. 2013. How does capital affect bank performance
   during financial crises? Journal of Financial Economics 109 (1): 146-176.
Berger, Allen N., Anthony Saunders, Joseph M. Scalise, and Gregory F. Udell. 1998. The effects
   of bank mergers and acquisitions on small business lending, Journal of Financial Economics
   50: 187­229.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell. 1995. Relationship lending and lines of credit in small
   firm finance, Journal of Business 68: 351­382.
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in propagation of the great
   depression, American Economic Review 73, no. 3: 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben, and Gertler, Mark. 1990. Financial fragility and economic performance,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 105:87­114.
Bernstein, Shai, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti. 2019. Private equity and financial fragility
   during the crisis, Review of Financial Studies 32(4): 1309-1373.
Bernstein, Shai, Josh Lerner, Morten Sorensen, and Per Strömberg. 2016. Private equity and
   industry performance, Management Science 63:1198­213.
Bernstein, Shai, and A. Sheen. 2016. The operational consequences of private equity buyouts:
   Evidence from the restaurant industry, Review of Financial Studies 29:2387­418.
Blundell-Wignall, Adrian. 2007. The private equity boom: Causes and policy issues, Financial
   Market Trends: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 92:59­86.
Boucly, Quentin, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. 2011. Growth LBOs, Journal of Financial
   Economics 102 (2): 432-453.
Brown, Gregory W., Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and David T.
   Robinson. 2015. What do different commercial data sets tell us about private equity
   performance? University of Chicago Working Paper.
Calder, Bobby, and Robert Burnkrant. 1977. Interpersonal influence on consumer behavior: An
   attribution theory approach, Journal of Consumer Research 4:29­38.
Che, Yeon-Koo, and Ian Gale. 2006. Revenue comparisons for auctions when bidders have
   arbitrary types, Theoretical Economics 1: 95­118.
Cohn, Jonathan B., Hotchkiss, Edith S., and Erin Towery. 2020. The motives for private equity
   buyouts of private firms: Evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns, Working Paper.
Colonnelli, Emanuele, Mounu Prem, and Edoardo Teso. 2020. Patronage and selection in public
   sector organizations, American Economic Review, Forthcoming.



                                                  31
Cornett, Marcia Millon, and Hassan Tehranian. 1992. Changes in corporate performance
   associated with bank acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 31: 211­234.
Dam, Lammertjan, and Michael Koetter. 2012. Bank bailouts and moral hazard: Evidence from
  Germany, Review of Financial Studies 25: 2343­2380.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier Miranda.
   2014. Private equity, jobs, and productivity, American Economic Review 104:3956­90.
Davison, Lee K., and Ashley M. Carreon. 2010. Toward a long-term strategy for deposit
   insurance fund management, FDIC Quarterly 4: 29­37.
DeYoung, Robert, Michal Kowalik, and Gokhan Torna. 2018. Private equity investment in US
  banks, Working Paper.
Duchin, Ran, Oguzhan Ozbas, and Berk Sensoy. 2010. Costly external finance, corporate
   investment, and the subprime mortgage credit crisis, Journal of Financial Economics
   97:418­35.
Eaton, Charlie, Sabrina T. Howell, and Constantine Yannelis. 2019. When investor incentives
   and consumer interests diverge: Private equity in higher education, Review of Financial
   Studies (10).
ECB. 2017. Guidance on leveraged transactions. Technical Report.
  https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/pdf/ssm.leveraged_transactions_guidanc
  e_201705.en.pdf
Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner. 2013. Combining banking with private equity
   investing, Review of Financial Studies 26 (9): 2139-2173.
Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner. 2015. The disintermediation of financial markets:
   Direct investing in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 116:160­78.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 2009. Final Statement of Policy on Qualifications for
   Failed Bank Acquisitions. 74 Federal Register 45440-45449, September 2, 2009.
   https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/federal/2009/09FinalSOP92.pdf.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2017. Crisis and Response: An FDIC History,
   2008-2013. Washington, DC: FDIC.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 2018. Quarterly Banking Profile, Third Quarter 2018.
   https://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/qbp/timeseries/qbpnot.pdf.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2019. Resolutions Handbook, Revised January
   15, 2019. https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/reshandbook/resolutions-handbook.pdf.
Fisman, Raymond, Florian Schulz, and Vikrant Vig. 2014. The private returns to public office,
   Journal of Political Economy 122 (4): 806-862.
Fracassi, Cesare, Alessandro Previtero, and Albert W. Sheen. 2020. Barbarians at the store?
   Private equity, products, and consumers, National Bureau of Economic Research, No.
   w27435.
Gandhi, Ashvin, YoungJun Song, and Prabhava Upadrashta. 2021. Private Equity, Consumers,
   and Competition: Evidence from the Nursing Home Industry, Working Paper.

                                                 32
Gelman, Andrew, and Guido Imbens. 2019. Why high-order polynomials should not be used in
   regression discontinuity designs, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (3): 447-456.
Gilje, Erik P., Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan. 2013. Exporting liquidity: Branch banking
    and financial integration, Journal of Finance 71: 1159­1184.
Goergen, Marc, Noel O'Sullivan, and Geoff Wood. 2011. Private equity takeovers and
   employment in the UK: Some empirical evidence, Corporate Governance: An International
   Review 19:259­75.
Gompers, Paul, Steven Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov. 2016. What do private equity
  firms say they do? Journal of Financial Economics 121:449­76.
Gompers, Paul, Kristin Mugford, and Daniel Kim. 2012. Bain Capital: Outback Steakhouse,
  Harvard Business School Case no. 212-087.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Winton. 2003. Financial intermediation. In Handbook of the
   Economics of Finance, vol. 1, pp. 431-552. Elsevier.
Granja, Joao. 2013. The relation between bank resolutions and information environment:
   Evidence from the auctions for failed banks, Journal of Accounting Research 51: 1031­1070.
Granja, Joao, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. 2017. Selling failed banks, Journal of Finance
   72(4): 1723-1784.
Gupta, Atul, Sabrina T. Howell, Constantine Yannelis, and Abhinav Gupta. 2021. Does private
   equity investment in healthcare benefit patients? Evidence from nursing homes, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, No. w28474.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1990. The role of banks in reducing the
   costs of financial distress in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 27:67­88.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1991. Corporate structure, liquidity, and
   investment: Evidence from Japanese industrial groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics
   106:33­60.
Houston, Joel F., and Michael D. Ryngaert. 1994. The overall gains from large bank mergers,
   Journal of Banking & Finance 18: 1155­1176.
Hotchkiss, Edie, David C. Smith, and Per Strömberg. 2011. Private equity and the resolution of
   financial distress.
Hynes, Richard M., and Steven D. Walt. 2010. Why banks are not allowed in bankruptcy,
   Washington & Lee Law Review 67: 985­1051.
Illig, Robert. 2012. The dog that didn't bark: Private investment funds and relational contracts in
     the wake of the Great Recession, Michigan Journal of Private Equity & Venture Capital Law
     2:49­95.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Anna Kovner. 2011. The private equity advantage: Leveraged buyout
    firms and relationship banking, Review of Financial Studies 24:2462­98.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein. 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008,
    Journal of Financial Economics 97:319­38.



                                                  33
James, Christopher. 1987. Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans, Journal of Financial
   Economics 19: 217­235.
James, Christopher. 1991. The losses realized in bank failures, Journal of Finance 46: 1223­
   1242.
James, Christopher, and Peggy Wier. 1987. An analysis of FDIC failed bank auctions, Journal of
   Monetary Economics 20: 141­153.
Jensen, Michael. 1989. The eclipse of the public corporation, Harvard Business Review no. 5:
   61-74.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Wei Wang. 2012. Hedge funds and Chapter 11, Journal of Finance 67
    (2): 513-560.
John, Kose, Larry Lang, and Jeffry Netter. 1992. The voluntary restructuring of large firms in
   response to performance decline, Journal of Finance 47:891­917.
Kahle, Kathleen, and Rene Stulz. 2013. Access to capital, investment, and the financial crisis,
   Journal of Financial Economics 110:280­99.
Kaplan, Steven. 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value,
   Journal of Financial Economics 24:217­54.
Kaplan, Steven, and Jeremy Stein. 1993. The evolution of buyout pricing and financial structure
   in the 1980s, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:313­57.
Kaplan, Steven, and Per Strömberg. 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity, Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 23:121­46.
Kirti, Divya, and Natasha Sarin. 2020. Private equity value creation in finance: Evidence from
    life insurance, U of Penn, Inst for Law & Econ Research Paper 20-17.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. Regression discontinuity designs in economics,
   Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2): 281-355.
Lerner, Josh, Morten Sorensen, and Per Strömberg. 2011. Private equity and longrun
   investment: The case of innovation, Journal of Finance 66 (2): 445-477.
Lichtenberg, Frank, and Donald Siegel. 1990. The effects of leveraged buyouts on productivity
   and related aspects of firm behavior, Journal of Financial Economics 27:165­94.
Michaely, Roni, and Michael Roberts. 2012. Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private
   firms, Review of Financial Studies 25:711­46.
Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q. 2019. Are credit markets still local? Evidence from bank branch
   closings, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11 (1): 1-32.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "OCC Conditionally Approves First National Bank
   Shelf Charter to Expand Pool of Qualified Bidders for Troubled Institutions," NR 2008-137,
   November 21, 2008, https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/2008/nr-occ-2008-
   137.html.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan. 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence
    from small business data, Journal of Finance 49:3­37.


                                                  34
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan. 2002. Does distance still matter? The information
    revolution in small business lending, Journal of Finance 57: 2533­2570
Rajan, Raghuram. 1992. Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm's- length
   debt, Journal of Finance 47: 1367­1400.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. Financial dependence and growth, American
   Economic Review 88:559­86.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2002. Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus
    hierarchical firms, Journal of Finance 57: 1891­1921.
Vij, Siddharth. 2020. Acquiring failed banks, Working Paper.




                                                 35
Appendix 1. Variable Definition and Description

 Variable                   Definition and Description

 Asset size (in $Million)   Total assets. Sum of all assets owned by the institution including cash,
                            loans, securities, bank premises and other assets.

 % Tier 1 risk-based        Tier 1 capital divided by adjusted average assets (%). Tier 1 capital
 capital ratio              includes common equity plus noncumulative preferred stock plus
                            minority interests in consolidated subsidiaries less goodwill and other
                            ineligible intangible assets. Adjusted average assets are average total
                            assets minus disallowed intangibles.

 Liquidity ratio            Sum of cash, fed funds sold, and securities, excluding mortgage-backed
                            securities, divided by total assets.

 Core deposits to total     Total domestic deposits minus time deposits of more than $250,000 and
 deposits                   brokered deposits of $250,000 or less, divided by total deposits.

 Net interest margin (%)    Quarterly net interest income as a percent of a two-period average
                            earning assets.

 CRE loans to total         Ratio of commercial real estate (CRE) loans to total loan and lease
 loans                      financing receivables. Includes all nonfarm, nonresidential properties
                            secured by real estate and multifamily (5 or more) residential properties
                            secured by real estate held in domestic offices.

 C&D loans to total         Ratio of construction and development loans (C&D) to total loans and
 loans                      lease financing receivables. Includes all construction and land
                            development loans secured by real estate held in domestic offices.

 C&I loans to total         Ratio of commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to total loans and lease
 loans                      financing receivables.

 Residential loans to       Ratio of total loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties held in
 total loans                domestic offices to total loans and lease financing receivables.

 Consumer loans to          Ratio of loans to individuals for household, family, and other personal
 total loans                expenditures to total loans and lease financing receivables.

 Noncurrent loans to        Ratio of noncurrent loans and leases to gross loans and leases. Includes
 total loans                total loan and lease financing receivables 90 days or more past due and in
                            nonaccrual status.

 OREO to total assets       Ratio of other real estate owned to total assets. Includes real estate
                            acquired and direct and indirect investments in real estate.

 Loss-sharing               Agreement between the FDIC and a failed bank acquirer in which the
 agreement                  FDIC absorbs a portion of the losses on a specified pool of assets.

 Neighbor % tier 1 risk-    Mean tier 1 risk-based capital ratio for banks that share at least one
 based capital ratio        branch zip code with the focal bank (%).

                                                    36
Neighbor noncurrent     Mean noncurrent loans to total loans for banks that share at least one
loans to total loans    branch zip code with the focal bank.

Neighbor OREO to        Mean other real estate owned to total assets for banks that share at least
total assets            one branch zip code with the focal bank.

No of local banks       Number of local banks at least three times the size and sharing at least
(>3xSize)               one branch zip code with the focal bank.

No of failed banks in   Number of failed banks in state where focal bank headquarters is located.
state




                                                37
Appendix 2. Institutional Details--The General Process of Failed Bank Resolution

     Bank resolution activities are initiated by a failing bank letter to the FDIC from federal and state
banking regulators who monitor the financial condition of banks. Such initiation is triggered when a
banking institution becomes critically undercapitalized or insolvent. 20

     The FDIC then contacts the management of the failing depository institution. The FDIC also engages
a third-party financial advisor to conduct a review of the assets and compile initial information.
Importantly, in this review process, the financial advisor estimates a loss factor for each asset category
using an identified sample of assets. This information is further used by the FDIC to set the reservation
value on the subsequent resolution of the depository institution.

     During the financial crisis, the FDIC used the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) resolution method in
roughly 95 percent of the cases, and these are the transactions studied in this paper. In a P&A transaction,
the FDIC uses a process that resembles a first-price sealed bid auction to sell some or all of the assets and
liabilities of the depository institution. Only in cases when the auction does not generate any bidding or
when the highest bid is below the FDIC's reservation value will the FDIC use an alternative resolution
method. The resolution process can be categorized into four steps: marketing and identifying the bidder
pool, providing information, bidding, and resolution.

     The first step of selling failed banks is to identify a pool of potential buyers that have expressed
interest in bidding on failed institutions and that satisfy a list of requirements. To be approved to bid in a
P&A transaction, the potential bidder must be a chartered financial institution or an investor group that
has received a conditional charter or is in the process of obtaining a "de novo" charter. PE investors fall
into the latter category of "investor group" as bidders. Moreover, the bidding financial institution must be
well capitalized and possess a CAMELS 21 rating of 1 or 2, a satisfactory Community Reinvestment Act
(CRA) rating, and a satisfactory anti-money-laundering record.

     In the second step, eligible bidders receive notification of an acquisition opportunity, and those who
are interested in pursuing the opportunity must sign a confidentiality agreement. The FDIC then provides
eligible bidders with an information package on the failed institution. The information contains loan
reviews, schedules representing the value of the items on the failed bank's balance sheet, and operational



     20
        A bank is deemed by regulators to be critically undercapitalized when the ratio of tangible equity to total assets is at or
below 2 percent. Tangible equity is the amount of tier 1 capital plus outstanding non-tier 1 perpetual preferred stock.
     21
        CAMELS is short for (C)apital Adequacy, (A)sset quality, (M)anagement, (E)arnings, (L)iquidity, and (S)ensitivity to
market risk. CAMELS ratings are assigned by bank supervisors after an on-site examination at each bank.
                                                                  38
information. As part of their onsite due diligence, potential bidders can request to review the individual
loan documents.

     In the third step, the formal bidding, the process generally starts 12 to 15 days before the scheduled
closing of the failed bank. Bidders can place one or more sealed bids for the failed bank. The FDIC then
chooses the bid that is least costly to the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) 22 after evaluating all submitted
bids using its proprietary least-cost test model. The FDIC selects the bid whose terms entail the least-
estimated cost for the DIF if those costs are below the reservation value set by the FDIC, which is unknown
to bidders. Bids are not submitted as a single "price," but rather they frequently vary along multiple
dimensions for each bid. For example, these pricing dimensions can include the amount of discount
applied to the assets, the premium paid for deposits, the amount and types of assets acquired, the type of
transaction for purchase (whole bank, loss share, etc.), the extent of any coverage for shared losses, and
so on. The least cost test must take all of these factors into account when estimating the resolution cost
associated with each bid for comparison.

     In the final step, i.e., when a failing depository institution enters receivership, the FDIC takes custody
of the failed bank's premises, records, loans, and other assets. The priority for paying allowed claims is
given to depositors, including the FDIC as subrogee, over other general and unsecured creditors. The DIF
took a loss on most bank failures that occurred during the recent financial crisis, suggesting that the
receivership proceeds do not cover the FDIC's subrogated claim and that the FDIC is the residual claimant
in most receiverships (Hynes and Walt, 2010). Between 2008 and 2013, the DIF lost approximately $73
billion due to depository institution failures. 23 The fund reached a negative balance on an accounting basis
during the third quarter of 2009. It has since recovered and stood at $100 billion at the end of 2018,
resulting in a reserve ratio of 1.36 percent. 24 The FDIC responded to the large losses on its DIF by
collecting a special assessment of 5bps on all depository institutions and requiring prepaid assessments to
boost the fund's liquidity. In addition, the FDIC updated its risk-based pricing for deposit insurance. 25




     22
       This is mandated by The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) of 1991.
     23
       Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2017. Crisis and Response: An FDIC History, 2008-2013. Washington,
DC: FDIC. p.xiii.
    24
       Quarterly Banking Profile, Third Quarter 2018. https://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/qbp/2018sep/qbp.pdf.
    25
       Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2017. Crisis and Response: An FDIC History, 2008-2013. Washington,
DC: FDIC. Chapter 5.


                                                            39
                                                           Figure 1. Bank Failures over Time

This figure plots the time series of bank failures irrespective of resolution method and acquirer type during the period 2000 to 2018. Data are from the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation and are available at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html. The time series includes the failed banks
whose resolution process was a P&A transaction or a deposit payoff, but does not include open bank assistance. In Panel (A) we plot the total number of
bank failures, and in Panel (B) we plot the total assets (in Billion USD) at failure.




                                  Panel (A)                                                                        Panel (B)




                                                                                 40
                            Figure 2. Illustrative Flow Chart of Failed Bank Resolution and PE Participation




Private Equity apply to
                                     Private Equity apply to
regulator to obtain bank
                                     FDIC to be added to
charter, apply to Federal
                                     eligible bidder list
Reserve to form BHC



                                                                                                           Least cost resolution
Bank deemed critically               FDIC bid list generation,           Virtual data room and due         determined by FDIC;
undercapitalized or                  notify acquisition                  diligence, sealed bid             bank closed, assets and
insolvent                            opportunity                         submissions                       deposits transferred to
                                                                                                           acquirer



                                      Banks satisfying
                                      qualification tests and
                                      showing interest are
                                      added




                                                                    41
                                               Figure 3. PE Participation in Failed Bank Acquisitions

This figure shows the number of failed banks acquired by other banks and by PE during 2009­2014. Panel (A) is plotted based on the number of failed bank
acquisitions. Panel (B) is based on the total assets acquired. Years 2009­2014 are active years for PE acquisitions during the crisis. Prior to 2008, PE acquirers
were not yet allowed to participate in failed bank auctions, and 2009 was the first successful PE acquisition. After 2014, they were allowed to participate but
no PE acquisitions of failed banks were made.




                                  Panel (A)                                                                          Panel (B)




                                                                                  42
                      Figure 4. Comparing Banks in Different Acquisition Groups

This figure presents the characteristics of failed banks (and those of their neighboring banks) targeted by different
pools of acquirers: those that were bid on and eventually acquired by PE investors, those bid on by PE investors but
may eventually be won by a PE investor or an incumbent bank, and those that were only bid on and eventually
acquired by other incumbent banks. For each characteristic, we present the sample mean across the three groups.


Panel (A): Sorting on Failed Banks' Own Characteristics




Panel (B): Sorting on Neighboring Banks' Characteristics




                                                           43
                         Table 1. Summary Statistics for the Private Equity Buyers

This table presents summary statistics of the PE buyers in failed bank acquisitions. We report the summary
statistics at the consortia level and PE fund level. Consortia are the groups of PE investors that collaborate in
acquiring failed banks, and consortia-level information is collected from the FDIC. Of the 20 distinct PE charters,
one acquirer purchased failed banks under two separate charters that were then consolidated and is counted as a
single consortium in the data below. PE-level information is collected from Preqin. For each variable, we report
mean, standard deviation, and 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles.



                                                                 Standard             25th                      75th
                                                  Mean                                           Median
                                                                 Deviation         Percentile                Percentile


 Consortium-Level (N=19)
 Number of PE firms per consortium                 3.37             2.29               2             4           4.5
 Share of PE ownership in consortium 26           68.9              35.5               62           76           100
 Total number of failed banks bid on               5.2              4.18              1.75           3            8
 Number of states (bids)                          1.32              0.82               1             1            1
 Number of acquisitions (bid and "win")           3.26              3.07               1             2            4
 Number of states (acquisitions)                  1.26              0.56               1             1            1
 Prior experience in financial distress           0.58              0.51               0             1            1


 Private Equity Level (N=42, available on Preqin)
 Fund vintage                                   2007.52             2.95             2006          2007         2009
 Fund size (million USD)                        2724.21           4075.23            654.05      1393.15      3100.00
 First-time fund (0 or 1)                         0.18              0.39               0             0            0




26
   PE ownership shares include three acquisitions that occurred through non-bank charters but are exceptions in their funding
structure. Of these, two were small banks acquired by single investors, and one was a community development bank with
funding provided by large institutional investors. We count those PE ownership shares as zero in the above table. Excluding
these banks results in a mean PE ownership share of 82 percent and a median of 85 percent.

                                                               44
                                                        Table 2. Summary Statistics of the Failed Banks

This table presents summary statistics for failed banks between 2009 and 2014. Variables are obtained from the Call Report submitted by the failed bank in the
quarter prior to failure. Asset size is the amount of assets at the failed bank in millions. % Tier 1 risk-based capital is the tier 1 risk-based capital divided by adjusted
average assets, as a percentage. Liquidity ratio is the sum of cash, fed funds sold and securities, excluding mortgage-backed securities, divided by total assets. Core
deposits to total deposits is total domestic deposits minus time deposits of more than $250,000 and brokered deposits of $250,000 or less, divided by total deposits.
Net interest margin (%) is the quarterly net interest income as a percent of a two-period average earning assets. CRE loans to total loans is non-farm, non-residential
properties secured by real estate and multifamily (5 or more) residential properties secured by real estate, divided by total loans. C&D loans to total loans is
construction and land development loans secured by real estate divided by total loans. C&I loans to total loans is commercial and industrial loans, divided by total
loans. Consumer loans to total loans is loans to individuals for household, family, and other personal expenditures, divided by total loans. Residential loans to total
loans is loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties, divided by total loans. Noncurrent loans to total loans is the ratio of noncurrent loans to total loans. OREO
to total assets is the ratio of other real estate owned to total assets. Loss sharing agreement is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if the P&A in resolution included
an agreement for the FDIC to partially indemnify losses incurred on covered assets. Neighboring and local bank variables are constructed as the mean of banks that
share at least one branch zip code with the focal bank. No of failed banks in state is defined as the number of failed banks located in the same state as the headquarters
of the failed bank.
                                                                                                     Standard         25th                        75th
                                                                                         Mean                                     Median
                  N = 456                                                                            Deviation     Percentile                  Percentile
                  Failed bank characteristics
                  Asset size ($ millions)                                                727.0         2,352          101.7        207.4         461.2
                  % Tier 1 risk-based capital to total assets                            0.925         2.698          0.155        1.105         1.995
                  Liquidity ratio                                                        0.168         0.082          0.110        0.156         0.211
                  Core deposits to total deposits                                        0.837         0.145          0.742        0.878         0.958
                  Net interest margin (%)                                                2.550         1.248          1.850        2.560         3.285
                  CRE loans to total loans                                               0.387         0.170          0.272        0.379         0.491
                  Construction and development loans to total loans                      0.186         0.137         0.0842        0.158         0.261
                  C&I loans to total loans                                               0.107         0.089          0.044        0.083         0.143
                  Consumer loans to total loans                                          0.023         0.040          0.004        0.012         0.027
                  Residential loans to total loans                                       0.259         0.184          0.127        0.231         0.326
                  Noncurrent loans to total loans                                        0.164         0.095          0.097        0.150         0.203
                  OREO to total assets                                                   0.052         0.049          0.017        0.039         0.071
                  Loss-sharing agreement (Yes/No)                                        0.662         0.473            0            1             1

                  Neighboring bank conditions
                  Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based capital ratio                             7.930         1.340         7.133         7.945         8.650
                  Neighbor noncurrent loans to total loans                               0.036         0.035         0.009         0.024         0.053
                  Neighbor OREO to total assets                                          0.007         0.010         0.001         0.003         0.009
                  No. of local banks (>3xSize)                                           2.877         2.259           1             2             4
                  No. of failed banks in state                                           37.41         28.75           8            35            69


                                                                                       45
                          Table 3. Characteristics of PE-Acquired Failed Banks

This table presents the estimation results from a logit regression framework in the following form:
                        (  = 1) = ( +    +    +  +  ).
The analysis is performed on the cross-sectional sample of all failed banks that were eventually acquired by a bank
or a private equity consortium. The dependent variable is a dummy that takes value 1 if the failed bank was
eventually acquired by PE and 0 otherwise (i.e., acquired by a bank). Panel A investigates characteristics of the
failed banks themselves. Panel B investigates characteristics of the neighboring banks of the focal failed bank. All
variables are defined in Table 2 and in the appendix of variable definition. We control for the size of the bank using
the logarithm of the total assets of the bank. Failed Year-Quarter fixed effects are included to account for the time-
varying economic and regulatory environments that could affect the failed bank resolution process. Robust standard
errors are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Panel A: Characteristics of Failed Banks and PE Acquisitions
                                                  (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)
                                                                       I(PE Acquired)

           % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio -0.013***
                                               (0.005)
           Core deposits to total deposits                  -0.220**
                                                             (0.103)
           Net interest margin (%)                                       -0.054***
                                                                           (0.012)
           C&D loans to total loans                                                     0.229*
                                                                                        (0.123)
           OREO to total assets                                                                   0.626**
                                                                                                  (0.253)
           Log(asset in $000)                  0.057***    0.052***       0.044***      0.052*** 0.058***
                                                (0.011)     (0.011)        (0.009)       (0.012)  (0.011)

           Observations                           456         456           456           456       456
           Failed Year-Quarter FE                 Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes
           Pseudo R-squared                      0.181       0.170         0.218         0.172     0.175




                                                            46
Panel B: Financial Health of Neighbor Banks and PE Acquisitions

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)
                                                                          I(PE Acquired)

      Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based capital ratio   -0.020*
                                                   (0.012)
      Neighbor noncurrent loans to total loans                   0.825***
                                                                  (0.319)
      Neighbor OREO to total assets                                         3.905***
                                                                             (1.435)
      No. of local banks (>3xsize)                                                         -0.011*
                                                                                           (0.006)
      No. of failed banks in state                                                     0.002***
                                                                                        (0.000)
      Log(asset in $000)                           0.062*** 0.051*** 0.058*** 0.060*** 0.055***
                                                    (0.012)  (0.010)  (0.012)  (0.011)  (0.010)

      Observations                                   456           456         456          456       456
      Failed Year-Quarter FE                         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
      Pseudo R-squared                              0.167         0.175       0.188        0.167     0.217




                                                            47
                                  Table 4. Private Equity Bidding Activities

This table presents the estimation results from a logit regression framework in the following form:
                         (  = 1) = ( +    +    +  +  ).
The analysis is performed on the cross-sectional sample of all failed banks in 2008­2015. Observation numbers are
higher than in previous tables because additional failures in years 2008 and 2015 are added, in which a few PE bids
were made on failed banks but did not win. The dependent variable is a dummy that takes value 1 if at least one PE
bid on the failed bank and 0 otherwise (i.e., only bid on by banks). Panel A investigates characteristics of the failed
banks themselves. Panel B investigates characteristics of the neighboring banks of the focal failed bank. All
variables are defined in Table 2 and in Appendix 1. We control for the size of the bank measured using the logarithm
of the total assets of the bank. Failed Year-Quarter fixed effects are included to account for the time-varying
economic and regulatory environments that could affect the failed bank resolution process. Robust standard errors
are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Characteristics of Failed Banks and PE Bidding


                                                  (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                                       I(PE Bidding)

           % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio -0.025***
                                               (0.006)
           Core deposits to total deposits                   -0.162
                                                             (0.158)
           Net interest margin (%)                                       -0.056***
                                                                           (0.019)
           C&D loans to total loans                                                     0.152
                                                                                       (0.389)
           OREO to total assets                                                                  0.656*
                                                                                                 (0.389)
           Log(asset in $000)                  0.088***     0.080***     0.075***      0.080*** 0.085***
                                                (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.016)  (0.015)

           Observations                           487          487          487          487        487
           Failed Year-Quarter FE                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
           Pseudo R-squared                      0.144        0.118        0.136        0.118      0.122




                                                            48
Panel B: Financial Health of Neighbor Banks and the PE Bidders



                                                 (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)
                                                                        I(PE Bidding)

 Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based capital ratio   -0.034**
                                               (0.016)
 Neighbor noncurrent loans to total loans                    1.539***
                                                              (0.461)
 Neighbor OREO to total assets                                            6.718***
                                                                           (2.043)
 No. of local banks (>3xSize)                                                           -0.005
                                                                                        (0.008)
 No. of failed banks in state                                                                      0.003***
                                                                                                    (0.001)
 Log(asset in $000)                           0.097***       0.079***     0.091***      0.090***   0.090***
                                               (0.018)        (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.016)    (0.014)

 Observations                                    487           487          487           487        487
 Failed Year-Quarter FE                          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes
 Pseudo R-squared                               0.137         0.151        0.158         0.129      0.204




                                                        49
      Table 5. Balance Test of the Quasi-Random Bank Allocation to PE Investors and Banks

This table provides the balance test for the quasi-random acquisition sample by comparing characteristics prior to
bank failures. The sample consists of failed bank auctions in which (1) PE investors and banks both bid, (2) one is
the winning bidder (acquirer) and one is the cover bid, and (3) the bidder value difference is smaller than five
percent of total bank assets. The balance test compares the banks that were marginally won by a bank and those
that were marginally won by a PE investor, and it reports the mean, the standard deviation, and the t-test of the
two samples. Variables are defined in prior tables or used in tables to follow.

                                         PE-acquired                        Bank-acquired
                                                Standard                             Standard
                                       Mean                               Mean                              t-stat
                                                Deviation                            Deviation
 Failed bank characteristics
 Log(asset in $000)                    12.758         0.829              13.073           1.464            0.921
 % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio      0.139         1.769               0.497           2.384            0.358
 Core deposits to total deposits        0.870         0.134               0.822           0.152            -1.153
 Net interest margin (%)                2.367         0.865               2.415           0.788            0.197
 CRE loans to total loans               0.444         0.148               0.482           0.168            0.834
 C&D loans to total loans               0.208         0.100               0.190           0.119            -0.571
 OREO to total assets                   0.077         0.068               0.051           0.071            -1.198


 Neighboring bank conditions
 Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based
                                        7.735         1.475               7.188           2.445            -0.940
 capital ratio
 Neighbor noncurrent loans to
                                        0.059         0.049               0.045           0.039            -1.411
 total loans
 Neighbor OREO to total assets          0.015         0.015               -0.037          0.215            -1.200


 Branch-level Conditions
 Branch closure rate (%) (2005-
                                        4.082         1.267               6.667           2.644            0.982
 2007)
 Branch deposits ($000)              51,777.11      91,362.15           57,660.35       100,444.4          0.513


 County-level Condition
 Log(SBA loan amount)                  15.463         1.881              15.900           2.075            1.304
 Log(SBA loan number)                   2.672         1.541               3.136           1.925            1.640
 SBA loan interest rate                 6.412         0.590               6.352           0.589            -0.588
 Log(SBA loan average loan
                                       12.791         0.841              12.764           0.839            -0.187
 size)
 Log(startup employment)                8.197         1.755               8.337           2.235            0.430
 Log(employment)                        8.565         1.834               8.654           2.310            0.264
 Log(total personal income)             0.023         0.127               0.047           0.122            0.977
 Log(per capital income)               -0.032         0.052              -0.034           0.034            -0.256


                                                          50
          Table 6. Branch Closing Post Failed Bank Acquisition--Branch-level Regression

This table studies failed bank branch closings after being acquired by a PE investor or by another bank. The analysis
uses the following specification at the branch  level (located in region ), of bank  , that failed in year :

                      ( = 1),,, = ( +    +    + × +  ).

The key explanatory variable is the dummy variable indicating whether the bank is acquired by a PE acquirer or by
another bank. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (3) is a dummy variable indicating whether the branch
closes within the three-year window post acquisition. Columns (2) and (4) use a dependent variable indicating
whether the branch closes and simultaneously makes the bank exit the county. Control variables include those that
have strong power in explaining PE investors' selection of acquisition--tier 1 risk-based capital ratio, core deposits
to total deposits, C&D loans to total loans, OREO to total assets, and total assets.
Fixed effects are included at the failed year by branch state level. Standard errors are double clustered at the state
and failed year levels and are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.


                                         Quasi-Random Sample                             Full Sample
                                        (1)             (2)                         (3)             (4)
                                                Close and Exit from                         Close and Exit from
                                      Closing                                    Closing
                                                      County                                      County

 I(PE Acquired)                      -0.148***            -0.070**              -0.072***            -0.027**
                                       (0.037)             (0.029)                (0.028)             (0.013)
 % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio      -0.006              -0.008                 0.002               0.003
                                       (0.004)             (0.006)                (0.003)             (0.002)
 Core deposits to total deposits     -0.929***           -0.657***              -0.537***           -0.224***
                                       (0.233)             (0.161)                (0.107)             (0.066)
 C&D loans to total loans             -0.282**           -0.286***                 0.039               0.027
                                       (0.135)             (0.107)                (0.080)             (0.053)
 OREO to total assets                    0.645              -0.137                 0.158              -0.210
                                       (0.691)             (0.358)                (0.333)             (0.194)
 Log(asset in $000)                    -0.074*             -0.035*              -0.029***            -0.010**
                                       (0.031)             (0.019)                (0.005)             (0.003)

 Observations                           617                 617                    4,476              4,476
 R-squared                             0.345               0.234                   0.236              0.143
 State x Failed Year FE                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes                Yes
 Mean of Dependent Var                 0.201               0.117                   0.241              0.045




                                                            51
                                            Table 7. Post-Acquisition Performance in Deposit Growth

This table shows the deposit changes of bank- and PE-acquired failed bank branches post acquisition. The analysis is at the county-bank level, using the
following specification,

                                                 ,, =  +    +    + × +  .

The dependent variable is failed bank  's (in region ) one-year or three-year deposit change since  's year of failure . For PE-acquired banks using shelf
charters, this deposit change is for all branches in the local region; for bank-acquired banks or PE-acquired banks using inflatable charters or with multiple
acquisitions, the deposits are calculated using both the failed bank branches and the branches originally owned by the acquirer bank in order to account for
the measurement issues that may arise from reorganization. We only keep counties where the failed bank did not completely exit. The analysis incorporates
a combination of state and failure year fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at the level of state and failed year, and they are displayed in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                      Quasi-Random Sample                        Full Sample                 Quasi-Random + No-overlap Sample
                                        (1)          (2)                     (3)             (4)                   (5)              (6)
                                   1-Yr Deposit 3-Yr Deposit            1-Yr Deposit 3-Yr Deposit             1-Yr Deposit     3-Yr Deposit

        I(PE Acquired)                -0.018           0.356***              0.067          0.214***               -0.014               0.351**
                                      (0.141)           (0.111)             (0.056)          (0.037)               (0.135)              (0.115)

        Observations                     431              431                1,685             1,685                 417                  417
        R-squared                       0.594            0.611               0.459             0.505                0.162                0.248
        State x Failed Year FE           Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes                  Yes
        Mean of Dependent Var          0.0627           -0.0288             -0.0605           -0.173               0.0408               -0.0401




                                                                                52
                       Table 8. Real Economic Outcomes: Small Business Lending

This table studies regional economic activities after failed banks were acquired by a PE investor versus an
incumbent bank. The analysis is at the county level, exploiting the quasi-random allocation of banks, and focuses
on counties with only one type of acquirer. The analysis studies small business lending activities. The dependent
variables are three-year growth of SBA lending activities in terms of quantity, total amount, interest rate, and
average loan size. Panels A and B use the quasi-random sample and the full sample, respectively. The analysis
incorporates a combination of state and failure year fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at the level
of the state and failed year and are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.


 Panel A: Small business lending activities--Quasi-random sample
                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                       (4)
                                 SBA                 SBA              SBA Interest             SBA Average
                                 Number              Amount             Rate                    Loan Size

 I(PE Acquired)                  0.320**             0.154**             -0.323*                    0.165
                                 (0.112)             (0.049)             (0.147)                   (0.107)

 Observations                      276                 276                 276                       276
 R-squared                        0.797               0.901               0.777                     0.479
 State x Failed Year FE            Yes                 Yes                 Yes                       Yes


 Panel B: Small business lending activities--Full sample
                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                       (4)
                                 SBA                 SBA              SBA Interest             SBA Average
                                 Number              Amount             Rate                    Loan Size

 I(PE Acquired)                  0.125*              0.077*              -0.065*                   -0.012
                                 (0.071)             (0.042)             (0.035)                   (0.084)

 Observations                     2,181               2,181               2,181                     2,181
 R-squared                        0.863               0.936               0.816                     0.612
 State x Failed Year FE            Yes                 Yes                 Yes                       Yes




                                                            53
                          Table 9. Real Economic Outcomes: Regional Recovery

This table studies regional economic activities after failed banks were acquired by a PE investor versus an
incumbent bank. The analysis is at the county level, exploiting the quasi-random allocation of banks, and focuses
on counties with only one type of acquirer. The analysis studies regional economic indicators, and the dependent
variables are three-year growth in startup employment, total employment, total personal income, and per capita
income. Panels A and B use the quasi-random sample and the full sample, respectively. The analysis incorporates
a combination of state and failure year fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at the level of the state
and failed year and are displayed in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

 Panel A: Regional economic recovery--Quasi-random sample
                               (1)               (2)                       (3)                     (4)
                             Startup                                                            Per Capita
                          Employment       Employment                Total Income                Income

 I(PE Acquired)                  0.042*             0.065**             0.015***                  0.007*
                                 (0.023)            (0.029)              (0.006)                  (0.004)

 Observations                      276                276                  276                      276
 R-squared                        0.957              0.949                0.600                    0.412
 State x Failed Year FE            Yes                Yes                  Yes                      Yes

 Panel B: Regional economic recovery--Full sample
                                (1)               (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                             Startup                                                            Per Capita
                          Employment         Employment              Total Income                Income

 I(PE Acquired)                 0.026**             0.039**              0.011*                    0.002
                                (0.012)             (0.015)              (0.006)                  (0.002)

 Observations                     2,181              2,181                2,181                    2,181
 R-squared                        0.976              0.964                0.671                    0.408
 State x Failed Year FE            Yes                Yes                  Yes                      Yes




                                                           54
                                Table 10. Loss Share Claims for Failed Banks

This table studies loss share claims submitted by failed bank acquirers and examines the difference in whether the
bank is acquired by a PE investor or by another bank. There were a total of 304 failed bank purchase agreements
during the crisis that included loss share coverage. The analysis uses the following specification at the bank  , failure
year-quarter , and bank state  level:

                              ,, =  +    +    + × +  .

The key explanatory variable is the dummy variable indicating whether the bank is acquired by a PE investor or by
another bank. The dependent variable is the aggregate loss rate by the bank during the period of loss share coverage.
We aggregate all the loss claims during the coverage period that could last for several years. This aggregated amount
is then scaled by the total assets covered by the FDIC loss sharing agreement to give us a measure of total claimed
losses comparable across different banks. Total loss rate is the total losses on the acquired portfolio as a ratio of
covered assets. Incurred loss rate is the losses incurred by the acquirer as a ratio of covered assets after netting out
any payments received from the FDIC according to the terms of the loss share agreement. Control variables include
those that have strong power in explaining PE investors' selection of acquisition--tier 1 risk-based capital ratio,
core deposits to total deposits, C&D loans to total loans, and OREO to total assets. Fixed effects are included at the
state-by-fail year level. Standard errors are clustered at the level of failed bank acquirers are displayed in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)      (6)
                                                                      Total Loss Rate
                                                      Total Loss Rate                 Incurred Loss Rate

       I(PE Acquired)                      -0.015   -0.013    0.044                  0.007      0.003   -0.007
                                          (-0.544) (-0.406) (0.690)                 (0.648)    (0.207) (-0.263)
       % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio -0.005** -0.007** -0.024                    0.000      0.001   -0.002
                                          (-2.578) (-2.368) (-0.769)                (0.268)    (0.510) (-0.330)
       Core deposits to total deposits     -0.028    0.042   -0.049                  0.015      0.023    0.070
                                          (-0.486) (0.736) (-0.164)                 (0.801)    (0.930) (0.863)
       C&D loans to total loans          0.307*** 0.334*** -0.300                   0.055**    0.063* -0.094
                                          (5.688)  (3.933) (-0.463)                 (2.340)    (1.921) (-0.681)
       OREO to total assets                0.339* 0.560*** 2.426                     0.054      0.106    0.329
                                          (1.694)  (3.206)  (1.208)                 (0.851)    (1.320) (0.754)

       Observations                            304          304         38            304        304        38
       R-squared                              0.836        0.939       0.266         0.650      0.815      0.124
       Quasi-random Sample                     No           No          Yes           No         No         Yes
       State FE                                Yes          No          No            Yes        No         No
       Failed Year FE                          Yes          No          No            Yes        No         No
       State x Failed Year FE                  No           Yes         No            No         Yes        No




                                                              55
                                    Table 11. Exit of PE-Acquired Banks

This table presents the exit outcomes of PE-acquired failed banks as of 2020 Q1. We hand collect information on
the exit of PE-acquired banks from FDIC structure reports on bank merger activity. We obtain details on IPO
activity from S&P Global Market Intelligence. The analysis is primarily performed at the acquiring bank level
(consortium level) because different failed banks are lumped into one bank after being acquired by the same
consortium under the same charter. We also report the bank-level counts that reflect the number of acquired failed
banks in the acquiring consortia. The exit outcomes include still active, merger and acquisitions (acquired) or
consolidated, IPO, and closed and liquidated. For acquired banks, we also code the acquirer identity. For the purpose
of this table, Local bank buyer is identified here as a bank that has a branch network that overlaps with the acquired
bank's branch network in at least one zip code. Non-local bank buyer is identified here as a bank that does not
overlap with the acquired bank's branch network in at least one zip code.



      Outcomes                                 PE-Acquired Failed Banks Bank-Acquired Failed Banks
                                               Acquirer-level    Bank-level     Acquirer-level     Bank-level
      Still active under acquirer ownership           1               1               158              273
      Acquired or Merged                             15              52               54               95
                          Local bank buyer            9              30               24               47
                      Non-local bank buyer            6              22               30               48
      IPO                                             2               4               11               24
      Closed and liquidated                           1               5               2                 3




                                                            56
                     Table 12. Characteristics of Management in PE-acquired Banks

This table presents the background information of the CEOs appointed by PE investors after acquiring failed banks.
CEO background information is hand-collected from publicly available information on the internet, such as
company bios, professional profiles, and featured articles. Prior experience in banking is an indicator variable for
whether the new CEO appointed at the PE-acquired failed bank had a history of employment in commercial banking.
Years of prior experience in banking is the number of years the individual was employed in commercial banking
prior to joining the PE-acquired failed bank. Formerly at failed bank is an indicator variable for whether the CEO
was at the failed bank prior to failure. (In most cases, the FDIC does not allow existing management to stay on at
failed banks.) From PE firm is an indicator variable for whether the new CEO came directly from the PE firm. In
all instances, CEOs came from the commercial banking industry. Local banking experience is an indicator variable
for whether the CEOs had prior banking experience in the state where the PE acquisition was located. Community
banking experience is an indicator variable for whether the CEO's prior experience was at a bank with a footprint
within a single state (as opposed to regional or national footprints). Prior CEO of bank is an indicator variable for
whether the CEO held a previous CEO position at a bank. While a little over half had prior CEO experience, all
CEOs at PE-acquired banks had prior experience in upper banking management. Prior founding of bank is an
indicator variable for whether the CEO had previously founded a bank. Almost a third of these CEOs had experience
in starting up a new bank and later selling it. Prior experience in turnaround management, troubled debt, distressed
assets is an indicator variable for whether the CEO had experience rehabilitating troubled institutions or products.

                                                                    Standard                   25th         75th
 N = 19                                                  Mean                    Median
                                                                    Deviation               percentile   percentile
 Prior experience in banking                               1            0           1           1            1
 Years of prior experience in banking                     29.3         7.6          30          25           37
 Formerly at failed bank                                   0            0           0           0            0
 From PE firm                                              0            0           0           0            0
 Externally hired                                          1            0           1           1            1
 Local banking experience                                 0.63        0.51          1           0            1
 Community banking experience                             0.68        0.48          1           0            1
 Prior CEO of bank                                        0.53        0.51          1           0            1
 Prior founding of bank                                   0.32        0.48          0           0            1
 Prior experience in turnaround management,
                                                          0.37         0.5          0           0            1
 troubled debt, distressed assets




                                                           57
                                        Online Appendix for
                          Private Equity and Financial Stability:
              Evidence from Failed Bank Resolution in the Crisis

           Emily Johnston-Ross                      Song Ma                        Manju Puri
                    FDIC                        Yale University             Duke University, NBER,
                                                                                  and FDIC




Emily Johnston-Ross can be reached by phone: (202) 898-6841, email: emjohnston@fdic.gov. Song Ma can be
reached by phone: (203) 436-4687, email: song.ma@yale.edu. Manju Puri can be reached by phone: (919) 660-7657,
email: manju.puri@duke.edu. The analysis, conclusions, and opinions set forth here are those of the author(s) alone
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.



                                                         A.1
         Online Appendix 1. Sample of Failed Bank Acquisitions and PE Participation

In this appendix, we provide details on the sample construction of failed banks in our main analysis,
which focuses on 456 failed bank acquisitions. None of the data processing steps described below
change the results of the paper in any meaningful way, either qualitatively or quantitatively.

     From 2009­2014 (the main dates of our sample, because these are the years in which PE
investors acquired failed banks), the cumulative number of failed bank observations is 483. This
includes 394 bank failures acquired by banks, 1 62 bank failures acquired by PE investors, 2 25
failures that received no winning bid and were thus liquidated by the FDIC, and 2 banks that were
temporarily run by the FDIC as bridge banks. The 25 liquidations and 2 bridge banks are excluded
from our analysis, leaving 394 + 62 = 456 failed bank acquisitions for our main analysis.

     The amount of assets at the failed banks in Figure 1, Panel B shows total assets held at failed
banks in the quarter before failure. The sample includes assets at banks that were acquired,
liquidated, or temporarily run as a conservatorship or bridge bank. These numbers differ from the
total assets acquired, depicted in Figure 3, Panel B. Figure 3 only includes assets from banks that
were acquired, so it excludes any assets from banks that were liquidated and two bankers' banks
that failed and were temporarily run as bridge banks by the FDIC. In addition, acquirers rarely
purchase 100 percent of the assets at the failed bank, so the FDIC retains a large portion overall.
Any assets retained by the FDIC in the resolution process are excluded from the measure of assets
acquired. This is why the amount of assets at failure and the amount of assets acquired are different
between Figure 1, Panel B, and Figure 3, Panel B, in the paper, capturing details of bank failures
vs. acquisitions.




     1
        One bank that failed in 2010 was split between two different acquirers ­ these are counted as separate
observations in our analysis.
      2
        One bank failed in 2008 but was run by the FDIC as a conservatorship before being acquired in 2009 by a PE
entity.
                                                         A.2
Online Appendix 2. Additional Results




                  A.3
                                                Table A1. Bank Failures and PE Participation in Resolutions

This table shows the number and size of failed bank acquisitions by year. Column (1) is the year in which the acquisition occurred. Column (2) is the total number
of failed bank acquisitions in a given year. Column (3) is the total amount of failed bank assets in millions acquired in a given year from internal resolution data at
the FDIC. Column (4) is the number of failed banks acquired by PE in a given year. Column (5) is the percentage of failed bank acquisitions by PE in a given year
relative to the total failed bank acquisitions that year. Column (6) is the total assets in millions passed to the acquiring banks in a given year from internal FDIC
resolutions data. Column (7) is the percentage of assets acquired by PE in a given year relative to total assets acquired in that year. Column (8) is the number of
failed banks acquired by banks in a given year. Column (9) is the percentage of failed bank acquisitions by banks in a given year relative to the total failed bank
acquisitions that year. Column (10) is the total assets passed to the bank acquirers in a given year from internal FDIC resolutions data. Column (11) is the percentage
of assets acquired by banks in a given year relative to total assets acquired in that year.


     Year      Total failed bank acquisitions                  Failed banks acquired by PE                        Failed banks acquired by other banks
                              Total assets                                  Total assets                                           Total assets
              Number                               Number       %                                  %         Number     %                              %
                              ($Million)                                     ($Million)                                             ($Million)

     2009       129            151,605                11       8.53%            38,181          25.18%          118     91.47%           113,423           74.82%
     2010       149             79,620                22      14.67%            15,847          19.90%          127     85.33%            63,774           80.10%
     2011        90             31,888                20      22.22%            10,240          32.11%          70      77.78%            21,648           67.89%
     2012        47             8,723                  5      10.64%            1,149           13.17%          42      89.36%            7,574            86.83%
     2013        23             4,794                  2      8.70%              363             7.57%          21      91.30%            4,431            93.43%
     2014        18             2,173                  2      11.11%             210             9.68%          16      88.89%            1,963            90.32%
    Overall     456            278,803                62        13%             65,990            24 %          394       87%            212,813            76 %




                                                                                   A.4
                                                      Table A2. Summary Statistics of the Failed Banks

This table presents summary statistics for failed bank acquisitions by PE and other banks between 2009 and 2014. Asset size is the amount of assets at the failed bank
in millions. % Tier 1 risk-based capital is the Tier 1 risk-based capital divided by adjusted average assets, as a percentage. Liquidity ratio is the sum of cash, fed
funds sold, and securities (excluding mortgage-backed securities) divided by total assets. Core deposits to total deposits is total domestic deposits minus time deposits
of more than $250,000 and brokered deposits of $250,000 or less divided by total deposits. CRE loans to total loans is non-farm, non-residential properties secured
by real estate and multifamily (5 or more) residential properties secured by real estate divided by total loans. C&D loans to total loans is construction and land
development loans secured by real estate divided by total loans. C&I loans to total loans is commercial and industrial loans divided by total loans. Consumer loans
to total loans is loans to individuals for household, family, and other personal expenditures divided by total loans. Noncurrent loans to total loans is the ratio of
noncurrent loans to total loans. OREO to total assets is the ratio of other real estate owned to total assets. Loss-sharing agreement is an indicator variable that equals
1 if the transaction included an agreement with the FDIC to share in a portion of the losses on covered assets and 0 if no loss-sharing agreement was included.
Neighboring bank variables are constructed as the mean of banks that share at least one branch zip code with the focal bank.
                                                              PE Acquisitions                                Bank Acquisitions                                 T-test
                                                                     Standard                                       Standard                          t-stat            p-val
                                                  N       Mean                       Median        N       Mean                      Median
                                                                    Deviation                                       Deviation
 Failed bank characteristics
 Asset size ($ millions)                         62       1,354          4,216         341        394       628          1,890         193          -2.267**            0.024
 % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio               62       0.165          2.418        0.615       394      1.045         2.722        1.190         2.402**             0.017
 Liquidity ratio                                 62       0.168          0.085        0.156       394      0.168         0.081        0.156          0.030              0.976
 Core deposits to total deposits                 62       0.824          0.148        0.889       394      0.839         0.144        0.874          0.753              0.452
 Net interest margin (%)                         62       2.019          1.320        2.115       394      2.634         1.217        2.625         3.655***            0.001
 CRE loans to total loans                        62       0.400          0.165        0.394       394      0.385         0.171        0.378          -0.649             0.516
 C&D loans to total loans                        62       0.227          0.149        0.199       394      0.179         0.135        0.152         -2.571**            0.011
 C&I loans to total loans                        62       0.083          0.080        0.065       394      0.111         0.090        0.085         2.284**             0.023
 Consumer loans to total loans                   62       0.014          0.013        0.010       394      0.024         0.042        0.012          1.842*             0.066
 Residential loans to total loans                62       0.253          0.184        0.209       394      0.260         0.184        0.237          0.303              0.762
 Noncurrent loans to total loans                 62       0.183          0.088        0.162       394      0.161         0.096        0.143         -1.716*             0.087
 OREO to total assets                            62       0.065          0.057        0.051       394      0.050         0.047        0.037         -2.386**            0.017
 Loss-sharing agreement                          62       0.839          0.371          1         394      0.632         0.483          1          -3.224***            0.001
 Neighboring bank conditions
 Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based capital ratio      62       7.692          1.274        7.713       394      7.972         1.345        7.956          -1.479             0.140
 Neighbor noncurrent loans to total loans        62       0.048          0.041        0.038       394      0.034         0.033        0.022         2.870***            0.004
 Neighbor OREO to total assets                   62       0.012          0.013        0.006       394      0.006         0.009        0.003         4.106***            0.000
 No. of Local Banks (>3xSize)                    62       2.949          1.682        2.000       394      3.337         2.178        3.000          -1.300             0.194
 No. of Failed Banks in State                    62       52.9           29.4          69         394       35.0          27.9         21           17.9***             0.000


                                                                                     A.5
     Table A3. Robustness: Comparing PE-Acquired and Bank-Acquired Failed Banks

This table presents the estimation results from a logit regression framework in the following form:
                         ( = 1) = ( +    +    +  +  ).
The analysis is performed on the cross-sectional sample of all failed banks that eventually got acquired by
a bank or a private equity investor. The dependent variable is a dummy that takes value 1 if the failed bank
was eventually acquired by a PE investor and 0 otherwise (i.e., acquired by a bank). This table differs from
Table 3 of the paper by using alternative definitions of PE acquisitions. We required PE holding to be above
75% or 66% respectively.


                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                              Pr(PE Acquired); PE defined as PE Ownership > 75%

          % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio   -0.011**
                                               (-2.183)
          Core deposits to total deposits                 -0.268**
                                                          (-2.073)
          Net interest margin (%)                                    -0.075***
                                                                      (-4.657)
          C&D loans to total loans                                               0.347**
                                                                                 (2.480)
          OREO to total assets                                                              0.728***
                                                                                             (2.654)
          Log(asset in $000)                  0.052***    0.048***   0.043***    0.043***   0.054***
                                               (4.099)     (3.931)    (3.587)     (2.807)    (4.260)

          Observations                          408         408         408        408        408
          Failed Year-Quarter FE                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
          Pseudo R-squared                     0.131       0.132       0.204      0.148      0.138




                                                          A.6
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                     Pr(PE Acquired); PE defined as PE Ownership > 66%

% Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio   -0.012**
                                     (-2.300)
Core deposits to total deposits                 -0.248*
                                                (-1.858)
Net interest margin (%)                                    -0.082***
                                                            (-4.849)
C&D loans to total loans                                               0.365**
                                                                       (2.512)
OREO to total assets                                                              0.866***
                                                                                   (3.262)
Log(asset in $000)                  0.060***    0.056***   0.050***    0.050***   0.061***
                                     (4.554)     (4.391)    (4.090)     (3.271)    (4.770)

Observations                          428         428         428        428        428
Failed Year-Quarter FE                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Pseudo R-squared                     0.156       0.152       0.229      0.171      0.169




                                                A.7
     Table A4. Robustness: Comparing PE-Acquired and Bank-Acquired Failed Banks

This table presents the estimation results from a logit regression framework in the following form:
                         ( = 1) = ( +    +    +  +  ).
The analysis is performed on the cross-sectional sample of all failed banks that eventually got acquired by
a bank or a private equity investor. The dependent variable is a dummy that takes value 1 if the failed bank
was eventually acquired by a PE investor and 0 otherwise (i.e., acquired by a bank). This table differs from
Table 3 of the paper by simultaneously incorporating bank characteristics of the failed banks and their
neighboring banks, as defined in the paper.


                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)
                                                                        I(PE Acquired)

  % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio          -0.017***
                                               (0.005)
  Neighbor % tier 1 risk-based capital ratio -0.018*
                                               (0.011)
  Core deposits to total deposits                      -0.591**
                                                        (0.254)
  Neighbor core deposits to total deposits              -0.401*
                                                        (0.217)
  Net interest margin (%)                                       -0.073***
                                                                  (0.021)
  Neighbor net interest margin (%)                                -0.012
                                                                  (0.041)
  C&D loans to total loans                                                0.309***
                                                                           (0.101)
  Neighbor C&D loans to total loans                                        0.324**
                                                                           (0.147)
  OREO to total assets                                                                              0.492**
                                                                                                    (0.234)
  Neighbor OREO to total assets                                                                     3.397**
                                                                                                    (1.444)
  Log(asset in $000)                           0.064***       0.029*       0.027**       0.025**   0.060***
                                                (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.011)       (0.010)    (0.012)

  Observations                                    456          456           456          456        456
  Failed Year-Quarter FE                          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
  Pseudo R-squared                               0.198        0.118         0.141        0.0951     0.196




                                                        A.8
