                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHICH MARKETS (DON'T) DRIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INNOVATION? EVIDENCE
                   FROM U.S. MEDICAID EXPANSIONS

                                       Craig Garthwaite
                                        Rebecca Sachs
                                       Ariel Dora Stern

                                     Working Paper 28755
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28755


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




The authors are grateful to Amitabh Chandra, David Dranove, Tamara Hayford, Lyle Nelson,
Fiona Scott Morton, Mark Shepard, Amanda Starc, Chapin White, Wesley Yin, as well as
participants at the Bates-White Life Sciences Symposium, the Conference of the American
Society of Health Economists, and ASSA Annual Meetings for helpful comments. Ariel D. Stern
gratefully acknowledges support from the Kauffman Junior Faculty Fellowship. Rebecca Sachs
gratefully acknowledges support from the National Institute on Aging under Award Number
T32AG000186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Melissa Ouellett and Tiffany
Truong provided valuable research assistance. This paper has not been subject to CBO's regular
review and editing process. The views expressed here should not be interpreted as CBO's, nor as
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Craig Garthwaite, Rebecca Sachs, and Ariel Dora Stern. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Which Markets (Don't) Drive Pharmaceutical Innovation? Evidence From U.S. Medicaid
Expansions
Craig Garthwaite, Rebecca Sachs, and Ariel Dora Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 28755
May 2021
JEL No. H0,I1,L43,L5,O3

                                        ABSTRACT

Pharmaceutical innovation policy involves managing a tradeoff between high prices for new
products in the short-term and stronger incentives to develop products for the future. Prior
research has documented a causal relationship between market size and pharmaceutical research
and development (R&D) activities. The existing literature, however, provides no evidence of how
this relationship varies across markets. We investigate whether recent expansions in state
Medicaid programs caused an increase in R&D. We find no evidence of a response, potentially a
result of Medicaid's low reimbursement for pharmaceuticals, suggesting low(er) price markets
may have different dynamics with respect to innovation policy.

Craig Garthwaite                               Ariel Dora Stern
Kellogg School of Management                   Harvard Business School
Northwestern University                        Morgan Hall 433
2211 Campus Drive                              Boston, MA 02163
Evanston, IL 60208                             astern@hbs.edu
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Rebecca Sachs
Congressional Budget Office
Ford House Office Building
Second and D Streets, SW
Washington, DC 20515
rebecca.sachs@cbo.gov
1. INTRODUCTION

          The scientific knowledge generated when firms create new pharmaceutical products is largely
a public good--i.e., absent non-market protections, much of this knowledge is non-rival and non-
excludable. This leads to a fundamental "hold up" problem, in which, absent policy intervention, firms
would be unwilling to make the large, upfront research and development (R&D) investments neces-
sary for new product development. For this reason, governments use various forms of intellectual
property protection to provide firms developing novel products with the temporary market power
necessary to justify investments in innovation.
          Optimal pharmaceutical innovation policy therefore involves managing a tradeoff between
high prices for new products in the short-term and stronger incentives to develop new products for
the future. When the social benefit of new products exceeds the deadweight loss resulting from mo-
nopoly prices charged in the product's early years on the market, this tradeoff is welfare enhancing.
Therefore, understanding the degree to which expected economic returns impact the rate of develop-
ment of products is central to determining the optimal parameters of this tradeoff.
          In a number of studies, economists have shown that firms' R&D investments and new product
introductions are driven by expected returns (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein, 2004; Blume-
Kohout and Sood, 2013; Dubois et al., 2015; Dranove et al., 2020). With over 40 percent of the world
market (and growing)1, profits from the United States' (U.S.) market are believed to play an outsized
role in determining the level and nature of global pharmaceutical R&D investments. To the extent
this is true, the existing literature primarily speaks to the magnitude of the innovative response to the
decisions of U.S. payers. 2 As a corollary, if pharmaceutical firms largely respond to expected U.S.
profits (either overall or those from a particular sector such as the commercial market), policymakers
in other settings may have more freedom to constrain prices without impacting innovation. Unfortu-
nately, empirical research to date provides little information about potential heterogeneity in pharma-
ceutical firms' innovative responses vis-à-vis different reimbursement systems. Yet, it is precisely these



1https://www.iqvia.com/insights/the-iqvia-institute/reports/the-global-use-of-medicine-in-2019-and-outlook-to-2023
2While some studies examine changes in global disease burden (Dubois et al., 2015), these studies do not separate out the role of high
potential American profits compared to profits earned elsewhere.



                                                                    1
types of differences that will drive the welfare implications of country-specific drug pricing policy
decisions.
        As governments continue to refine pharmaceutical pricing policies, the question quickly be-
comes: which markets generate enough expected returns to impact marginal R&D investment deci-
sions of pharmaceutical firms? Stated differently: if policymakers alter reimbursement rules in settings
that have little effect on marginal investments in pharmaceutical innovation, they may have greater
freedom to reduce prices from their current level without diminishing welfare (Lakdawalla, 2018).
Importantly, this could be true not only across countries, but also across various segments of a multi-
payer system such as the United States.
        We bridge the gap in the existing literature by examining the effect of the 2010 Patient Pro-
tection and Affordable Care Act's (ACA) Medicaid expansions on private sector investments in phar-
maceutical R&D. The passage of the ACA caused a sudden and unanticipated increase in the expected
market size for pharmaceuticals treating conditions afflicting individuals who would become newly
eligible for Medicaid. We identify the ACA's causal effect on R&D investments by exploiting this
variation in expected demand.
        Across a variety of specifications, we find no evidence that greater expected demand from the
Medicaid expansion caused a change in R&D activities (i.e. clinical trials). This is true for both early
stage investments (i.e., Phase I trials), later stage investments (i.e., Phase III trials), and for investments
in new indications for existing drugs (i.e., trials for non-primary indications). These findings hold
across a variety of measures of the demand shock caused by the ACA.
        The absence of an observed effect of market expansion on investments in innovation stands
in contrast to the existing literature, which has repeatedly shown that R&D responds to changes in
expected demand. Of particular relevance to our study, the creation of Medicare Part D (hereafter
Part D), which provides prescription drug insurance to elderly Americans, was found to have a large
impact on R&D investments for conditions afflicting the elderly (Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2013;
Dranove et al., 2020). This raises an obvious question: what economic factors could cause this diver-
gence in results?




                                                         2
       The differences are unlikely to be based simply on the number of individuals affected by the policy
change. While Medicare often garners the largest amount of national attention, Medicaid has grown
from its modest origins to cover approximately 70 million Americans. This makes Medicaid larger
than both Medicare and the British National Health Service (NHS, the world's eighth largest pharma-
ceutical market), and comparable in size to the statutorily insured population of Germany (the world's
fourth largest pharmaceutical market). 3 In 2017, Medicaid spent approximately $29 billion on retail
prescription drugs net of rebate--more than the entire NHS spent that same year on prescription
drugs before rebates.
            Part of Medicaid's formidable growth came from the ACA expansion, which made 12.7 mil-
lion Americans newly eligible for Medicaid (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019)--more than the approx-
imately 5 million individuals who received new coverage (after accounting for meaningful crowd-out)
from the creation of Part D (Engelhart and Gruber, 2011). Perhaps more importantly, the increase in
the number of new prescriptions filled because of these two insurance expansions was broadly similar. 4
This similarity results from the fact that while meaningfully more individuals received new coverage
under the ACA, the average Medicare recipient uses more prescription drugs.
            While both program expansions resulted in a comparable increase in the number of prescrip-
tions, a key difference between Part D and Medicaid is in how pharmaceutical prices are determined
under the two programs. Part D is a social insurance program run by private firms and subsidized by
the government. These firms negotiate drug prices in a manner largely similar to the rest of the U.S.
commercial market. Medicaid prices, however, are determined by strict regulations that reflect the U.S.
government's choice to exert its economically meaningful buyer power. Specifically, federal law re-
quires pharmaceutical firms to provide Medicaid with a flat rebate that ensures Medicaid pays a price
at least as low as the lowest net price by to any private insurer. A second rebate further reduces prices
paid when manufacturer list prices grow faster than inflation. Finally, state Medicaid agencies use
additional hard and soft pressures to negotiate often substantial supplemental rebates (Dolan, 2019;




3   https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/canada-location-site/top10worldwidesales_en_17.pdf
4   See Appendix A for more information.



                                                                 3
Office of the Inspector General, 2014). For products for which Medicaid is a large payer, the combi-
nation of these rules has been shown to have market-wide implications (Duggan and Scott Morton,
2006).
          After accounting for these rebates, drug prices in Medicaid are often meaningfully lower than
prices paid by any other commercial or federal insurer. For top selling drugs in 2017, the average net
of rebate and subsidy price in Medicaid was 35% of the average net price in Medicare (CBO, 2021).
For older drugs, inflation rebates can greatly reduce Medicaid prices (Feng et al., 2020). This growth
in the importance of inflation rebates also likely explains why a quarter of top selling drugs in 2017
had net Medicaid prices between zero and 5 percent of Medicare's net price.
          The combination of its large overall program size and binding price controls means that, in
many ways, Medicaid reimbursement is more similar to other developed markets with price controls
(e.g., those in Canada and Europe) than to the U.S. commercial or Part D market. As a result, our
estimates of the impact of Medicaid expansions on innovation may provide insight into how the policy
decisions of a range of lower-reimbursing payers--such as those that are characteristic of other Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries--will affect innovation
incentives for pharmaceuticals.
          Understanding heterogeneity in innovation response across markets is not just an intellectual
exercise; comparing different policy regimes around the globe reveals clear differences in how much
pricing power governments grant to branded pharmaceuticals. 5 The United States provides largely
unfettered pricing power to pharmaceutical firms during the time a drug is covered by one or more
types of market exclusivity. In contrast, other countries have prioritized lower prices for new drugs,
primarily by using various forms of buyer power to curtail prices. 6
          While other developed countries have chosen policy regimes focused on lower prices relative
to the United States, it does not necessarily follow that such policies reveal a willingness to accept
decreased innovation. Rather, it could reflect these smaller markets recognizing they are largely incon-
sequential to the investment decisions of pharmaceutical firms and therefore policymakers realize they

5Branded pharmaceuticals are products covered by some form of intellectual property protection.
6Such policies include explicit price controls, reference pricing, cost-benefit analyses, and government-supported coalitions of buyers
empowered to walk away in the face of high prices relative to clinical value (Paris and Belloni, 2013; Stern et al., 2019).



                                                                     4
have more freedom to constrain prices without impacting innovative activity (Lakdawalla, 2018). It
could also simply reflect the fact that global innovation incentives are not as price elastic as estimates
from settings that include the U.S. commercial and/or Part D markets. Our results provide support
for the argument that lower-reimbursing insurers may have more freedom to increase access without
impacting innovation incentives. Vis-à-vis the existing literature, they also accord with the common
contention that higher-reimbursing markets such as those characterized by many U.S. payers play an
outsized role in driving the investment decisions of pharmaceutical firms.

2. THE ACA MEDICAID EXPANSION

         The passage of the ACA in March 2010 launched the largest U.S. expansion of health insur-
ance coverage since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid (Dranove et al., 2016). Additionally, it
changed the very nature of U.S. social health insurance. Traditionally, Medicaid covered only low-
income persons that also fell into distinct eligibility categories ­ members of families with children,
pregnant women, and persons with disabilities. While eligibility rules have historically varied by state
and expansions and contractions in coverage have occurred over time, low-income individuals who
did not fit into one of these categories, such as those who were both non-disabled and childless, largely
did not qualify for Medicaid, regardless of income (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Baicker et al., 2013; Garth-
waite et al., 2014). The ACA provided federal financing for states to expand Medicaid coverage to
non-elderly adults earning less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). Following the
ACA, residents living in states that chose to expand Medicaid programs could gain access to health
insurance based solely on income. 7 Estimates suggest that over 12 million Americans gained new
Medicaid access through these expansions (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019).

3. DATA

         To identify the expected demand shock from the ACA, we use data from the 2007-2010 Med-
ical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to estimate the prevalence of different medical conditions. This




7Following a 2012 Supreme Court decision, states were given the option of implementing the reform. In 2014, 27 states plus the
District of Columbia (D.C.) adopted the expansion, a number that has grown to 37 states.



                                                                5
provides an ex-ante (i.e., pre-ACA) measure of demand for pharmaceuticals in the newly-eligible Med-
icaid population. The MEPS is a publicly available, nationally representative survey of the U.S. civilian
non-institutionalized population. It contains information on health insurance status, demographics,
medical conditions, and prescription drug use. 8 We use the MEPS to identify medical conditions for
which pharmaceutical firms would have anticipated demand increases following the ACA's passage.
Many newly eligible enrollees did not have access to prescription drug coverage prior to the expansion
and therefore their prior use of pharmaceuticals may not reflect the demand associated with insurance.
This is particularly true for drugs that are either very expensive or for conditions where treatment may
be more discretionary. Therefore, we our primary measure of expected demand focuses on the prev-
alence of medical conditions reported in the MEPS rather than pharmaceutical utilization.
          We develop an additional measure of the expected demand shock using Medicaid State Drug
Utilization Data from 2004-2013 to identify changes in drug spending for three states (California,
Connecticut, and Massachusetts) that chose to expand Medicaid prior to 2014. For every National
Drug Code (NDC), we observe quarterly utilization and (pre-rebate) spending in all 50 state pro-
grams. 9 We then link these data to detailed information on drug products and their typical uses from
four databases employed by professional pharmacists. 10 By combining data on utilization and spend-
ing with information on typical use, we can analyze the conditions that experienced the largest drug
spending increases in ACA Medicaid expansion states. Appendix B provides more detail on these data.
          Our final data source, the Clarivate Analytics Cortellis Competitive Intelligence database (Cortellis),
provides detailed data on pharmaceutical R&D activities. In the Cortellis data, we identify all U.S.
clinical trials that began between 2004-2016 (totaling almost 58,000 clinical trials in this period), which
can be used to estimate pharmaceutical innovation activities by disease area. 11 Cortellis assembles data
on drug candidates from public records including company documents, press releases, financial list-
ings, clinical trial registries, publications, and FDA submissions. From 2005 onwards, our data contain



8 For more information, see https://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/about_meps/survey_back.jsp
9 We aggregate NDC codes by active ingredient to simplify analysis. Data on active ingredients comes from Drugs@FDA.
10 Importantly, these databases include both approved and "off-label" uses for each drug in our sample.
11 We restrict our focus to U.S.-based clinical trials since manufacturers pursuing U.S. regulatory approval typically conduct one or more

U.S.-based clinical trials as part of an FDA submission.



                                                                      6
the near universe of drugs that entered clinical trials. 12 Since the dataset covers all known registered
and published trials, our analysis captures several stages of the drug development process.

4. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

          To date, the literature on how firms respond to pharmaceutical demand shocks has largely
focused on identifying the presence and magnitude of the causal relationship between expected profits
and investments in drug development. This focus has produced evidence of a consistent connection
between future returns and various measures of R&D activity (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein,
2004; Blume-Kohut and Sood, 2013; Dubois et al., 2015; Dranove et al., 2020). However, there has
been comparatively less focus on whether markets with different reimbursement characteristics (i.e.,
those with lower prices) demonstrate variation in the presence or magnitude of this R&D response.
Given each market (or payer in a multi-payer system) must determine its respective pricing policy,
understanding the degree to which such decisions impact R&D investments is important for under-
standing the implications of market policies.
          It is often asserted that the U.S. market drives the majority of pharmaceutical innovation (Car-
roll and Frakt, 2017; Easton, 2018; Goldman and Lakdawalla, 2018). In the academic literature, Civan
and Maloney (2009) provide initial descriptive evidence that supports this oft-stated belief. These au-
thors document an association between investments in drug development and diseases which are more
prevalent in the U.S. population. However, this descriptive work falls short of establishing a causal
relationship between market size and R&D investment. Estimating this causal relationship requires
identifying an economically meaningful demand shock that is isolated to markets whose fundamental
economics differ from those that have been previously studied. For two reasons, the ACA's Medicaid
expansions present a useful empirical setting to make progress on this question.
          First, the ACA expansion was expected to increase pharmaceutical demand from individuals
with a particular and ex-ante knowable set of conditions. This allows us to identify the subset of R&D
investments most likely to be affected by the demand shock. Given the passage of the ACA was largely


12 Starting in 2005, sponsors were required to register trials to an approved clinical trial registry prior to patient enrollment in order to

be considered for publication in any International Committee of Medical Journal Editors journals (See De Angelis et al., 2004). See
Chandra et al., 2018 for more information.



                                                                        7
uncertain and unexpected (i.e., in the years prior to its passage, firms did not have enough information
to make anticipatory investments), post-ACA changes in R&D for conditions prevalent among the
newly-eligible population (compared to those that were less affected, such as conditions primarily seen
among senior citizens and others with wider access to prescription drug coverage) can reasonably be
interpreted as a causal effect of ACA expansions.
          Second, while located in the United States, the Medicaid program's reimbursement policies
for prescription drugs bear little resemblance to other parts of the U.S. pharmaceutical market that are
commonly believed to drive investments in innovation. Unlike private insurers or Part D, state Med-
icaid programs benefit from a series of explicit and implicit pharmaceutical price controls. Due to
federal regulations, Medicaid programs pay prices at least as low as any commercial insurer in the market.
In addition to this statutory guarantee, state Medicaid agencies operate under increasing budgetary
pressure, which is expected to continue to increase demands for additional price concessions in the
form of supplemental rebates. This combination of explicit and implicit price controls renders Medi-
caid far more similar to the lower-reimbursing markets of other developed countries than it is to the
rest of the U.S. market. Theoretically, this feature of Medicaid should dampen the innovative response
to any program expansions relative to what would be expected from a similarly sized increase in covered
lives in more generously-reimbursing insurance programs such as Part D. Depending on the cost
structure of private pharmaceutical firms (in particular the fixed costs of developing a new product)
and the distribution of potential development projects, anticipated change in sales volumes and asso-
ciated revenues from Medicaid could be below the level that is relevant to the marginal clinical trial
investment decision.
     That said, there could be a concern that other features of the ACA limited the magnitude of the
expected demand shock. Specifically, in addition to expanding coverage, the ACA increased the min-
imum rebate pharmaceutical manufacturers were required to give to state Medicaid agencies. If this
higher minimum rebate increased overall rebates, this could outweigh the expected increase in reve-
nues from the program's expansion. 13 However, actual changes to average rebates post-ACA were


13 An increase in overall rebates is a function of how many products were expected to be subject to the minimum rebate requirement

versus Medicaid's "best price" rebate.



                                                                  8
minimal and net-rebate pharmaceutical prices continued to grow between 2010 and 2018 (Feng et al.,
2020). This implies that even after accounting for the effect of the minimum rebates, the observed
increases in total Medicaid drug utilization resulting from ACA expansion (show in Appendix C)
caused an increase in pharmaceutical revenue. Furthermore, given the largely mechanical nature of the
Medicaid rebate requirements, even relatively unsophisticated firms had the ability to predict ex ante
the likely change in average rebates based on the ACA.
          In considering the nature of potential changes in R&D activity, it is also important to recognize
how the impact of policy changes may vary across stages of clinical development. Firms move prod-
ucts through the clinical development and regulatory approval processes in phases. At any point in
time, firms likely have a number of products in development that have already cleared early-stage trials
(Phase I or Phase II trials) but did not have sufficiently compelling results and/or expected demand
to justify a subsequent (Phase III) investment. For such products, relatively small changes in expected
future demand could change the anticipated return to additional investments from negative to positive.
If this were the case, we might see a change in investments in later-stages (e.g., Phase III trials) without
any new activity in earlier stages.
          Similarly, firms may have knowledge about additional indications that could be pursued for
their existing (marketed or in-development) products. While prescriptions can be written for condi-
tions that are not approved by the FDA, firms face meaningful restrictions on marketing and reim-
bursement for such "off label" use. Firms can apply for an extension of their existing label but must
fund clinical trials to demonstrate efficacy for new indications. This decision is driven by expected
returns (Berger et al, 2021). Thus, a change in expected market size could also lead firms to pursue
new clinical trials for additional indications. 14




14 The welfare implications of such investments are unclear. See Bagley et al. (2018) for a discussion of this in the context of the orphan

drug market.



                                                                       9
5. ESTIMATION

5.1 PRIMARY MEASURE OF DEMAND SHOCK
       Given the passage of time, we now have the ability to directly observe how disease-specific de-
mand of newly eligible Medicaid patients changed as a result of the ACA's Medicaid expansions. 15
However, this ex-post observation likely does not accurately represent the information available to
firms making investment decisions immediately in the wake of the ACA's passage. Therefore, we
develop a measure of expected demand based on the known disease burden of individuals made newly
eligible for Medicaid under the ACA.
       Estimating the size of the demand shock requires correctly identifying the newly-eligible popula-
tion, a population that is meaningfully different than those previously eligible. As noted above, the
movement away from categorical eligibility means conditions prevalent in the historical Medicaid pop-
ulation may not be reflected in the new eligible population. Therefore, our preferred method of esti-
mating demand uses data from the 2007-2010 MEPS on the disease burden of individuals who would
gain new Medicaid eligibility as a result of the ACA. These are individuals who were uninsured for at
least part of the year and earned less than 138 percent of the FPL.
       Under this definition, we estimate the ACA would have increased the size of the eligible Medicaid
population by 18 million individuals. Considering that 12.7 million individuals eventually gained new
access to Medicaid (despite many states choosing not to expand their Medicaid programs), this esti-
mate is broadly consistent with what has been documented elsewhere and what was likely expected by
firms as they made decisions about forward-looking R&D investments. In Appendix E, we present
our findings using alternative definition of the demand shock, one of which includes individuals eligi-
ble for ACA nongroup coverage expansions. 16
             There are two ways to calculate the Medicaid market share (MMS) to capture demand. The
first calculates demand as a relative measure, in which it is represented as the share those with a given
disease that are newly-covered. This provides some sense of a social insurer's impact on that disease,
but little evidence about the expected return (or changes in the return) from a product targeting that


15 Appendix   C details this approach.
16   Our upper and lower bound definitions detailed in Appendix E give estimates of 14.6 and 48.3 million individuals respectively.



                                                                      10
condition. Therefore, we prefer the second definition of MMS, which focuses on the percentage of
the overall U.S. population that both has a condition and gained new coverage as a result of Medicaid
expansions. Given that firms care about absolute, rather than relative market opportunities, this meas-
ure is likely to be more relevant to their investment decisions. 17
          Figure 1 shows the distribution of our preferred MMS measure. For our analysis, we focus on
International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-9 Sub-Chapters, which group ICD-9 three-digit codes
into smaller categories that are more representative of the R&D decisions firms face. 18 Appendix Fig-
ure D1 shows the distribution of MMS across ICD-9 subchapters.


5.2. ALTERNATE MEASURE OF DEMAND
     To address potential concerns that measures generated from public data are inferior to infor-
mation about expected demand that sophisticated firms would have possessed, we also generate a
measure of demand based on the realized change in the use of drugs following early Medicaid expan-
sions. While firms clearly did not have access to this ex-post measure in 2010, the observed changes
could potentially more accurately reflect other types of proprietary estimates to which firms had ac-
cess. In addition, early expansions provided market information during a time period that could rea-
sonably impact trial decision in our data.
     To generate this alternate measure, we focus on three states that expanded Medicaid prior to 2014:
California, Connecticut, and Massachusetts. 19 To calculate realized demand for pharmaceuticals across
conditions, we combine total drug spending on active ingredients in early expansion states and other
states within the relevant Census Division in the year prior to and following expansion in the Medicaid
State Drug and Utilization Data. 20 We allocate drug spending to associated conditions in the year prior

17 That said, estimating the negative binomial model in this paper with condition fixed effects should generate qualitatively similar
results for each condition. Appendix F presents results using the first definition, the share of individuals with a disease that were made
newly eligible by the expansion, for completeness. The results are remarkably similar across both definitions.
18 For instance, while Endocrine Diseases, Nutritional and Metabolic Diseases, and Immunity Disorders are all part of ICD-9 Chapter

3, the Sub-Chapters break these diseases into four distinct categories: Diseases of the Thyroid Gland, Diseases of other Endocrine
Glands, Nutritional Deficiencies, and Other Metabolic Disorders and Immunity Disorders.
19 It is worth noting that other states also expanded Medicaid between 2010 and 2014. We focus on these three states because a large

literature has documented these early expansions increased Medicaid coverage and evaluated their effect on care utilization, health, and
providers (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012; Sommers et al., 2014; Golberstein and Gonzales, 2015; Nikpay et al., 2015; Sommers et al.,
2016).
20 For each expansion, we focus on drugs that together account for 95% of total drug spending two years prior to expansion. The

remaining 5% of spending consists of a large number of low-volume drugs.



                                                                      11
to and following expansion and calculate the relative increase in spending on these products. The
difference between these ratios represents the growth in drug spending for that condition resulting
from Medicaid expansion. To isolate conditions with high vs. low demand in in the newly-eligible
Medicaid population, we divide conditions into the top vs. bottom three quartiles by growth in drug
spending. 21
5.3. ESTIMATING CHANGES IN CLINICAL TRIAL ACTIVITY
     Since our outcome data are primarily count-based measures of clinical trials, we estimate a negative
binomial specification. 22 Specifically, we model whether increases in expected pharmaceutical demand
increased clinical trial activity by running the following regression for each condition in the MEPS:
                                                 2016

                      =   +      1( = ) +  +  
                                                =2004

     Where  measures the number of trials for condition i in year t.  is the demand for

drugs treating condition i in the newly-eligible population,  are year fixed effects, and  are condi-
tion fixed effects.

     The coefficients of interest,  , measure how a 1 percentage point higher  for a condition
impacts the number of trials conducted for potential drugs intended to treat that condition. The year
prior to the ACA's passage, 2009, serves as the omitted category. Coefficients from this negative bi-
nomial model can be interpreted as the change in log trials. Using an event study specification allows
us to examine both pre-trends in the data as well as the time path of the change in clinical trial activity
after the passage of the ACA.

6. EFFECT OF MEDICAID EXPANSION ON CLINICAL TRIAL ACTIVITY

     We begin by graphically examining clinical trial activity over time. Figure 2 presents the share of
trials per year in each clinical trial phase targeting conditions above the median MMS. To the naked



21Appendix Table D1 lists these conditions.
22In the case of count data such as ours, a negative binomial is better suited to the data-generating process than an ordinary least
squares (OLS) model. We determined we do not need to use a zero-inflated negative binomial, as 90 percent of our observations are
for conditions with at least one trial overall.




                                                                    12
eye, there is no clear difference in the pattern of clinical trial investments in this category. For example,
the first panel of Figure 2 contains the share of Phase I trials by category and shows a largely stable
distribution of clinical trials targeting conditions above the median measure of the demand shock
variable. This is true whether we consider trials for primary indications or for secondary indications
that could expand the set of conditions on a drug's FDA label. 23 We also observe stability over time
in shares of both Phase II and Phase III trials.
     Since the decision to move forward with drug development involves a large and fixed investment,
it is possible pharmaceutical firms only respond to the largest demand shocks. Thus, Figure 2 also
includes a measure of clinical trials for conditions in the top quartile of the demand shock variable.
Again, there is no observable change in clinical trial activity resulting from the passage of the ACA for
even those drugs targeting the conditions most affected by the expansion. This is true across all phases
and for both primary and secondary conditions.
     While there is little graphical evidence of a change in clinical trial activity, there could still be a
response that is not visually apparent. To account for that possibility, Figure 3 presents the event study
coefficients from the negative binomial model described above. The figure contains the estimated
coefficient on the interaction between the MMS demand shock variable and a series of indicator var-
iables for each year. Prior to the passage of the ACA, the event study coefficients are flat and close to
zero and they remain so following the passage of the ACA.
     Table 1 contains the estimates from a model that collapses all of the post-expansion variables into
a single indicator variable. Given that the R&D spending for each stage of development is meaning-
fully different, heterogeneity in the clinical trial response across phases may be obscured. To account
for this, negative binomial results are presented for both the entire sample and for each clinical devel-
opment phase. Regardless of the phase of development, there is no evidence of any change in clinical
trial activity in response to the demand shock from the ACA's Medicaid expansions.


6.1 ESTIMATES USING ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF DEMAND SHOCKS

23If anything, in the upper right panel of Figure 2, it would appear that phase I trial activity is increasing in those diseases with the
smallest increases in Medicaid demand and slightly decreasing in diseases where the greatest increases in Medicaid demand were ob-
served.



                                                                     13
          The evidence using our preferred ex-ante measure of the ACA-driven demand shock demon-
strates no change in clinical trial investments related to the increase in the number of potential insured
customers. However, it is possible this could be the result of our preferred estimate of the demand
shock ineffectively measuring the change in firm expectations about future profits. Therefore, we next
present results where the change in expected demand is estimated using the ex-post utilization of phar-
maceuticals by newly insured patients in early expansion states. While firms could not directly observe
this change in the actual use of drugs when making their investment decisions, it is possible that so-
phisticated firms had a better understanding of which conditions would likely see more demand than
could have been seen in the MEPS. 24 For this specification, we estimate the change in clinical trial
activity based on a binary variable for whether a condition, i, is in the top quartile of the change in
spending as a result of the earlier expansion:
                                             2016

                 =   +      1( = ) +  +  
                                           =2004

     Where  measures the number of trials for condition i in year t.  indicates
whether the condition was in the top quartile of conditions with increased spending due to early Med-

icaid expansion in the state,  are year fixed effects, and  are condition fixed effects.
     Figure 4 plots the event study coefficients for the change in clinical trials for conditions based on
whether they are in the bottom three quartiles vs. top quartile for early expansions in California,
Connecticut, and Massachusetts. Again, there is no statistically significant or consistent evidence of
an increase in trials targeting the top quartile of conditions, as observed in these states.

7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

     Across a variety of specifications and at every stage of clinical development, we find no evidence
that ACA Medicaid expansions changed the pattern of private sector investments in R&D for new
products. This lack of effect emerges robustly, despite the fact that this expansion represented a large




24 It is also possible firms may respond to changes in market share rather than the absolute shock. Given firm investment decisions

represent an attempt to have a positive return on a fixed cost investment, we do not believe this is the case. For completeness, Appendix
F presents results for this definition.



                                                                     14
increase in the number of U.S. patients with health insurance, associated with several billion dollars
more in annual revenues for pharmaceutical firms (MACPAC, 2016).
       The lack of a response to such a change in demand stands in stark contrast to the existing health
care economics literature, which has consistently found increases in both R&D activity and new prod-
uct introductions in response to greater expected demand for pharmaceuticals. Our findings demon-
strate that R&D activity does not respond to demand changes in all markets. While Medicaid repre-
sents a large market in terms of the number of covered individuals, explicit and implicit government
price controls decrease the potential returns for products used by patients in this system. In this way,
Medicaid is far more similar to pharmaceutical markets in other developed countries than it is to the
privately insured or Medicare Part D market in the United States. As such, the lack of a detectable
effect of Medicaid revenues on innovation activity provides some insight into the degree to which
revenues earned in non-U.S. markets drive--or more accurately fail to drive--investments in phar-
maceutical innovation.
       Given various types of price controls in most OECD markets, an interpretation of our results is
that the revenues earned in these countries might have little impact on R&D investments at the mar-
gin. As a corollary, policymakers in these markets (both Medicaid and in other developed countries)
likely have more ability to constrain prices without decreasing the current global rate of pharmaceutical
innovation. However, it is important to note that this relative freedom is driven by 1) sustained high
levels of reimbursement by other U.S. payers and 2) the decision to exert price controls in Medicaid
and thus drive market returns below the level that would impact the marginal R&D investment by
pharmaceutical firms.
       Policymakers setting prices in non-U.S. markets may still face decreased access to medicines from
firms being unwilling to sell existing products at lower prices. 25 However, given the relatively low
marginal costs of production, there exists a set of low(er) prices that would still be profitable for firms
that have already laid out R&D costs. Additional research is necessary to understand implications for




25   For example, Vertex refused to provide its cystic fibrosis products to the United Kingdom for many years.



                                                                      15
equilibrium R&D spending in world where the United States follows the pricing policies of other
OECD countries.




                                                16
     8. REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharma-
    ceutical Industry." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 3 (August 1, 2004): 1049­90.
    https://doi.org/10.1162/0033553041502144.
Baghdadi, Ramsey. "Medicaid Best Price." HealthAffairs, August 10, 2017. https://www.healthaf-
    fairs.org/do/10.1377/hpb20171008.000173/full/.
Bagley, Nicholas, Amitabh Chandra, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel D. Stern. "It's Time to Reform the Orphan
     Drug Act." NEJM Catalyst (2018).
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah L. Taubman, Heidi L. Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan H. Gruber, Joseph P.
     Newhouse, Eric C. Schneider, Bill J. Wright, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Amy N. Finkelstein. "The Ore-
     gon Experiment -- Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes." New England Journal of Medicine 368,
     no. 18 (May 2, 2013): 1713­22. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1212321.
Berger, Ben, Amitabh Chandra, and Craig Garthwaite. "Regulatory Approval and Expanded Market
    Size," working paper (2021).
Blume-Kohout, Margaret E., and Neeraj Sood. "Market Size and Innovation: Effects of Medicare Part D
    on Pharmaceutical Research and Development." Journal of Public Economics 97 (January 2013): 327­36.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.10.003.
Carroll, Aaron E., and Austin Frakt. "Can the U.S. Repair Its Health Care While Keeping Its Innovation
     Edge?" The New York Times, October 9, 2017, sec. The Upshot. https://www.ny-
     times.com/2017/10/09/upshot/can-the-us-repair-its-health-care-while-keeping-its-innovation-
     edge.html.
Chandra, Amitabh, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel Dora Stern. "Characterizing the Drug Development Pipe-
    line for Precision Medicines." In NBER Chapters, 115­57. National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Inc, 2018. https://ideas.repec.org/h/nbr/nberch/13994.html.
Civan, Abdulkadir, and Michael T. Maloney. "The effect of price on pharmaceutical R&D." The BE Journal of
     Economic Analysis & Policy 9, no. 1 (2009).
Congressional Budget Office "A Comparison of Brand-Name Drug Prices Among Selected Federal Pro-
    grams" (February 18, 2021).
De Angelis, Catherine, Jeffrey M. Drazen, Frank A. Frizelle, Charlotte Haug, John Hoey, Richard Horton,
    Sheldon Kotzin, et al. "Clinical Trial Registration: A Statement from the International Committee of
    Medical Journal Editors." New England Journal of Medicine 351, no. 12 (September 16, 2004): 1250­51.
    https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMe048225.
Dolan, Rachel. "Understanding the Medicaid Prescription Drug Rebate Program," Kaiser Family Foundation,
    2019. https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/understanding-the-medicaid-prescription-drug-rebate-
    program/
Dranove, David, Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. "The Trillion Dollar Conundrum:
    Complementarities and Health Information Technology." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6,
    no. 4 (November 2014): 239­70. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.6.4.239.
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody. "Uncompensated care decreased at hospitals in
    Medicaid expansion states but not at hospitals in nonexpansion states." Health Affairs 35, no. 8 (2016):
    1471-1479.



                                                           17
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite and Manuel Hermosilla. "Expected Profits and the Scientific Novelty
    of Innovation", NBER Working Paper #27093 (2020)
Dubois, Pierre, Olivier de Mouzon, Fiona ScottMorton, and Paul Seabright. "Market Size and Pharma-
   ceutical Innovation." The RAND Journal of Economics 46, no. 4 (2015): 844­71.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-2171.12113.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona M. Scott Morton. "The distortionary effects of government procurement: evi-
    dence from Medicaid prescription drug purchasing." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, no. 1
    (2006): 1-30.
Easton, Robert. "Price Controls Would Stifle Innovation in the Pharmaceutical Industry," STAT. Janu-
     ary 22, 2018. https://www.statnews.com/2018/01/22/price-controls-pharmaceutical-industry/.
Engelhardt, Gary V., and Jonathan Gruber. "Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of the El-
    derly." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3, no. 4 (November 2011): 77­102.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.3.4.77.
Feng, Josh, Thomas Hwang, and Luca Maini. "The ACA Medicaid Rebate Rule Change: Impact on Pric-
    ing and Innovation." Available at SSRN 3544987 (2020).
Finkelstein, Amy. "Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the Vaccine Industry."
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 2 (May 1, 2004): 527­64.
     https://doi.org/10.1162/0033553041382166.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse,
     Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the
     First Year*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, no. 3 (August 1, 2012): 1057­1106.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs020.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. "Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and
    Employment Lock." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 2 (May 1, 2014): 653­96.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju005.
Golberstein, Ezra, and Gilbert Gonzales. "The Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Mental Health Services
    and Out-of-Pocket Spending for Mental Health Services." Health Services Research 50, no. 6 (Decem-
    ber 2015): 1734­50. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12399.
Goldman, Dana and Darius Lakdawalla. "The Global Burden of Medical Innovation." Brookings (blog),
    January 30, 2018. https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-global-burden-of-medical-innovation/.
Kaiser Family Foundation. "Medicaid Expansion Enrollment" 2019. https://www.kff.org/health-re-
     form/state-indicator/medicaid-expansion-enrollment/
Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. "The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and Preven-
     tive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts." Journal of Public Economics, 96, no. 11-12 (Dec 1, 2012):
     909-929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.07.003.
Lakdawalla, Darius. "Economics of the Pharmaceutical Industry," Journal of Economic Literature 56, no. 2
    (June 2018):397-449.
MACPAC "Next Steps in Improving Medicaid Prescription Drug Policy" (2016) https://www.mac-
   pac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Next-Steps-in-Improving-Medicaid-Prescription-Drug-Pol-
   icy.pdf




                                                         18
"Medical Expenditure Panel Survey," April 22, 2019.
    https://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/about_meps/survey_back.jsp.
Nikpay, Sayeh, Thomas Buchmueller, and Helen Levy. "Early Medicaid Expansion in Connecticut
    Stemmed The Growth In Hospital Uncompensated Care." Health Affairs 34, no. 7 (July 1, 2015):
    1170­79. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0107.
Office of the Inspector General, HHS. "States' Collection of Offset and Supplemental Medicaid Rebates."
     OEI-03-12-00520 (December, 2014) https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-03-12-00520.pdf
Paris, Valérie, and Annalisa Belloni. "Value in Pharmaceutical Pricing," July 11, 2013.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/5k43jc9v6knx-en.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Robert J. Blendon, E. John Orav, and Arnold M. Epstein. "Changes in Utiliza-
   tion and Health Among Low-Income Adults After Medicaid Expansion or Expanded Private Insur-
   ance." JAMA Internal Medicine 176, no. 10 (October 1, 2016): 1501­9.
   https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.4419.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Thomas Musco, Kenneth Finegold, Munira Z. Gunja, Amy Burke, and Audrey
   M. McDowell. "Health Reform and Changes in Health Insurance Coverage in 2014." New England
   Journal of Medicine 371, no. 9 (August 28, 2014): 867­74. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1406753.
Stern, Ariel D., Felicitas Pietrulla, Annika Herr, Aaron S. Kesselheim, and Ameet Sarpatwari. "The Im-
     pact of Price Regulation On The Availability Of New Drugs In Germany." Health Affairs 38, no. 7
     (July 1, 2019): 1182­87. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05142.




                                                         19
Figure 1. Kernel Density of Newly-Eligible Medicaid Market Share (MMS) Across Conditions
2007 - 2010

Note: This figure demonstrates that there is substantial variation in demand for pharmaceuticals treating
different conditions in the newly-eligible Medicaid population. It specifically plots the kernel density of
our demand measure among the newly-eligible (MMS) for conditions at the ICD-9 Sub-Chapter level.
MMS is defined as the share of the total US population that both has a condition and was expected
to gain coverage due to ACA Medicaid expansion. Estimates of MMS are derived from the 2007-2010
MEPS for individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions.




                                                    1
Figure 2. Share of Trials with Above Median Newly-Eligible Medicaid Market Share (MMS)

Note: This figure plots clinical trial activity over time. It shows the share of Phase I, II, and III trials
with primary or secondary indications targeting conditions with high Medicaid Market Share (MMS).
The figure provides no graphical evidence that clinical trials targeting conditions with high demand
among the newly-eligible (i.e. high MMS) increased following the ACA's passage. MMS is defined as the
share of the total US population that has a condition and was expected to gain coverage due to ACA
Medicaid expansion. MMS is calculated at ICD-9 Subchapter level. Clinical trial activity is shown for
conditions with MMS above the median or in the top quartile of all conditions. All data on MMS comes
from 2007-2010 panels of the MEPS for individuals living in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census
Divisions. Data on the universe of clinical trials, along with information on trial phase and indications
come from Clarivate Analytics Cortellis Competitive Intelligence Database (Cortellis). The sample of
clinical trials is limited to U.S.- based trials between 2004 and 2016 with at least one reported indication.
Figure 3. Trends in Total Clinical Trials for One Percentage Point Higher Newly-Eligible
Medicaid Market Share (MMS)

Note: This figure plots event negative binomial event study estimates for the effect of a one percentage
point higher newly-eligible Medicaid Market Share (MMS) on clinical trials in the years surrounding the
passage of the ACA. The outcome is the total clinical trials per condition. The points are regression
coefficients from a negative binomial specification with calendar year and condition fixed effects. All
effects are plotted as changes relative to the year before ACA passage (2009). The top chart contains the
total number of of trials with primary indication for a condition and the bottom chart contains the total
number of trials with a secondary indication for a condition. The figure provides no graphical evidence
that clinical trials targeting conditions with higher MMS increased following the ACA's passage. MMS is
defined as the share of the total U.S. population that has a condition and was expected to gain coverage
due to ACA Medicaid expansion. The MMS ranges between 0.00% and 0.79%, so a one percentage point
change is a unit of magnitude higher than we see in our data. The average number of total trials with a
primary indication for a given condition over the whole 13 year period is 37.85. The average number of
total trials with at least one secondary indication for a given condition is 12.85. Estimates of MMS are
derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS for individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions.
Data on clinical trials comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported
indication.
                                            Panel A: California




                                           Panel B: Connecticut




                                          Panel C: Massachusetts




Figure 4. Comparing Clinical Trials Targeting Conditions with Large and Small Changes in
Medicaid Spending Under Early State Medicaid Expansions

Note: This figure plots the event study coefficients for the change in clinical trials for conditions based
on whether they are in the bottom three quartiles or top quartile of spending growth among Medicaid
beneficiaries in early expansion states (CA, CT, MA). There is no statistically significant or consistent
increase in trials targeting the conditions with high expected demand among the newly-eligible. The
regression uses a negative binomial specification to estimate the change in clinical trial activity based on
a binary variable for whether a condition is in the top quartile of Medicaid spending growth following
early state Medicaid expansions. Conditions in the top quartile of spending in early expansion states
are identified by comparing ex-post utilization of pharmaceuticals by Medicaid beneficiaries in CA, CT,
and MA and surrounding control states following early Medicaid expansions. Medicaid pharmaceutical
product expenditures come from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data and pharmaceutical products
are linked to conditions using databases employed by professional pharmacists (See Appendix B). Data
on clinical trial activity comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported
indication.
            Table 1--Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Clinical Trial Activity




                                                       P. I Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                         0.866                   1.241
                                            (0.071)                (0.124)
         Post 2009 × MMS                     0.109                  0.152
                                            (0.115)                (0.203)
         Observations                        1274                    1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                      P. II Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                         0.565                   0.988
                                            (0.057)                (0.084)
         Post 2009 × MMS                     0.168                  -0.154
                                            (0.092)                (0.149)
         Observations                        1274                    1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                      P. III Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                          0.212                   0.354
                                            (0.076)                 (0.126)
         Post 2009 × MMS                    -0.280                   -0.317
                                            (0.119)                 (0.204)
         Observations                        1274                     1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


Note: This table contains estimates from a negative binomial difference-in-differences specification for
the effect of a 1 percentage point higher newly-eligible Medicaid Market Share (MMS) on innovation
post-ACA passage. Since responses to Medicaid Expansion may vary across clinical trial stage, Phase
I, Phase II, and Phase III trials are presented in separate panels. The first column contains the total
number of trials with primary indication for a condition and the second column contains the total number
of trials with a secondary indication for a condition. Regardless of the phase of development, there is
no detectable change in clinical trial activity in response to the demand shock from the ACA's Medicaid
expansions. The MMS ranges between 0.00% and 0.79%, so a 1 percentage point change is a unit of
magnitude higher than we see in our data. The outcome is the total trials per condition. The average
number of total trials with a primary indication for a given condition over the whole 13 year period is
37.85. The average number of total trials with at least one secondary indication for a given condition is
12.85. Estimates of MMS are derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS for individuals in the Northeast, West,
and Midwest Census Divisions. Data on clinical trials comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based
trials with at least one reported indication.
                      APPENDICES


Which Markets (Don't) Drive Pharmaceutical Innovation?
        Evidence from U.S. Medicaid Expansions

    By Craig Garthwaite, Rebecca M. Sachs, Ariel D. Stern




                              1
 Appendix A: Comparing the ACA's Medicaid Expansion to Medicare Part
                                            D Expansion


        The ACA's Medicaid Expansions and Prescription Drug Utilization

  Several studies have examined the relationship between Medicaid expansions
under the ACA and prescription drug utilization. Research by Mulcahy et al.
(2016) suggests that gaining insurance through ACA Medicaid expansions had a
larger effect on prescription drug utilization than gaining coverage through other
insurers: individuals transitioning from no insurance to Medicaid increased their
drug utilization at a threefold higher rate than individuals transitioning from no
insurance to private coverage.
  Other studies directly compare utilization increases between expansion and non-
expansion states. Using data from a nationally representative prescription drug
transaction database, Ghosh et al. (2019) find that Medicaid prescriptions in-
creased by 19 percent in states that expanded Medicaid in 2014 and the first
quarter of 2015 relative to states that did not. This increase translates to approx-
imately nine additional prescriptions per year for each newly enrolled beneficiary.
Other studies report utilization increases of a similar magnitude.1 Data from
IMS Health (2015) show that Medicaid prescriptions increased by 25.4 percent
in states that expanded Medicaid relative to 2.8 percent in states that did not in
2014. Based on a subset of expansion and non-expansion states, Mahendrarat-
nam (2016) finds that one year after ACA implementation, expansion states had
17 percent more Medicaid prescriptions than were seen in the quarter proceeding
the expansion.2
  Our study's estimates, which are based on the Medicaid State Drug Utilization
Data, align with these estimates. Between 2013 and 2014, we find an 18 percent

    1 While Wen et al (2016) also look at drug utilization using the Medicaid State Drug Utilization data,
the estimates they present are not directly comparable to ours since they are normalized by the number
of residents in each state.
    2 Mahendraratnam (2016) reports that prescription drug utilization grew on an upwards trajectory
throughout 2014, which is consistent with the continued growth we observe in 2015.
increase in expansions states relative to 3 percent in non-expansion states. These
increases translated into 24 million new Medicaid prescriptions in 2014. When
we expand our sample through 2015, which other studies do not report on, we
observe 60 million new prescriptions.

                  Medicare Part D and Prescription Drug Utilization

  While a large literature has examined how Medicare Part D's implementation
affected prescription drug utilization and spending, the precise size of this utiliza-
tion increase is difficult to pinpoint.
  Both Litchenberg and Sun (2007) and Yin et al. (2008) use a difference-in-
differences approach to study drug utilization in Walgreens pharmacy claims data.
Comparing utilization among the elderly to the non-elderly, Litchenberg and Sun
(2007) find that Medicare Part D implementation increased prescription drug use
among the elderly by 13 percent. When only comparing the elderly to the near-
elderly (60-63), Yin et al. (2008) find a five percent increase in utilization. Using
prescription drug transaction data between 2004 and 2007 for those over 66 years
to those below 58, Ketcham and Simon (2008) find Part D increased elderly pre-
scription drug utilization by 4.7 percent. Khan and Kaestner (2009) estimate that
Part D would increase utilization 4-10 percent among the elderly using a nation-
ally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries and a fixed-effect estimator.
While Khan and Kaestner provide information on projected instead of realized
increases, the benefit of their study design is that they can vary parameters and
think about the overall Medicare population instead of subsamples. Back-of-the-
envelope calculations using predicted drug spending in the absence of Part D in
2006 derived from Litchenberg and Sun (2007) suggest a 4-13 percent increase
in prescriptions among the elderly translated into 46 million to 158 million new
prescriptions due to Part D.3

                Medicare Part D vs. the ACA's Medicaid Expansions
   3 Duggan and Scott Morton (2010) are outliers in this literature. They document an increase of 51
percent, although it is not significant and imprecisely estimated.
  Notably, there are two key reasons why it is difficult to compare utilization
increases in Medicare vs. Medicaid: price effects and crowd-out effects.
  The creation of Medicare Part D led to substantial declines in average branded
pharmaceutical prices, especially among drugs with high sales to individuals eligi-
ble for Part D (Duggan and Scott Morton, 2010). This price decrease contributed
to increased consumption. Meanwhile, there is no evidence of price decreases fol-
lowing Medicaid expansion (Feng et al., 2019). In fact, due to the structure
of Medicaid rebate rules, we would expect commercial branded pharmacuetical
prices to rise for drugs with high sales to Medicaid following expansion (Duggan
and Scott Morton, 2006).
  Medicare Part D also included substantial crowd-out of other drug coverage,
while Medicaid expansion did not. Results from Ghosh et al. (2019) suggest
that new coverage under Medicaid did not substitute for other payment sources.4
When prescriptions paid for by Medicaid increase, they find no evidence of reduc-
tions in prescriptions paid for by private insurance or by those with no insurance.
In Part D, on the other hand, there is substantial crowd-out. Englehardt and
Gruber (2010) estimate that Part D resulted in a 75 percent crowd-out of pre-
scription drug insurance coverage and expenditures among the elderly population.
In their data, Litchenberg and Sun (2007) find that for every seven new prescrip-
tions paid for by the government, there was a reduction of five prescriptions paid
for by the private sector. The reduction also implies a large crowd-out of private
insurance by Part D. Levy and Weir (2010) also report high crowd-out of other
private insurance by Part D.




   4 A review of the literature finds limited crowd out of insurance among the newly eligible Medicaid
population (KFF, 2020)
                                             References

Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton. "The effect of Medicare Part D on pharmaceutical prices and
utilization." American Economic Review 100.1 (2010): 590-607.
  Ghosh, Ausmita, Kosali Simon, and Benjamin D. Sommers. "The effect of health insurance on pre-
scription drug use among low-income adults: evidence from recent Medicaid expansions." Journal of
health economics 63 (2019): 64-80.
  IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. "Medicines Use and Spending Shifts: A Review of the Use
of Medicines in the U.S. in 2014" (April 2015)
  Ketcham, Jonathan D., and Kosali I. Simon. "Medicare Part D's Effects on Elderly Patients' Drug
Costs and Utilization." The American journal of managed care 14.11 Suppl (2008): SP14-SP22.
  Khan, Nasreen, and Robert Kaestner. "Effect of prescription drug coverage on the elderly's use of
prescription drugs." INQUIRY: The journal of health care organization, provision, and financing 46.1
(2009): 33-45.
  Levy, Helen, and David R. Weir. "Take-up of Medicare Part D: results from the Health and Retirement
Study." Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 65.4 (2010): 492-
501.
  Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Shawn X. Sun. "The impact of Medicare Part D on prescription drug use
by the elderly." Health Affairs 26.6 (2007): 1735-1744.
  Mahendraratnam, Nirosha, Stacie B. Dusetzina, and Joel F. Farley. "Prescription drug utilization
and reimbursement increased following state Medicaid expansion in 2014." Journal of managed care &
specialty pharmacy 23.3 (2017): 355-363
  Mulcahy, Andrew W., Christine Eibner, and Kenneth Finegold. "Gaining coverage through Medicaid
or private insurance increased prescription use and lowered out-of-pocket spending." Health Affairs 35.9
(2016): 1725-1733.
  Wen, Hefei, Tyrone F. Borders, and Benjamin G. Druss. "Number of Medicaid prescriptions grew,
drug spending was steady in Medicaid expansion states." Health Affairs 35.9 (2016): 1604-1607.
  Yin, Wesley, Anirban Basu, James X. Zhang, Atonu Rabbani, David O. Meltzer, and G. Caleb Alexan-
der. "The effect of the Medicare Part D prescription benefit on drug utilization and expenditures." Annals
of internal medicine 148, no. 3 (2008): 169-177.
Appendix B: Typical Use of Products in Medicaid State Drug Utilization
                                      Data

  To link drugs listed in the Medicaid State Drug Utilization data to ICD-9
codes, we employed a two-step process. We first obtained information on the
active ingredients of the drugs in the Medicaid State Drug Utilization data from
current and historical versions of the Drugs @ FDA database and the FDA's
National Drug Code (NDC) Directory. We then removed all active ingredients
with at least one NDC listed as available over the counter. To limit our sample
to a reasonable number of active ingredients, we focus on the set of drugs that
together account for 95% of total drug spending two years prior to each expansion
studied. The remaining 5% of spending consists of a large number of low-volume
drugs.
  Next, we hired a Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD) candidate in the final stages of
her studies to research the most common uses (both on and off-label) for relevant
active ingredients. The PharmD candidate identified the primary indications for
each active ingredient using four tertiary pharmacy databases.

  1) MicroMedix - owned by Truven Health Analytics, an IBM Watson Health
     company

  2) DynaMed Plus - owned by EBSCO Health

  3) Clinical Pharmacology - powered by ClinicalKey, owned by Elsevier

  4) Lexicomp ­ owned by Wolters Kluwer

  All four pharmacy databases are used by licensed pharmacists and other health-
care providers for clinical guidance in practice along with student pharmacists for
educational purposes accessed via an institutionally paid subscription plan. The
companies that own these sources supply health information supported by peer-
reviewed studies. Examples of the information provided by each database for a
sample active ingredient are presented below.
  When the databases listed multiple indications, the PharmD candidate iden-
tified consensus across the four databases and used her clinical judgement to
narrow down the indications to the primary one to three indications. In cases
where the primary uses of an active ingredient varied by route of administration,
the PharmD candidate referenced the indications for the route of administration
compromising the majority of spending in the Medicaid population (information
on each NDC code came from Drugs FDA).

  To link drug indications to three-digit ICD-9 codes, the PharmD candidate
relied on ICD-9-CM codes listed at findacode.com. In cases where the drug was
primarily used as a contraception, an antibiotic, or as part of general medical
and surgical procedures (e.g. anesthesia, contrast fluid, saline), the drug was not
linked to a specific ICD-9 code or disease. For example, Lidocaine is often used
for medical anesthesia. Because this does not correspond to a disease, it not
linked to a specific ICD-9 code. Contraception similarly does not correspond to
a disease. In the case of antibiotics, the list number of diseases they can treat are
too large to able to be able to accurately learn about specific conditions in the
newly-eligible Medicaid population from their utilization. Given that a lack of
innovation in antibiotics is well documented, their exclusion cannot explain our
null results for innovation.

  Micromedix
DynaMed Plus




Clinical Pharmacology
Lexicomp
        Appendix C: Increases in Medicaid Drug Utilization Post-ACA




                          Figure C1. States Expanding Medicaid in 2014

Note: This figure illustrates which states chose to expand Medicaid under the ACA and which chose
not to expand. Expansion states are in dark gray, non-expansion states are in white, and states that
expanded, but are excluded from our sample due to the nature of their early expansion, are in light gray.
The list of excluded states comes from Dranove, et al (2016).
                       Panel A: Total Prescriptions Reimbursed by Medicaid




                       Panel B: Total Pre-Rebate Drug Spending in Medicaid




Figure C2. Medicaid Prescriptions and Pre-Rebate Spending in Expansion and Non-Expansion
States

Note: This figure plots measures of drug utilization and spending across expansion and non-expansion
states over time. It shows that both utilization (total prescriptions) and spending increased more in
states that expanded Medicaid than those that did not. Total prescriptions includes any prescription
for which Medicaid paid a portion of the claim, as well as those prescriptions for which Medicaid paid
the full claim. Total spending include the total amount reimbursed by both Medicaid and non-Medicaid
entities to pharmacies or other providers for drugs prescribed to Medicaid beneficiaries. This total
does not include Medicaid rebates and represents both federal and state reimbursement. All data on
drug spending comes from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data and includes information for both
Medicaid Fee-For-Service and Medicaid Managed Care Organization beneficiaries.
                                    Total Pre-Rebate Drug Spending
                                               (Billions)
                                    2013              2015                        Ratio
             Expansion               8.62             14.20                        1.63
             Non-Expansion          13.59             16.68                        1.23
                                                           Difference:            0.40
Figure C3. Difference-in-Differences Methodology for Calculating Changes in Drug Spend-
ing Across All Conditions

Note: This figure demonstrates the difference-in-differences (DID) methodology for capturing changes
in drug spending due to Medicaid expansion. The same methodology is repeated for total spending
on drugs used to treat every condition in early expansion states. Total spending includes the total
amount reimbursed by both Medicaid and non-Medicaid entities to pharmacies or other providers for
drugs prescribed to Medicaid beneficiaries. This total does not include medicaid rebates and represents
both federal and state reimbursement. All data on drug spending comes from the Medicaid State Drug
Utilization Data and includes information for both Medicaid Fee-For-Service and Medicaid Managed
Care Organization beneficiaries.
Figure C4. Condition Level Demand Estimates Derived from ACA Medicaid Drug Spending
Difference-in-Differences

Note: This figure further shows how the difference-in-differences (DID) methodology in Appendix Figure
C3 is used to define conditions in the top quartile of spending for Medicaid expansion. The same
methodology is repeated for total spending on drugs used to treat every condition in early expansion
states. Pharmaceutical products and their associated spending are linked to conditions using databases
employed by professional pharmacists (See Appendix B). All data on drug spending comes from the
Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data and includes information for both Medicaid Fee-For-Service and
Medicaid Managed Care Organization beneficiaries.
Figure C5. Comparing Clinical Trials Targeting Conditions with Large and Small Changes
in Medicaid Spending Under 2014 ACA Medicaid Expansion

Note: This figure plots the event study coefficients for the change in clinical trials for conditions based
on whether they are in the bottom three quartiles or top quartile of spending growth among Medicaid
beneficiaries under the full 2014 Medicaid expansion. There is no statistically significant or consistent
increase in trials targeting the conditions with high expected demand among the newly-eligible. The
regression uses a negative binomial specification to estimate the change in clinical trial activity based on
a binary variable for whether a condition is in the top quartile of Medicaid spending growth following
early state Medicaid expansions. Conditions in the top quartile of spending in early expansion states
are identified by comparing ex-post utilization of pharmaceuticals by Medicaid beneficiaries. Medicaid
pharmaceutical product expenditures come from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data and phar-
maceutical products are linked to conditions using databases employed by professional pharmacists (See
Appendix B). Data on clinical trial activity comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with
at least one reported indication.
              Appendix D: Additional Tables and Figures from Text




                                                                  Newly-Eligible   Traditional      Medicare &
 Order   ICD Chapter                                                Medicaid        Medicaid     Privately Insured
                                                                   Prevalence      Prevalence       Prevalence

   1     Certain Conditions Originating In The Perinatal Period        0.00           0.21             0.04
   2     Congenital Anomalies                                          0.24           1.35             0.74
   3     Diseases Of The Blood And Blood-Forming Organs                0.68           2.60             1.68
   4     Complications Of Pregnancy, Childbirth,                       0.78           1.90             0.78
         And The Puerperium
   5     Neoplasms                                                     2.11           4.48             10.25
   6     Diseases Of The Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                  4.38           8.62             12.41
   7     Diseases Of The Genitourinary System                          6.08           10.03            13.25
   8     Supplementary Classification Of Factors Influencing           7.97           18.80            18.64
         Health Status And Contact With Health Services
   9     Diseases Of The Nervous System And Sense Organs              11.50           25.01            27.58
  10     Diseases Of The Digestive System                             13.27           19.75            19.81
  11     Diseases Of The Circulatory System                           14.30           28.98            39.68
  12     Endocrine, Nutritional And Metabolic Diseases,               14.92           25.99            39.97
         And Immunity Disorders
  13     Symptoms, Signs, And Ill-Defined Conditions                  17.29           37.61            30.97
  14     Injury And Poisoning                                         17.90           19.78            23.12
  15     Infectious And Parasitic Diseases                            17.98           23.66            24.49
  16     Mental Disorders                                             18.96           30.77            19.68
  17     Diseases Of The Musculoskeletal System                       29.23           36.20            47.89
         And Connective Tissue
  18     Diseases Of The Respiratory System                           37.02           58.01            55.68

               Figure D1. Comparing Disease Prevalence Across Insurance Groups

Note: This figure shows how the prevalence of conditions differs across the newly-eligible Medicaid,
traditional Medicaid, and Medicare and privately insured populations. Prevalence is defined as the share
of the eligible population with a particular condition, defined at the ICD-9 Chapter level. There is large
variation in prevalence across both diseases and populations. Since prevalence across conditions in the
newly-eligible population differs from prevalence in other populations, pharmaceutical utilization across
the newly-eligible population cannot be accurately predicted using data from other populations. Overall
prevalence across diseases may be mechanically lower in the newly-eligible Medicaid population due to
infrequent interactions with the medical system. All data come from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS) for individuals living in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions.
     Figure D2. Selected States Expanding Medicaid pre-2014 and Surrounding Regions

Note: This figure illustrates which states are in the same Census Division as the three early expansion
states we focus on - CA, CT, and MA. Early expansion states are in dark gray and surrounding states in
the same census division are in light gray. In 2011 California implemented a county-by-county rollout of
Medicaid for individuals under 200% of the FPL. Beginning in 2010, Connecticut offered full Medicaid
benefits to childless adults with incomes below 56% of the FPL. In 2006, Massachusetts fully subsidized
care for individuals with incomes less than 100% under statewide healthcare reform.
     Table D1--Early Expansion State Growth in Pharmaceutical Spending by Condition



                               Relevant Conditions                                              CA                       CT                      MA
                                                                                     Spending Growth   Rank   Spending Growth   Rank   Spending Growth   Rank
Acute Respiratory Infections                                                              -3.47         55            -           -            -           -
Arthropathies And Related Disorders                                                       -0.63         47         -0.29         37          0.13          9
Benign Neoplasms                                                                          -0.64         49            -           -          0.11         11
Cerebrovascular Disease                                                                    0.20         10            -           -          0.07         15
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease And Allied Conditions                               -0.05         19         -0.30         38          0.04         25
Complications Of Surgical And Medical Care, Not Elsewhere Classified                      -0.24         33          0.66          4          0.07         16
Diseases Of Arteries, Arterioles, And Capillaries                                         -0.22         30          0.50          7          0.01         31
Diseases Of Esophagus, Stomach, And Duodenum                                              -0.28         37          0.55          5         -0.30         49
Diseases Of Male Genital Organs                                                            0.12         14          0.71          3          0.07         18
Diseases Of Oral Cavity, Salivary Glands, And Jaws                                         0.78          3            -           -            -           -
Diseases Of Other Endocrine Glands                                                        -0.17         28         -0.10         31          0.00         34
Diseases Of Pulmonary Circulation                                                          0.15         11            -           -          0.16          8
Diseases Of The Blood And Blood-Forming Organs                                             0.02         18          0.51          6         -0.07         44
Diseases Of The Ear And Mastoid Process                                                    0.23          7            -           -            -           -
Diseases Of Veins And Lymphatics, And Other Diseases Of Circulatory System                 0.07         15          0.26         10          0.20          3
Disorders Of The Eye And Adnexa                                                           -0.36         39          0.82          2         -0.03         40
Disorders Of Thyroid Gland                                                                -0.45         44          0.18         15          0.00         33
Dorsopathies                                                                              -0.42         43         -0.34         39          0.19          5
Hereditary And Degenerative Diseases Of The Central Nervous System                        -0.10         23          0.13         18          0.06         20
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (Hiv) Infection                                              -0.24         32         -0.11         32         -0.03         38
Hypertensive Disease                                                                      -0.66         50          0.15         17          0.03         27
Infections Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                                                 0.86          2          0.04         24          0.36          2
Injury To Nerves And Spinal Cord                                                          -0.22         31         -0.70         48          0.06         21
Ischemic Heart Disease                                                                    -0.05         20          0.00         27          0.06         22
Malignant Neoplasm Of Bone, Connective Tissue, Skin, And Breast                           -0.64         48          0.19         13         -0.02         36
Malignant Neoplasm Of Digestive Organs And Peritoneum                                     -0.75         52          0.12         19          0.02         29
Malignant Neoplasm Of Genitourinary Organs                                                -0.15         26          1.01          1          0.07         19
Malignant Neoplasm Of Lymphatic And Hematopoietic Tissue                                  -0.79         53         -1.37         50          0.40          1
Malignant Neoplasm Of Other And Unspecified Sites                                         -0.09         22          0.18         14         -0.04         42
Malignant Neoplasm Of Respiratory And Intrathoracic Organs                                -0.67         51          0.19         12          0.11         10
Mycoses                                                                                   -0.13         25         -0.55         44          0.01         30
Nephritis, Nephrotic Syndrome, And Nephrosis                                               0.21          9          0.04         23          0.17          6
Neurotic Disorders, Personality Disorders, And Other Nonpsychotic Mental Disorders        -0.07         21         -0.15         33         -0.02         37
Noninfectious Enteritis And Colitis                                                       -0.16         27         -0.40         42          0.05         23
Nutritional Deficiencies                                                                   0.12         13          0.09         20            -           -
Organic Sleep Disorders                                                                   -0.46         45         -0.59         45         -0.12         48
Osteopathies, Chondropathies, And Acquired Musculoskeletal Deformities                    -0.50         46         -0.38         40          0.07         17
Other And Unspecified Effects Of External Causes                                           1.11          1         -0.85         49          0.19          4
Other Diseases Due To Viruses And Chlamydiae                                              -0.32         38         -0.64         47         -0.03         39
Other Diseases Of Digestive System                                                        -0.24         34         -0.17         35          0.09         13
Other Diseases Of Intestines And Peritoneum                                               -0.21         29          0.16         16          0.09         14
Other Diseases Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                                               -           -         -0.43         43         -0.75         50
Other Diseases Of The Upper Respiratory Tract                                              0.06         16         -0.63         46          0.17          7
Other Diseases Of Urinary System                                                             -           -          0.45          9            -           -
Other Disorders Of Female Genital Tract                                                   -0.26         36          0.03         25         -0.02         35
Other Disorders Of The Central Nervous System                                             -0.24         35         -0.05         28          0.01         32
Other Forms Of Heart Disease                                                               0.43          5          0.45          8         -0.04         43
Other Infectious And Parasitic Diseases                                                   -1.43         54            -           -            -           -
Other Inflammatory Conditions Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                             -0.38         40         -0.15         34          0.11         12
Other Metabolic And Immunity Disorders                                                    -0.42         42          0.05         22         -0.09         46
Pain                                                                                      -0.12         24         -0.06         29         -0.09         45
Pneumonia And Influenza                                                                    0.22          8         -0.26         36          0.04         24
Poisoning By Drugs, Medicinal And Biological Substances                                    0.27          6          0.21         11            -           -
Psychoses                                                                                  0.45          4         -0.06         30          0.03         28
Rheumatism, Excluding The Back                                                             0.04         17          0.02         26         -0.10         47
Symptoms                                                                                  -0.41         41         -0.39         41         -0.03         41
Viral Diseases Generally Accompanied By Exanthem                                           0.13         12          0.07         21          0.03         26



Note: This table reports the difference-in-difference estimation results for conditions in early expansion
states. Conditions are defined at the ICD-9 Sub-Chapter level and spending growth is derived using the
proportional growth difference-in-differences methodology in Appendix Figure C3. Rank is the relative
ranking of each condition's growth. All information on pharmaceutical product expenditures come from
the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data. Pharmaceutical products are linked to conditions using
databases employed by professional pharmacists (see Appendix B) and spending on products is split
equally among conditions linked to each product. Not all conditions are present in this table, as some
conditions were not primarily targeted by pharmaceutical products in the set of drugs that together
account for 95% of total drug spending in the two years prior to early state expansion. Some conditions
are also only targeted by excluded categories of pharmaceutical products (see Appendix B).
    Appendix E: Estimates using Demand from Expanded Newly-Eligible
                         Medicaid and Subsidy-Eligible Population


             Table E1--Newly Eligible (NE) Medicaid Population Sample Selection




                                                   Medicaid                                           Estimated
        Description                Income                                Insurance Status
                                                     Status                                         Population Size
    NE Medicaid (strict)       Under 138% FPL   Not on Medicaid         Uninsured full year          14.6 Million
        NE Medicaid            Under 138% FPL   Not on Medicaid   Uninsured at some point in year     18 Million
       NE Medicaid &
                               Under 400% FPL   Not on Medicaid   Uninsured at some point in year    48.3 Million
 Subsidy-Eligible Population


Note: This table displays three different sample selection criteria that can be used to identify individuals
newly eligible for Medicaid under the ACA. The analysis in this paper uses the second sample, since the
definition and estimated population size most accurately align with ACA-era Medicaid expansion, but
later tables in this section present results for the most generous sample selection - newly-eligible Medicaid
and marketplace subsidy-eligible. The three criteria ­ income, Medicaid status, and insurance status ­
all translate to variables collected in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) between 2007 and
2010. The sample selection criteria for three potential groups are listed from most to least restrictive.
All calculations include individuals from every region of the United States. The estimated population
size calculations are averaged over the 2007 - 2010 panels of the MEPS.
                                                                   Newly-Eligible
                                                                                       Traditional      Medicare &
                                                                      Medicaid
 Order   ICD Chapter                                                                    Medicaid     Privately Insured
                                                                  & Subsidy-Eligible
                                                                                       Prevalence       Prevalence
                                                                     Prevalence

   1     Certain Conditions Originating In The Perinatal Period          0.05             0.21             0.04
   2     Congenital Anomalies                                            0.28             1.35             0.74
   3     Diseases Of The Blood And Blood-Forming Organs                  0.70             2.60             1.68
   4     Complications Of Pregnancy, Childbirth,                         0.73             1.90             0.78
         And The Puerperium
   5     Neoplasms                                                       2.14              4.48            10.25
   6     Diseases Of The Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                    4.77              8.62            12.41
   7     Diseases Of The Genitourinary System                            6.33             10.03            13.25
   8     Supplementary Classification Of Factors Influencing             8.48             18.80            18.64
         Health Status And Contact With Health Services
   9     Diseases Of The Nervous System And Sense Organs                11.94             25.01            27.58
  10     Diseases Of The Digestive System                               12.19             19.75            19.81
  11     Diseases Of The Circulatory System                             14.82             28.98            39.68
  12     Endocrine, Nutritional And Metabolic Diseases,                 15.04             25.99            39.97
         And Immunity Disorders
  13     Symptoms, Signs, And Ill-Defined Conditions                    18.02             37.61            30.97
  14     Mental Disorders                                               18.23             30.77            19.68
  15     Injury And Poisoning                                           18.31             19.78            23.12
  16     Infectious And Parasitic Diseases                              18.49             23.66            24.49
  17     Diseases Of The Musculoskeletal System                         28.36             36.20            47.89
         And Connective Tissue
  18     Diseases Of The Respiratory System                             39.82             58.01            55.68

 Figure E1. Expanded Population - Comparing Disease Prevalence Across Insurance Groups

Note: This figure shows how the prevalence of conditions differs across the newly-eligible Medicaid and
subsidy-eligible, traditional Medicaid, and Medicare and privately insured populations. Prevalence is
defined as the share of the eligible population with a particular condition, defined at the ICD-9 Chapter
level. There is large variation in prevalence across both diseases and populations. Since prevalence
across conditions in the newly-eligible Medicaid and subsidy-eligible population (i.e. those uninsured with
incomes below 400% FPL) differs from prevalence in other populations, pharmaceutical utilization across
the newly-eligible population cannot be accurately predicted using data from other populations. Overall
prevalence across diseases may be mechanically lower in the newly-eligible Medicaid and subsidy-eligible
population due to infrequent interactions with the medical system. All data come from the 2007-2010
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) for individuals living in the Northeast, West, and Midwest
Census Divisions.
      Figure E2. Expanded Population - Share of Trials Below and Above Median MMS

Note: This figure plots clinical trial activity over time. It shows the share of Phase I, II, and III trials with
primary or secondary indications targeting conditions with high or low Medicaid Market Share (MMS).
The figure provides no graphical evidence that clinical trials targeting conditions with high demand
among the newly-eligible Medicaid and subsidy-eligible population (i.e. high MMS) increased following
the ACA's passage. MMS is defined as the share of the total US population that has a condition and was
expected to gain coverage due to ACA Medicaid expansion or marketplace exchange subsidies. MMS is
calculated at ICD-9 Subchapter level. Clinical trial activity is shown for conditions with MMS above the
median or in the top quartile of all conditions. All data on MMS comes from 2007-2010 panels of the
MEPS for individuals living in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions. Data on the universe
of clinical trials, along with information on trial phase and indications come from Clarivate Analytics
Cortellis Competitive Intelligence Database (Cortellis). The sample of clinical trials is limited to U.S.-
based trials between 2004 and 2016 with at least one reported indication.
Figure E3. Expanded Population - Trends in Total Clinical Trials for One Percentage Point
Higher MMS

Note: This figure plots negative binomial event study estimates for the effect of a one percentage point
higher newly-eligible Medicaid and subsidy-eligible Market Share (MMS) on clinical trials in the years
surrounding the passage of the ACA. The outcome is the total clinical trials per condition. The points
are regression coefficients from a negative binomial specification with calendar year and condition fixed
effects. All effects are plotted as changes relative to the time year before ACA passage (2009). The
top chart contains the total number of of trials with primary indication for a condition and the bottom
chart contains the total number of trials with a secondary indication for a condition. The figure provides
no graphical evidence that clinical trials targeting conditions with higher MMS increased following the
ACA's passage. MMS is defined as the share of the total US population that has a condition and was
expected to gain coverage due to ACA Medicaid expansion or marketplace exchange subsidies. The MMS
ranges between 0.00% and 2.38% (mean: 0.27, sd: 0.50), so a one percentage point change is a unit of
magnitude higher than we see in our data. The average number of total trials with a primary indication
for a given condition over the whole 13 year period is 37.85. The average number of total trials with at
least one secondary indication for a given condition is 12.85. Estimates of MMS are derived from the
2007-2010 MEPS for individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions. Data on clinical
trials comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported indication.
Table E2--Expanded Population - Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Clinical Trial Ac-
tivity




                                                       P. I Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                         0.864                   1.240
                                            (0.071)                (0.124)
         Post 2009 × MMS                     0.042                  0.056
                                            (0.039)                (0.070)
         Observations                        1274                    1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                      P. II Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                         0.562                   0.987
                                            (0.057)                (0.084)
         Post 2009 × MMS                    0.064                   -0.050
                                            (0.032)                (0.051)
         Observations                        1274                    1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                      P. III Trials
                                       Primary Indication Secondary Indications
         Post 2009                          0.211                   0.355
                                            (0.076)                 (0.126)
         Post 2009 × MMS                    -0.094                   -0.110
                                            (0.041)                 (0.070)
         Observations                        1274                     1274
         Standard errors in parentheses
            p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


Note: This table contains estimates from a negative binomial DID for the effect of a 1 percentage
point higher newly-eligible Medicaid and subsidy-eligible Market Share (MMS) on innovation post ACA
passage. Since responses to the ACA may vary across clinical trial stage, Phase I, Phase II, and Phase
III trials are presented in separate panels. The first column contains the total number of of trials with
primary indication for a condition and the second column contains the total number of trials with a
secondary indication for a condition. Regardless of the phase of development, there is no consistent and
detectable change in clinical trial activity in response to the demand shock from the ACA's Medicaid
expansions and marketplace exchange subsidy implementation. The MMS ranges between 0.00% and
2.38% (mean: 0.27, sd: 0.50), so a one percentage point change is a unit of magnitude higher than we
see in our data.The outcome is the total trials per condition. The average number of total trials with a
primary indication for a given condition over the whole 13 year period is 37.85. The average number of
total trials with at least one secondary indication for a given condition is 12.85. Estimates of MMS are
derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS for individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions.
Data on clinical trials comes from Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported
indication.
  Appendix F: Estimates using Alternative Definition of Newly-Eligible
                           Medicaid Market Share (Alt. MMS)




          Figure F1. Comparing MMS with Alternative MMS for Select Conditions

Note: This figure compares estimates of MMS with alternative MMS for select conditions. MMS is
defined as the share of the total US population that has a condition and was expected to gain coverage
due to ACA Medicaid expansion. Alternative MMS is defined as the share of the population with a
disease that are newly-covered by ACA Medicaid expansion. This chart illustrates that while a large
share of individuals with Syphilis and Other Venereal disease are in the newly-eligible population and
expansion represents a large relative increase, it is actually a fairly small overall increase. Meanwhile,
Acute Respiratory or Hypertensive conditions have a small relative increase, but a large overall increase
in demand.
        Figure F2. Kernel Density of Alternative MMS Across Conditions 2007 - 2010

Note: This figure demonstrates that there is substantial variation in demand for pharmaceuticals treating
different conditions in the newly-eligible Medicaid population. It specifically plots the kernel density of
our alternative demand measure among the newly-eligible (Alt. MMS) for conditions at the ICD-9
Sub-Chapter level. Alt. MMS is defined as the share of the population with a disease that are newly-
covered by ACA Medicaid expansion. Estimates of Alt. MMS are derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS for
individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions.
            Figure F3. Share of Trials Below and Above Median Alternative MMS

Note: This figure plots clinical trial activity over time. It shows the share of Phase I, II, and III trials
with primary or secondary indications targeting conditions with high or low Alternative Medicaid Market
Share (Alt. MMS). The figure provides no graphical evidence that clinical trials targeting conditions
with high demand among the newly-eligible (i.e. high MMS) increased following the ACA's passage.
Alt. MMS is defined as the share of the population with a disease that are newly-covered by ACA
Medicaid expansion. Alt. MMS is calculated at ICD-9 Subchapter level. Clinical trial activity is shown
for conditions with Alt. MMS above the median or in the top quartile of all conditions. All data on
Alt. MMS comes from 2007-2010 panels of the MEPS for individuals living in the Northeast, West, and
Midwest Census Divisions. Data on the universe of clinical trials, along with information on trial phase
and indications come from Clarivate Analytics Cortellis Competitive Intelligence Database (Cortellis).
The sample of clinical trials is limited to U.S.- based trials between 2004 and 2016 with at least one
reported indication.
  Figure F4. Trends in Total Clinical Trials for One Percentage Point Higher Alt. MMS

Note: This figure plots event negative binomial event study estimates for the effect of a one percentage
point higher alternative newly-eligible Medicaid Market Share (Alt. MMS) on clinical trials in the years
surrounding the passage of the ACA. The outcome is the total clinical trials per condition. The points
are regression coefficients from a negative binomial specification with calendar year and condition fixed
effects. All effects are plotted as changes relative to the time year before ACA passage (2009). The
top chart contains the total number of of trials with primary indication for a condition and the bottom
chart contains the total number of trials with a secondary indication for a condition. The figure provides
no graphical evidence that clinical trials targeting conditions with higher Alt. MMS increased following
the ACA's passage. Alt. MMS is defined as the share of the total US population that has a condition
and was expected to gain coverage due to ACA Medicaid expansion. The Alt. MMS ranges between
0.00% and 36.03% (mean: 2.93, sd: 3.75), so a one percentage point change is a reasonable magnitude of
change in our data. The average number of total trials with a primary indication for a given condition
over the whole 13 year period is 37.85. The average number of total trials with at least one secondary
indication for a given condition is 12.85. Estimates of Alt. MMS are derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS
for individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions. Data on clinical trials comes from
Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported indication.
 Table F1--Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Clinical Trial Activity for Alt. MMS




                                                           P. I Trials
                                           Primary Indication Secondary Indications
      Post 2009                                0.797                   1.187
                                                (0.077)                (0.131)
      Post 2009 × Alt. MMS                      0.039                   0.036
                                                (0.016)                (0.025)
      Observations                               1274                    1274
      Standard errors in parentheses
         p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                          P. II Trials
                                           Primary Indication Secondary Indications
      Post 2009                                0.477                   1.025
                                                (0.063)                (0.089)
      Post 2009 × Alt. MMS                     0.050                    -0.030
                                                (0.014)                (0.020)
      Observations                               1274                    1274
      Standard errors in parentheses
         p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


                                                          P. III Trials
                                           Primary Indication Secondary Indications
      Post 2009                                  0.125                  0.491
                                                (0.086)                 (0.147)
      Post 2009 × Alt. MMS                       0.016                  -0.083
                                                (0.018)                 (0.037)
      Observations                               1274                     1274
      Standard errors in parentheses
         p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001


Note: This table contains estimates from a negative binomial DID for the effect of a 1 percentage
point higher alternative newly-eligible Medicaid Market Share (Alt. MMS) on innovation post ACA
passage. Since responses to Medicaid Expansion may vary across clinical trial stage, Phase I, Phase II,
and Phase III trials are presented in separate panels. The first column contains the total number of
of trials with primary indication for a condition and the second column contains the total number of
trials with a secondary indication for a condition. Regardless of the phase of development, there is no
consistent and detectable change in clinical trial activity in response to the demand shock from the ACA's
Medicaid expansions. The Alt. MMS ranges between 0.00% and 36.03% (mean: 2.93, sd: 3.75), so a
one percentage point change is a reasonable magnitude of change in our data. The outcome is the total
trials per condition. The average number of total trials with a primary indication for a given condition
over the whole 13 year period is 37.85. The average number of total trials with at least one secondary
indication for a given condition is 12.85. Estimates of MMS are derived from the 2007-2010 MEPS for
individuals in the Northeast, West, and Midwest Census Divisions. Data on clinical trials comes from
Cortellis and includes all U.S.-based trials with at least one reported indication.
