                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        REGULATION AND SECURITY DESIGN IN CONCENTRATED MARKETS

                                           Ana Babus
                                      Kinda Cheryl Hachem

                                       Working Paper 28764
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28764


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2021, Revised June 2021




We are grateful to Marzena Rostek and Ariel Zetlin-Jones for very helpful comments. We also
thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Chester Spatt, and participants at the Fall 2020 Carnegie-
Rochester-NYU Conference for their constructive suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Regulation and Security Design in Concentrated Markets
Ana Babus and Kinda Cheryl Hachem
NBER Working Paper No. 28764
May 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. D47,D86,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

Regulatory debates about centralized trading assume security design is immune to market
structure. We consider a regulator who introduces an exchange to increase liquidity,
understanding that security design is endogenous. For a given security, investors would like to
trade in a larger market and, for a given market structure, they would like to trade a safer security.
We show that financial intermediaries design riskier securities after the exchange is introduced,
even when the exchange leads to the origination of safer underlying assets. The results reflect a
relative dilution of investor market power and motivate coordinated policies to improve investor
welfare.


Ana Babus
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr.
St. Louis, MS 63130
anababus@gmail.com

Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu
1     Introduction

The 2007-09 ...nancial crisis spurred regulatory e¤orts to move the trading of many ...nan-
cial instruments from decentralized over-the-counter markets to centralized platforms. The
argued bene...ts of trading in centralized markets include liquidity and transparency. These
arguments are almost always made on the premise that the set of securities designed by
...nancial intermediaries is immune to the market structure in which trading occurs. Do all
securities trading in decentralized markets migrate to the centralized platform rather than
ceasing to be issued? How can a regulator ensure that they do migrate? We present a
framework to study these questions here.
    We consider a regulator who redesigns the market structure for certain ...nancial contracts
to increase liquidity. In particular, the regulator introduces an exchange in which ...nancial
securities that have traditionally traded in fragmented (local) markets can also trade. Fi-
nancial intermediaries design asset-backed securities taking into account investor demand in
the markets in which the securities will be traded. Babus and Hachem (2020) show that in-
termediaries will create increasingly riskier securities when facing deeper, more concentrated
markets. We now consider two dimensions of market power: the depth of the local market
and the market power of the intermediary relative to the investors in that market. Both
dimensions are important for security design, but the latter is the critical one studied here
relative to our earlier work. The regulator understands that simply shifting trade from a
decentralized market to a centralized one will result in ...nancial intermediaries having more
market power relative to investors, and this will lead to the design of riskier securities.
    In our baseline model, the market structure is given and consists of a set of local markets
in addition to an exchange in which securities can be traded. In each local market, investors
trade strategically whereas the exchange is perfectly competitive and thus highly liquid.
Each intermediary designs an asset-backed security for his local market. This security can
also be traded on the exchange. The payo¤ of the security is backed by an underlying asset,
with the intermediary choosing how much of the underlying asset to acquire (or originate)

                                               2
at a cost.
   We characterize the e¤ect of introducing the exchange on security design and the welfare
of investors. For a given market structure, investors would like to trade a less risky security
and, for a given security, they would like to trade in a larger market. The introduction of the
exchange therefore makes investors better o¤ holding constant the payo¤s of the security.
However, we show that the security that intermediaries design after the introduction of the
exchange is of lower quality, in the sense of a lower expected payo¤ per unit of standard
deviation. This reects the relative dilution of investor market power, which is a powerful
tool in disciplining the incentives of intermediaries in security design (Babus and Hachem
(2020)). The decline in the quality of the security issued to investors then makes them
worse o¤, all else constant. For a su¢ ciently small exchange, that is, an exchange where the
intermediary does not have very high market power, the decline in the quality of the security
is not large enough to o¤set the bene...ts to investors of trading in a larger, more liquid
market. The investor is then unambiguously better o¤. However, for a larger exchange, the
decline in the quality of the security is severe enough that the investor can be worse o¤ as a
result of the introduction of the exchange.
   The next part of the paper considers how the introduction of the exchange a¤ects an
intermediary'
            s incentive to originate higher quality assets. We ...nd that introducing an
exchange leads the intermediary to originate better underlying assets, as indicated by a higher
expected payo¤ per unit of standard deviation, in order to relax the feasibility constraint
on the payo¤s in his security design problem. However, the quality of the asset-backed
securities sold by intermediaries to investors still declines as a result of the introduction of
the exchange, reecting once again the relative loss of market power by investors in the
local market. The local market power of investors is thus a powerful disciplining device on
intermediary security design, so much so that even with better quality underlying assets, the
asset-backed security can still be worse.
   These results motivate the need to coordinate regulations aimed at enhancing market


                                               3
liquidity with those that control security design. A policy tool that the regulator could use
to counter the negative e¤ects of the exchange on security design is a subsidy that lowers
the cost to intermediaries of originating more and/or better underlying assets. For the same
quality underlying asset, higher origination means that the intermediary has more returns,
in any given state, from which to design the payo¤ of the asset-backed security. This allows
him to create a security with higher average payo¤, without increasing the variability of those
payo¤s across states. The same is true if the intermediary is incentivized to originate better
quality underlying assets, holding constant their quantity. Alternatively, the regulator could
impose explicit oors on origination (or asset purchases) and supervise to ensure compliance.
This would be more budget neutral than origination subsidies provided supervision costs are
not too high.
   Our paper is motivated by post-crisis regulation of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives.
Lack of transparency in OTC markets is widely cited as an ampli...er of the 2007-09 ...nancial
crisis, resulting in a regulatory push to have all "standardized" OTC derivatives cleared
through central counterparties (Geithner (2009)). An important attribute of a standard-
ized contract is high transaction volume. Illiquid contracts, i.e., those with low transaction
volume, are not amenable to central clearing (Spatt (2017)). Thus, G-20 leaders agreed
in September 2009 that all standardized OTC derivatives should be traded on exchanges
or electronic trading platforms, in addition to being centrally cleared. Exchanges improve
market access, enhancing the liquidity of contracts and facilitating migration into central
clearing.
   While derivatives, and in particular swaps, have been the prime target of these e¤orts
because of their role in the crisis, the objective of market access transcends any one ...nancial
product. It is then important to understand more broadly the implications of trade cen-
tralization. In the case of swaps, the distinction between primary and secondary markets is
blurred, hence the debates about centralization have not focused on one market as opposed
to the other. For products where this distinction is sharper, liquidity in the secondary market


                                               4
is generally believed to positively a¤ect liquidity in the primary market, making it natural
to consider what happens if both markets are e¤ectively centralized.
    Our results suggest that caution is warranted when trying to improve market access:
exchange trading also alters security design, to the detriment of investors. In practice,
the move to a more centralized market structure has faced pushback from some market
participants. As discussed in Spatt (2017), end-users hedge risk in a variety of ways, including
the use of customized derivative contracts. Highly customized contracts will never achieve the
transaction volume necessary for centralized clearing, and end-users have complained about
the imposition of seemingly punitive rules on non-centrally-cleared contracts as regulators
try to disincentivize them. Our results support some of the concerns voiced by end-users.
Holding constant the products being traded, investors are better o¤ in more liquid markets.
This serves as a motivation for centralization in our model. However, once security design
is endogenized, the optimal amount of centralization is lower because investors need market
power to elicit their preferred securities.1


Related Literature There is a large literature on ...nancial innovation, with many studies
concentrating on whether market competition a¤ects the introduction of new securities (e.g.,
Allen and Gale (1991), Axelson (2007), Carvajal, Rostek, and Weretka (2012)). In recent
work, Rostek and Yoon (2020a,b) show that under imperfect competition even derivatives
need not be a redundant ...nancial innovation. We contribute to this literature by exploring
how the introduction of a centralized market a¤ects the incentives of ...nancial intermediaries
that design securities for fragmented markets. In Babus and Hachem (2020), we considered
the joint determination of market structure and security design and showed that investors
choose to trade in thinner, more fragmented markets to obtain safer securities. Here, we take
market structure as given and focus on how adding access to an exchange a¤ects security
   1
     The securities in our model are designed before individual preference shocks are realized so they are
not customized to these realizations. However, the more market power investors have, the more they can
customize the security to align with their expected preferences. In this regard, centralization leads to a loss
of customization, which negatively impacts the welfare of end-users.



                                                      5
design and investor welfare.
   The role of market structure for welfare has received renewed attention, spurred by the
regulations introduced in the aftermath of the 2007-09 ...nancial crisis. Traders in fragmented,
decentralized markets exercise market power, often resulting in ine¢ ciencies that do not exist
in centralized markets. For instance, market power leads to distortions in risk-sharing and
investment decisions (Neuhann and Sockin (2020)). Moreover, even when externalities arise
under perfect competition, such as in models of ...re sales, market power can exacerbate the
associated ine¢ ciency (Eisenbach and Phelan (2020)). At the same time, several studies have
shown that centralized trading does not unambiguously increase welfare. In Dugast, Üslü,
and Weill (2019), increasing the participation of banks that can take large positions to a
centralized market can improve welfare, but conditions have to be met. In Chen and Du¢ e
(2020), fragmentation allows market participants to split their trades, generating welfare
gains, while in Malamud and Rostek (2017), a decentralized market can increase welfare
by reallocating systematic risk toward less risk-averse agents. Competition between various
platforms (Lee and Wang (2018)) or between multiple exchanges (Cespa and Vives (2018))
can also increase welfare.
   We also show that centralized trading need not increase investor welfare. However, the
mechanism in our analysis is through the security that is issued. Access to a centralized
market increases the relative market power of ...nancial intermediaries, enabling them to
issue riskier securities than they otherwise would. This mechanism is in sharp contrast to
previous work where the security traded is taken as given.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 extends the set-up in Babus and
Hachem (2020) to include an exchange, with the equilibrium de...ned and characterized in
Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 then present the policy implications, namely the e¤ect of in-
troducing an exchange to improve market access on the overall welfare of investors and the
need for coordinated policies to mitigate welfare losses stemming from endogenous changes
in security design. The quality of underlying assets is held ...xed in the analysis of Section


                                               6
4, with changes in origination quality explored in Section 5. Section 6 concludes. All proofs
are collected in Online Appendix A.



2     The Model Set-Up

We consider an economy with three dates, t = 0; 1; 2, populated by ...nancial intermediaries
and investors. There is a mass M of ...nancial intermediaries indexed by m 2 M, where
M = [0; M ] is the set of intermediaries. Each intermediary m has access to a risky asset Zm .
Each unit of Zm yields a payo¤ zm (s)          0 if the idiosyncratic state s 2 [0; S ] is realized at
                       0
date t = 2. We assume zm ( ) > 0. The cumulative distribution function for states is Fm (s),
with Fm ( ) continuous and di¤erentiable. The probability density function is fm (s). The
realization of the assets Zm is assumed to be independent across intermediaries.
    A local market m is associated with each intermediary m. In each market m, the in-
termediary can issue a security Wm that pays wm (s) if state s is realized at t = 2. We
...x the quantity Am of the security issued by intermediary m and allow him to choose how
                                                                                Km2
many units Km of the asset Zm to acquire subject to a cost u (Km ) =            2
                                                                                    ,   where   > 0. In
this sense, Wm is an asset-backed security with an underlying asset Zm that can be a loan
originated by the intermediary or purchased from another originator. As in the literature on
the spanning role of securities (Du¢ e and Rahi (1995)), the security payo¤ is subject to the
feasibility constraint
                               A m w m ( s)    Km zm (s) ; 8s 2 [0; S ] :                           (1)

    There is a ...nite number of investors nm > 2 in each market m. The set of investors
in market m is Nm . Overall, there is a mass N of investors in the economy. Investors are
indexed by i 2 N , where N = [0; N ] is the set of investors. As in Babus and Hachem (2020),
                                                 i
investor i is subject to a preference shock          that shifts her marginal utility of consumption.
             i
The shock        is independently distributed across investors according to a distribution G ( )
                                                                                i
with mean        and standard deviation       . The realization of the shock        is also independent


                                                     7
of the realization of the state s.
       Investors do not have access to the assets Zm . However, an investor in market m can
obtain an exposure to Zm by trading the security Wm that intermediary m designs. Inter-
mediaries design securities before preference shocks are realized, so whether or not a security
in our model is standardized is squarely a question about whether or not it is su¢ ciently
liquid.
       We add to this environment a centralized market (or exchange) e where all securities Wm
are traded. The introduction of an exchange will allow us to study the e¤ect of regulations
that push towards trade centralization in Sections 4 and 5. Let E i denote the set of securities
traded by investor i in the centralized market, with ei = jE i j denoting the number of these
                         = E i for any i 2 Nm . That is, investor i in market m only trades
securities. We assume Wm 2
the security Wm in her local market, using the centralized market to acquire exposure to
other underlying assets Z`6=m .2
       Each security Wm that is traded in the centralized market also attracts a competitive
fringe with mass            m.   Agents in the competitive fringe will be referred to as traders to
distinguish them from the investors that participate in local markets. For simplicity, each
fringe trader k only trades one security on the exchange. The competitive fringe across all
                     Z
securities has mass     m dm = H . The overall mass that trades the security Wm in the

centralized market is            m,   including (a ...nite set of) investors.
       To summarize, the timing of events is as follows. At date t = 0, the intermediary in
market m designs the security Wm . The intermediary is assumed to supply a quantity am
of the security Wm in his local market m and a quantity ae
                                                         m in the centralized market e,

where am + ae
            m              Am . At date t = 1, each investor i and trader k learns their preference
           i         k
shock,         and       , respectively. After this, all markets open and trade occurs. At date t = 2,
   2
    Suppose instead Wm 2 E i . Then, since the centralized market is perfectly competitive, investors can
arbitrage away any price di¤erences between the local market and the exchange, driving the price in the local
market to the competitive price in the centralized market. We thus consider Wm 2 = E i to allow for strategic
trading in local markets and develop a richer understanding of how the exchange a¤ects security design and
investor welfare.



                                                           8
the states s are realized. Investors and the competitive fringe receive payo¤s according their
...nal holdings of the security. Each intermediary m pays Am wm (s) and receives Km zm (s).
Consumption takes place.
   We model investors' trading strategies as quantity-price schedules, as in Kyle (1989)
and Vives (2011). In particular, the strategy of an investor i in market m with preference
        i
shock           is a map from her information set to the space of demand functions, as follows.
When trading in the local market, the demand function of investor i is a continuous function
            i
Qi
 m : R
       e +1
            ! R which maps the price pm at which the security Wm trades in her local
market m, as well as the vector of prices pE i = pe
                                                  `j                                          at which securities W`j 2 E i
                                                                                j =1;:::;ei
                                                    i
trade in the centralized market e, into a quantity qm she wishes to trade


                                                                        i
                                                     Qi
                                                      m pm ; pE i ;
                                                                               i
                                                                            = qm :


To avoid confusion, we use pm to denote the price of the security Wm in the local market m
and pe
     m to denote the price of the same security in the centralized market e.

   Similarly, when trading security W`j 2 E i in the centralized market, the demand function
                                        i                               i
of investor i is a continuous function X`j
                                           : Re +1 ! R which maps the vector of prices
pE i = pe
        `j                      at which securities W`j 2 E i trade in the centralized market e, as well as
                  j =1;:::;ei
the price pm at which the security Wm trades in her local market m, into a quantity xi
                                                                                     `j she

wishes to trade
                                                      i                 i
                                                     X` j
                                                          pm ; pE i ;       = xi
                                                                               `j :


                             i
   An investor i who trades qm units of security Wm in market m and xi
                                                                     `j units of security

                                                        i
W`j in the centralized market e at date t = 1 consumes Cm at date t = 2, with


                                                    i
                                                   Cm    i
                                                      = qm W m + [ WE i ] T x E i ;                                           (2)


where WE i = W`j                j =1;:::;ei
                                              is the vector of securities W`j 2 E i and xE i = xi
                                                                                                `j                          is the
                                                                                                              j =1;:::;ei




                                                                  9
vector of quantities of securities traded in the centralized market.
   We model investors as having mean-variance preferences. Therefore, the expected payo¤
                                                   i
of an investor i with preference shock                 who trades security Wm in her local market m and
a set of securities E i in the centralized market e is
                                                                     2     3T 2     3
                                                                                 i
                           i     i       i                 i         6 pm 7 6 qm 7
                          Vm =       E1 Cm             V1 Cm         4      5 4      5;                    (3)
                                                   2                   pE i     xE i


where V ( ) is the variance operator. We use E1 ( ) and V1 ( ) to indicate that expectations
are being taken after the realization of preference shocks but before the realization of states.
   Traders in the competitive fringe have the same preferences as investors. That is, the
                                                                                             k
demand for security W` by a fringe trader k 2                    `   with preference shock       is given by a
          k           k
function X` pe
             `;           and the trader'
                                        s expected payo¤ takes the form of Eq. (3) with the
di¤erence that he trades only the security W` in the centralized market.
   The price pm in Eq. (3) is the price at which local market m clears, given that interme-
diary m supplies am units of the security Wm . That is, pm is such that

                                        X
                                                                 i
                                              Qi
                                               m pm ; pE i ;          = am :                               (4)
                                       i2Nm


When a security W` is traded in the centralized market by investors and the competitive
fringe   `,   the price pe                                                               e
                         ` at which all trades clear given that intermediary ` supplies a` units of

W` in market e is

                                         Z
                                                   k        k
                                                  X` pe
                                                      `;        dk = ae
                                                                      `:                                   (5)
                                        k2    `


Note that there are ...nite investors that trade W` in the centralized market, so it is the
competitive fringe that ultimately determines the market clearing price pe
                                                                         `.

   Substituting Eq. (2) into Eq. (3), we obtain the objective function at date t = 1 for an



                                                          10
investor i with trading strategy represented by the demand functions fQi
                                                                       m ; X E i g:

               8       02              31     2        39T 2      3       2          3T       2           3
               >
               <                                        >
                                                        =     i
         i         i B6 Wm 7C                 6 pm     7   6 Qm 7         6   Qi
                                                                               m     7    i   6    Qi
                                                                                                    m     7
        Vm =     E 1 @4      5A               4        5   4      5       4          5        4           5;   (6)
               >
               :        WE i                    pE i    >
                                                        ;    XE i     2       XE i                 XE i


              i                                                                               i
where XE i = X`j
                                     is the vector of demands for securities W`j and              is the variance-
                       j =1;:::;ei
covariance matrix of all securities that are traded by investor i. For any security m,
            RS                                 RS
E1 (Wm )     0
               wm (s) dFm (s) and V1 (Wm )      0
                                                  [wm (s) E1 (Wm )]2 dFm (s). Since the
assets Zm are independent across ...nancial intermediaries, the payo¤ realizations of two se-
                                                                                          i
curities Wm and W` are also independent. This implies that the matrix                         is diagonal.
    An intermediary m that designs security Wm receives the price pm per unit of the security
issued in the local market m and the price pe
                                            m per unit of the security issued in the centralized

market e. This is consistent with the interpretation that each intermediary m places the
security Wm with investors in the local market m as well as with investors and fringe traders
in the centralized market e by running a share auction as described by Wilson (1979). Thus,
even though the intermediary is not directly involved in the trade between investors at date
t = 1, an intermediary m'
                        s expected payo¤ at date t = 1 is


                V m = p m am + p e  e
                                 m am + E 1 [ K m Z m         (am + ae
                                                                     m ) Wm ]        u (Km ) ;


for any amount am issued in the local market and ae
                                                  m issued in the centralized market, where

    2 [0; 1] is a discount factor that captures the impatience of intermediaries relative to
investors.



3      Equilibrium

In this section, we de...ne and characterize the equilibrium. We start by solving for the
trading equilibrium in each local market m and in the centralized market e at date t = 1,


                                                        11
given the securities Wm that intermediaries design at date t = 0. We then characterize the
security that each intermediary designs in equilibrium at date t = 0.

De...nition 1 A subgame perfect equilibrium is a set of securities fWm gm2M , an amount
Km of the asset Zm that each ...nancial intermediary m acquires, a set of demand functions
fQi
  m ; XE i gi2N for each investor i that trades security Wm in the local market m and the set

of securities E i in the centralized market e, and a demand function X`
                                                                      k
                                                                        for each trader k in
the competitive fringe    `   that trades security W` in the centralized market e, such that:

  1. fQi
       m ; XE i g solve each investor i's problem at date t = 1

                88        02              31       2         39T 2      3            2               3T       2        39
                >
                <><                                           >
                                                              =     i              i                             i      >
                                                                                                                        =
                      i B6 Wm 7C                   6 pm      7   6 Qm 7         6 Qm 7                    i   6 Qm     7
        max          E1 @4      5A                 4         5   4      5       4    5                        4        5 ;
        m ;XE i g ::
      fQi         >>       WE i                      pE i     >
                                                              ;    XE i        2 X i                            XE i    >
                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                   E

                                                                                                                        (7)

      k
  2. X` solves each trader k 's problem at date t = 1

                                    n                                                    2
                                                                                             o
                                         k
                              max            E1 (W` )   pe  k
                                                         ` X`
                                                                                  k
                                                                        V1 (W` ) X`              ;
                               k
                              X`                                    2


  3. Wm and Km solve each intermediary m's problem at date t = 0


                 max fpm am + pe  e
                               m am + E1 [Km Zm                     (am + ae
                                                                           m ) Wm ]              u (Km )g ;             (8)
                Wm ;Km



      subject to the feasibility constraint


                                        Am wm (s)       Km zm (s) ; 8s 2 [0; S ] :



3.1    The Trading Equilibrium
                                                                                 i
At date t = 1, after each investor i learns her preference shock                     , markets open and trade
takes place. Each investor chooses her trading strategy in order to maximize her expected

                                                        12
payo¤, understanding that she may have an impact on security price, depending on which
security she is trading. The optimization problem (7), which is de...ned over a function space,
                                                                   i                                                      i
is simpli...ed to ...nding the functions Qi
                                          m pm ; pE i ;
                                                                                                i
                                                                           for security Wm and X`j
                                                                                                   pm ; pE i ;
for each security W`j 2 E i pointwise.
    The ...rst order condition from investor i'
                                              s optimization problem is
                     8       02        31      2        39                         2             3      2   3
                     >
                     <                                    >
                                                          =                           i
                         iB6 Wm 7C             6 pm     7          i           i   6 qm 7 6 0 7
                       E1 @4      5A           4        5              +           4      5 = 4 5;                       (9)
                     >
                     :       WE i                pE i     >
                                                          ;                          xE i      0

              i
where             represents the price impact matrix of investor i for the securities she trades. Speci...-
          i
cally,        is an (ei + 1) (ei + 1) matrix of the inverse residual demand of investor i, as implied
by the the market clearing conditions (4) and (5) given the schedules submitted by other
investors and traders in the competitive fringe. Entry (`0 ; `) in the matrix represents the
price change of security ` that results from a marginal increase in the demanded quantity of
security `0 .
    The following proposition characterizes the trading equilibrium.


Proposition 1 Given a set of securities fW` g`2M , there exists a unique symmetric linear
equilibrium that characterizes trading strategies for each security, as follows.


   1. (Centralized market) The equilibrium demand function of an investor i for security
         W` 2 E i is
                                       i        i         1            i
                                      X` pe
                                          `;        =                      E1 (W` )            pe
                                                                                                ` ;                    (10)
                                                        V1 (W` )

         which is also the demand of a trader in the competitive fringe                           `.   The equilibrium price
         at which security W` trades in the centralized market is

                                                                                   ae
                                                                                    `
                                            pe
                                             ` =    E1 (W` )           V1 (W` )            :                           (11)
                                                                                       `




                                                         13
  2. (Local market) The equilibrium demand function of an investor i for security Wm is


                                         i                      1            i
                        Qi
                         m pm ;              =                                   E1 (Wm )    pm ;           (12)
                                                 (1 +         m ) V1 (Wm )


                 1
      where     m    (nm       2) is an index of the depth of the local market m. The equilibrium
      price in market m is
                                                         !
                                       1 X           i                                           am
                       pm =                                  E1 (Wm )   V1 (Wm ) (1 +       m)      :       (13)
                                      nm i2N                                                     nm
                                             m




   Proposition 1 shows that in equilibrium the demand function of an investor for a security
depends only on the price of that security either in the local market or in the centralized
market. In other words, the investor'
                                    s equilibrium demand for one security is not contingent
on the prices of the other securities. When trading in the centralized market, the investor
faces a competitive fringe, hence her price impact is 0 for any security W` 2 E i . For the same
reason, the price of a security W` in the centralized market is not a¤ected as an investor
i 2 Nm changes her trade in either her local market security Wm or in another security W`0
traded in the centralized market. When trading in the local market, an investor i 2 Nm
                              i
has a price impact, @pm; i =@qm =                m       V1 (Wm ), that decreases with the depth of the local
           1
market,   m .   Trading other securities in the centralized market does not a¤ect the price pm
of the security Wm , despite the fact that the investor has a price impact in the local market,
because the securities have independent payo¤s.
   We also see from Proposition 1 that investor i 2 Nm buys (sells) security Wm in the local
                           i
market if her valuation        E1 (Wm ) of the security'
                                                       s expected payo¤ is above (below) the price
pm at which she can trade. Similarly, she buys (sells) security W` 2 E i in the centralized
                               i
market if her valuation            E1 (W` ) is above (below) the price pe
                                                                        ` . In the centralized market,

the price of a security W` is simply the expected value of the security, adjusted by the mean
valuation of the competitive fringe trading the security, minus a risk premium. The risk
premium exists because traders are risk averse and, in expectation, have to hold ae
                                                                                  `=                    `   units

                                                               14
of a risky security. Similarly, in the local market, the price of the security Wm is the expected
value of the security, adjusted by the mean valuation of the investors trading the security,
minus a risk premium. However, the risk premium in the local market depends not only
on the amount of the security issued per capita, am =nm , but also on the depth of the local
            1
market,    m .

   Given a realization of preference shocks, the price at which the security Wm trades either
in the local market or the centralized market in Proposition 1 decreases with the variance of
the security. However, the price in the local market decreases less with the variance of the
security as the market becomes deeper. Moreover, the variance of the security is endogenous
since the security is a choice of the intermediary, as we describe next.


3.2    The Equilibrium Security

At the end of date t = 0, each intermediary m designs a security Wm taking into account
both investors' demand in the local market and the demands in the centralized market.
In particular, an intermediary m chooses the payo¤ wm (s) of the security for each state
s to maximize his expected pro...t in (8), subject to the feasibility constraint (1). At the
same time, the intermediary also chooses the amount Km of the underlying asset Zm to
                                  Km2
acquire at the cost u (Km ) =     2
                                      .   The amount Km determines how many units of the
underlying asset are used to back the issuance of Am units of the security Wm . Essentially,
the intermediary uses the amount Km as another margin when deciding how much of the
payo¤ of the underlying asset Zm he transfers to the investors and how much he keeps for
himself.
   In solving for the equilibrium security, many of the forces identi...ed in Babus and Hachem
(2020) are at work. Substituting into (8) the expected price E0 (pm ) at which investors trade
the security Wm in the local market m (see Eq. (13)) and the price pe
                                                                    m at which the same

security is traded in the centralized market (see Eq. (11)), we obtain that intermediary m




                                               15
designs the security Wm to maximize the following objective function:

                                                       am     ae
Vm = (         ) E1 (Wm ) Am    V1 (Wm ) (1 +   m)        am + m ae
                                                                  m + Km E1 (Zm ) u (Km ) ;
                                                       nm      m
                                                                                      (14)
where Am = am + ae
                 m.

   The intermediary faces a trade-o¤ between the mean and the variance of the security he
designs. The intermediary bene...ts from o¤ering a security that pays well in expectation, as
the expected price at which trade occurs in either market (local or centralized) is increasing
in E1 (Wm ). However, the feasibility constraint (1) implies that the intermediary cannot
increase the mean of the security without increasing its variance V1 (Wm ). A security Wm
has a higher variance when it has more variable payo¤s. Alternatively, the variance of the
security increases when a greater amount Km of the asset Zm backs the security, as the
feasibility constraint (1) becomes laxer holding ...xed the amount Am of the security issued.
However, a security with a higher variance decreases the expected payo¤ of the intermediary
in a way that depends both on the market power of the investors in the local market as well
as on the market power of the intermediary, as de...ned next.
   In the local market, investors' market power is captured through their price impact.
                                               i
We recall that a higher price impact @pm; i =@qm is associated with a higher value of             m

for a given security Wm . All else constant, the intermediary'
                                                             s expected payo¤ in Eq. (14)
decreases more with the variance of Wm when        m   is high, therefore the security design of the
intermediary will be more responsive to investors'demand in a thinner local market. Hence,
we interpret   m   as a measure of investor market power in the local market.
   We also see from Eq. (14) the e¤ect of the exchange on the security design problem.
Holding ...xed the total supply Am of the security designed by intermediary m, an increase in
the quantity ae
              m supplied to the exchange dilutes (or down-weights) the negative e¤ect of the

variance on the intermediary'
                            s expected payo¤. This is because the intermediary is shifting
the sale of his security away from the local market, where investors have market power via



                                              16
their price impact, towards the centralized market where there is no price impact. As trade
shifts to the centralized market, investors cede market power to the intermediary. Therefore,
we de...ne
                                                             ae
                                                              m e
                                                                am
                                                              m
                                                   m         am
                                                                a
                                                             nm m

to capture the market power of the intermediary relative to investors in the local market,
for given market sizes nm and          m.     Intuitively, an increase in                  m   implies an increase in ae
                                                                                                                       m

relative to am    Am        ae
                             m and thus higher expected pro...t for the intermediary on any given

security Wm .
   The following proposition characterizes the optimal security in this environment.


Proposition 2 Suppose            >        so that intermediaries ...nd it pro...table to design securities
for investors. An intermediary m designs a security Wm with payo¤s
                                               8
                                               >
                                               <   Km
                                                      z
                                                   Am m
                                                             (s)     if s < sm
                                w m ( s) =                                                                          (15)
                                               >
                                               :   Km
                                                      z      (sm ) if s           sm
                                                   Am m



where the threshold state sm 2 [0; S ] is de...ned by

                     8                                                      p
                                                               (p
                                                                                       2
                     >                                               m m+       nm )
                     < zm1      Am
                                   E
                                Km 1
                                       (Wm ) +      1
                                                   Km    2          1+
                                                                                           ; 8nm < nm
                                                                         m+ m
             sm =                                                                                                   (16)
                     >
                     : S;                                                                      8nm     nm


with nm ...nite if and only if the equation

                 p              p     2
                     m m    +    nm
                     nm 1                 =            E1 (Zm ) [zm (S )           E1 (Zm )]         V1 (Zm )       (17)
             2       nm 2
                            +   m



has a solution nm      3.


   To rule out corner solutions in security design, we assume for the remainder of the paper
that Eq. (17) has a solution nm             3, and we focus on nm 2 [3; nm ].


                                                        17
   Proposition 2 shows that intermediary m ...nds it optimal to design an asset-backed
security that pays the lesser of a at payo¤ zm (sm ) and the full value of the underlying
asset zm (s), scaled by the ratio Km =Am of the quantity of the underlying asset originated
to the quantity of the asset-backed security issued, in every state s. Debt securities have the
least variance among all limited-liability securities with the same expected value, so, for the
preferences we consider, the optimal security is naturally a debt contract. The key insight
from Proposition 2 is that the face value of the debt depends in equilibrium on both the
local market power of investors             m   and the market power of the intermediary relative to the
investors     m.   The following corollary characterizes the relationship between each of these
objects and the debt contract that the intermediary designs.


Corollary 1 The security Wm that the intermediary designs in market m has the following
properties:

                                                                                                       @E1 (Wm )
  1. The threshold state sm de...ned by (16) is decreasing in                          m.   Further,     @ m
                                                                                                                   < 0 and
      @ V1 (Wm )                     @    E1 (Wm )
         @ m
                   < 0, while    @
                                          p              > 0.
                                     m      V1 (Wm )


  2. The threshold state sm de...ned by (16) is increasing in                          m   for any   m
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                           nm
                                                                                                                . Further,
      @E1 (Wm )              @ V1 (Wm )                       @        E1 (Wm )
        @ m
                   > 0 and      @ m
                                          > 0, while      @
                                                                       p            < 0.
                                                              m          V1 (Wm )


   The ...rst part of Corollary 1 shows that the intermediary designs a less variable security
when investors' local market power                   m   increases, as in the model of Babus and Hachem
(2020) with only local markets. Speci...cally, the intermediary decreases the lowest state sm
in which the security Wm pays the at payo¤. This decreases the variance of the security
by more than it decreases the mean, raising the expected payo¤ of the security per unit of
standard deviation. In contrast, the second part of Corollary 1 shows the e¤ect of an increase
in the market power          m   that the addition of an exchange a¤ords the intermediary. As the
intermediary gains more market power, the lowest state sm in which the security Wm pays
the at payo¤ increases, up to a certain point. This results in an equilibrium security with


                                                                  18
higher mean but also higher variance. Overall, the security has a lower expected payo¤ per
unit of standard deviation.
    Of course, the amount Km of the asset Zm that backs the optimal security Wm in Propo-
sition 2 is endogenous. The next proposition summarizes the equilibrium origination decision
Km , which is taken into account when deriving the properties of Wm in Corollary 1.


Proposition 3 The equilibrium amount Km of asset Zm that is acquired by intermediary m
satis...es                          R sm
                                     0
                                          zm (s) [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dFm (s)
                  Km     (      )        R sm                              = E1 (Zm ) ;
                                          0
                                              [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dFm (s)

where        is the cost function parameter.


    Allowing the intermediary to choose the quantity Km of the asset Zm that he acquires
a¤ects the design of the security Wm . In particular, increasing Km relaxes the feasibility
constraint (1), which is to say the intermediary has more returns, in any given state, from
which to design the payo¤ of the asset-backed security. This allows him to create a security
with higher average payo¤, without increasing the variability of those payo¤s across states.



4       Centralized Trading as Regulation

One of the central pieces of regulation introduced after the 2007-09 ...nancial crisis concerns
the creation of exchange facilities to trade contracts that have traditionally been traded in
over-the-counter markets. Swaps have been the prime target of this regulation because of
the outsized role they played in amplifying the crisis, but at the highest level, the goal of the
regulation is simply to ensure impartial access to markets and hence reduce other frictions
such as low liquidity arising from fragmentation (e.g., Giancarlo (2015)). Through the lens
of our model, we can explore how introducing an exchange to improve market access a¤ects
the security design of intermediaries and the overall welfare of investors.




                                                     19
4.1             E¤ect on Security Design

Our results on security design in Section 3.2 were derived allowing each intermediary m to
issue his security Wm in both a local market m and a centralized market e. To evaluate the
e¤ect of a regulation that mandates the introduction of an exchange, we need to start from
the equilibrium security that prevails in the absence of a centralized market.
            The model without an exchange corresponds to                  m   = 0 and is studied in Babus and
                    0
Hachem (2020). Let Wm denote the security that intermediary m designs in this case for
                               0
his local market. The optimal Wm is a debt security and the lowest state s0
                                                                          m in which the

investor receives the at payo¤ is mathematically equivalent to Eq. (16) with                           m   = 0.3
            The introduction of an exchange then corresponds to a movement from                  m   = 0 to   m    > 0,
for an arbitrary            m   > 0. To simplify the exposition, we ...x the amount of the security issued
by each intermediary m when there exists an exchange at one unit per capita in both his
local market and the centralized market, i.e., am = nm and ae
                                                            m =                        m.   Naturally, this implies
that the intermediary issues a quantity Am = nm +                        m    of the security in his local market
when there is no exchange.
            The following proposition contrasts the properties of the equilibrium security with and
without the exchange:

                                                                             0
Proposition 4 Let Wm be the optimal security described in Proposition 2 and Wm be the
equilibrium security designed in the absence of an exchange. Then, s0             0
                                                                    m < sm , E1 (Wm ) <

                0                    E1 (W 0 )  E1 (Wm )
E1 (Wm ), V1 (Wm  ) < V1 (Wm ), and p m0 > p             .
                                                   V1 (Wm )        V1 (Wm )


            In words, Proposition 4 states that the optimal security in the absence of an exchange
(   m        = 0) has a lower mean, but also a lower variance, resulting in a higher expected payo¤
per unit of standard deviation as compared to the optimal security when there is an exchange
                                                                              0
of any size (          m   > 0). The proof of Proposition 4 also establishes Km < Km . That is, the
        3
            We refer the reader to Babus and Hachem (2020) for a formal proof. The intermediary'    s market power
    m       is not well-de...ned in the absence of the exchange, so m cannot simply be set to 0 in Eq. (16).



                                                              20
intermediary acquires a larger quantity of the underlying asset Zm after the introduction of
the exchange, but not large enough to achieve sm = s0
                                                    m.




4.2    Welfare without Investor Participation in the Exchange

To ...x ideas, we ...rst consider an intermediate version of market access where investors trade
in local markets and only the competitive fringe trades in the exchange. This allows us to
isolate two forces that a¤ect aggregate welfare: market participation and security design.
   The expected payo¤ of investor i 2 Nm in this case is
                                                                                           !
              i            1+2       m
                                            2
                                                nm 1    1         (E1 (Wm ))2
          E0 Vm;local    =                                      2             + V1 (Wm )            (18)
                             2                   nm (1 +      m)   V1 (Wm )

for each local market m, where we have used the simpli...cation that intermediary m issues
am = nm units of the security Wm in his local market. The next corollary formalizes the
welfare e¤ect of the changes in security design in Proposition 4 for investors.


Corollary 2 Investors are made worse o¤ by the introduction of an exchange in which they
do not trade.


   The corollary highlights the security design cost of introducing the exchange. Speci...cally,
                                                                            0
moving from     m   = 0 to   m   > 0 changes the equilibrium security from Wm to the riskier Wm ,
                                                                       i
lowering the expected payo¤ of investors trading in local markets, E0 Vm;local .
   Turning next to the competitive fringe, the expected payo¤ of a trader k 2              m   is
                                                                              !
                                 k      1        2
                                                     (E1 (Wm ))2
                             E0 Vm    =                          + V1 (Wm )                         (19)
                                        2             V1 (Wm )

Fringe traders are trivially better o¤ in the presence of the exchange as their welfare increases
              k
from 0 to E0 Vm > 0 regardless of the security traded. This is the market access bene...t of
introducing the exchange.



                                                       21
   The overall welfare of market participants sums across investors and the competitive
fringe. The e¤ect of the exchange on welfare is therefore ambiguous; the welfare gain from
broadening market access to the competitive fringe is at least partly o¤set by the welfare
loss to investors in local markets who now have to trade a riskier equilibrium security.


4.3    Welfare with Investor Participation in the Exchange

Are investors still worse o¤ if they can access the exchange alongside the competitive fringe?
The expected payo¤ of an investor i 2 Nm is now the sum of the component due to trading
in the local market and a component due to trading in the centralized market:

                                                                       2
                                                                                      !
                i       i             1 X              2   E1 W`j
            E0 Vm = E0 Vm;local     +                                      + V1 W`j        ;    (20)
                                      2                    V1 W`j
                                        W`j 2E i
                                      |                       {z                       }
                                                    Centralized market component

where we have used am = nm and ae
                                m =        m   for each intermediary m. The introduction of
the exchange worsens the local component of the investor'
                                                        s value function for the reasons
discussed above. However, the total e¤ect on the investor'
                                                         s welfare, as de...ned by the sum
of payo¤s across markets in Eq. (20), is ambiguous. Since the investor can trade other
securities on the exchange, her overall payo¤ may be higher or lower depending on the mean
and variance of the securities she trades on the exchange.
   Consider the symmetric case in which each security Wm is traded by nm = n investors
in the local market m and by a competitive fringe of mass          m   =    in the centralized market
e. Each intermediary m acquires a quantity Km = K of the underlying asset (Zm = Z
with Fm = F ) and each security Wm in equilibrium delivers a at payo¤ in any state above
sm = s. All intermediaries o¤er a debt security with the same face value, hence the state-
by-state payo¤s of a security traded by investor i in the centralized market are the same as
the state-by-state payo¤s of the security she trades in her local market m, i.e., W`j = Wm
for all W`j 2 E i in Eq. (20). The securities still have independently realized payo¤s, even



                                               22
in the symmetric case where wm (s) = w (s) for all s, as the idiosyncratic states s are drawn
independently from the cumulative distribution F . The centralized market component in
Eq. (20) is thus equivalent to ei       k
                                    E0 Vm .
   We set ei = 1 for illustration. That is, each investor trades only one security in the
centralized market in addition to the security she trades in her local market. Overall welfare
is then
                                     i                              k
                         nM      E0 Vm;local + ( + n) M         E0 Vm

         i               k
with E0 Vm;local and E0 Vm as de...ned in Eqs. (18) and (19). Once again, the competitive
fringe is trivially better o¤ in the presence of the exchange. In contrast, investors are better
                      i             k                                          i
o¤ if and only if E0 Vm;local + E0 Vm evaluated at the security Wm exceeds E0 Vm;local
                           0
evaluated at the security Wm .
   We illustrate this comparison in Figure 1, as a function of the threshold state s0 prior
to the introduction of the exchange and the market power of the intermediaries         after the
exchange is introduced. Note that when the intermediary issues a per capita amount of the
security in both the local and the centralized market, his market power becomes            = =n.
Varying his market power is then a statement about varying relative market size (i.e. what
mass trades in the centralized market for each investor that trades in the local market).
Figure 1 considers small local markets, with n = 3 investors in each, so that investors'local
market power is high. We further consider a uniform distribution of states on the interval
[0; 1]. The formal derivations for Figure 1 are presented in Online Appendix B.
   Figure 1 demonstrates that the introduction of an exchange does not always bene...t
investors, even if it a¤ords them market access. In the light gray region, introducing an
exchange makes the investor unambiguously better o¤. However, in the dark gray region,
                                                       2
investors can be worse o¤ (i.e., there are values of       such that they are worse o¤).
   If intermediary market power is not too large, as is the case in the light gray region,
introducing an exchange makes the investor better o¤ because she is now able to trade a
reasonably similar, albeit somewhat riskier, security in a larger, more liquid market. If the

                                              23
security that investors would trade in the absence of an exchange is not too risky, i.e., if s0 is
low, then the introduction of even a relatively large exchange bene...ts investors despite the
emergence of intermediary market power. However, if the security that investors would trade
in the absence of an exchange is risky, i.e., if s0 is high, then investors can only tolerate the
introduction of a small exchange before they become worse o¤. This is illustrated in Figure
1 by the shrinking height of the light gray region. As the market power of intermediaries
increases, they design riskier securities relative to the security that investors would trade in
the absence of an exchange. The increase in the riskiness of the security can overcome any
bene...ts that the investors obtain from trading in a liquid exchange, and it does so even for
the introduction of a small exchange if the security that investors would otherwise trade is
already risky.
   Empirically, the introduction of an exchange (as represented by all-to-all electronic trad-
ing platforms) for securities that have traditionally traded over-the-counter has been asso-
ciated with low volumes (see O'
                              Hara and Zhou (2020) and Collin-Dufresne et al (2020)).
Although we do not model an investor'
                                    s choice of a trading venue here, it is clear from Eq.
(20) that investors would always want to participate in the exchange, conditional on the ex-
change having been introduced. This is true regardless of the size of the exchange. However,
if investors could choose, they would want to be in the light gray region in Figure 1, where
intermediaries do not have too much relative market power and the exchange makes investors
better o¤ compared to the case of no exchange. In this way, our model is consistent with
the empirical observations: if investors could choose, they would prefer a smaller exchange
(i.e. low volume).


4.4    Coordinated Policy

Even when the exchange makes investors worse o¤, a regulator could restore investors'welfare
by shaping the incentives of intermediaries. The following proposition formalizes this result.




                                               24
Proposition 5 For any parameters such that the introduction of the exchange makes in-
vestors worse o¤ (by altering security design in the local market), there exists a cost function
                Km2
u (Km ) =       2
                      that neutralizes the e¤ect.


     We interpret         as a tax that the regulator could lower, or an expense that he could
subsidize. A change in           a¤ects the equilibrium security through the intermediary'
                                                                                         s choice
of the quantity Km of the underlying asset Zm . Intuitively, decreasing                   increases Km ,
which relaxes the feasibility constraint in security design. As discussed after Proposition 3,
a larger pool of underlying assets Zm gives the intermediary more returns to work with when
designing the asset-backed security Wm . Accordingly, he can increase the expected payo¤
per unit of standard deviation of the security that he designs.
     Lowering         to neutralize the e¤ect of the exchange on security design is clearly not a
budget neutral solution for the regulator. An alternative would be to impose a constraint
         reg
Km      Km   on each intermediary m. In words, the regulator would dictate the minimum
size of the underlying pool of assets Zm for any asset-backed security issuance Wm of size
(nm +    m ).   We show in the proof of Proposition 5 that the regulator would need to set

                                                        2
                 reg             nm (nm 2) (1 +      m)                       1
                Km   =                                      R s0
                            2      nm 1 1 + n  m     2         m
                                                                   [zm (s0
                                              nm     1 m     0           m)   zm (s)] dFm (s)

                 0
to deliver Wm = Wm when an exchange that gives the intermediary market power                       m   is
introduced.
     We conclude that endogenous security design presents a challenge for introducing a cen-
tralized market. Our results motivate a coordinated policy, i.e., the introduction of the
exchange together with actions that mitigate the negative e¤ect on security design, to pro-
                                                                     reg
mote investor welfare. While a simple constraint Km                 Km   on the quantity of underlying
assets originated (or purchased) by the intermediary would be budget neutral for the reg-
ulator, it could lead to attempts to circumvent the constraint should a shadow banking
technology become available. Compliance would then have to be carefully supervised, which


                                                    25
is itself potentially costly. This speaks to implementation challenges of a coordinated policy.
    Note that limiting investor participation by splitting the one centralized market into
multiple perfectly competitive platforms does not alter our conclusion about the e¤ect of
mandating trade centralization on security design. To see this, consider two exchanges
                                                       ae
each of size   m
               2
                   , with the intermediary supplying    m
                                                        2
                                                            units of Wm to each exchange. The
intermediary'
            s problem still aggregates to Eq. (8) and hence the e¤ects on security design
are unchanged.



5      E¤ect of Trade Centralization on Origination Quality

The analysis so far has assumed a ...xed payo¤ pro...le for the underlying asset Zm . In
reality, intermediaries can choose between underlying assets of di¤erent quality. For the
purposes of our analysis, we are interested in how the introduction of an exchange a¤ects
an intermediary'
               s incentive to originate higher quality assets. This is important to consider
because the dilution of investors'local market power when an exchange is introduced was
found above to lead to a deterioration in the quality of the asset-backed securities sold by
intermediaries to investors. If the introduction of an exchange leads to the origination of
better underlying assets, perhaps the securities backed by these assets will also be of better
quality, even without the disciplining e¤ect of investor market power in local markets on
security design.
    To gain insight into this question, we ...x the quantity of the asset Zm originated by
intermediary m at K m . The intermediary instead chooses the payo¤s wm ( ) of the security
he designs based on Zm as well as the underlying payo¤s zm ( ). Speci...cally, we consider
that
                                                 2
                                       zm (s) = rm + rm s

where rm is chosen by the intermediary at a cost u (rm ) with standard properties, i.e.,
                                                             2
                                                            rm
increasing and convex. To ...x ideas, consider u (rm ) =    2
                                                                 with   > 0. The underlying asset


                                              26
originated by the intermediary then has an expected payo¤ per unit of standard deviation

                                           E (Z )    r + E1 (s)
                                           p1 m = m   p
                                            V1 (Zm )    V1 (s)

which is to say the quality of the asset Zm is increasing in rm . The intermediary chooses
wm ( ) and rm to maximize his expected pro...t at t = 0 subject to the feasibility constraint
on security design Am wm ( )             K m zm ( ).
    Consider what happens now when the exchange is introduced. We are interested speci...-
cally in the e¤ect on (i) the asset Zm and the asset-backed security Wm and (ii) the investor'
                                                                                             s
value function as we move from no exchange (                 m   = 0) to a government-mandated exchange
                                                               E1 (Zm )     E1 (Wm )
(   m   > 0). The di¤erence relative to Section 4 is that both p        and p        are now
                                                                             V1 (Zm )    V1 (Wm )
                         E1 (Wm )
endogenous, not just p               .
                          V1 (Wm )


Proposition 6 Consider          >> 2 K m . Introducing the exchange leads to the origination of
                                                E1 (Zm )
better underlying assets, as captured by higher p        , but the creation of worse securities
                                                              V1 (Zm )
                                                         E1 (Wm )
backed by those assets, as captured by lower p                       .
                                                          V1 (Wm )

                                                                           E1 (Zm )
    The intuition for higher rm , which is the driving force behind higher p        after the
                                                                                         V1 (Zm )

introduction of the exchange, is as follows. The marginal bene...t of increasing rm is to
relax the feasibility constraint Am wm (s)              K m zm (s) in the intermediary'
                                                                                      s security design
problem. The marginal cost comes from                  > 0. The introduction of the exchange does not
a¤ect the marginal cost, so, for the exchange to lead to an increase in rm , it must be that
introducing the exchange increases the marginal bene...t. As in Section 4, the exchange leads
to an increase in sm . The intuition for higher sm , which is the main driving force behind
      E1 (Wm )
lower p        after the introduction of the exchange, is similar to before. By increasing sm ,
           V1 (Wm )

the intermediary increases E1 (Wm ), which will fetch him a higher price, and he will not be
as penalized for the associated increase in V1 (Wm ) because investors have less market power
after the introduction of the exchange. The feasibility constraint therefore binds in more
states for the security designed after the introduction of the exchange, hence the marginal

                                                        27
bene...t to increasing rm and relaxing the constraint is indeed higher.
                                                                                       E1 (Zm )
       The key insight from this section is that introducing the exchange can increase p
                                                                                                     V1 (Zm )
                  E1 (Wm )                                   E1 (Wm )
but decrease p                . As before, the decrease in p              , which we interpret as a deteri-
                   V1 (Wm )                                    V1 (Wm )

oration in the quality of asset-backed securities sold by intermediaries to investors, reects
the relative loss of market power by investors in the local market. What we learn here is
(i) the exchange leads to better quality origination and (ii) the market power of investors is
a powerful disciplining device on the intermediary'
                                                  s security design, so much so that even
with better quality underlying assets, the asset-backed security can still be worse.
       Next, consider the e¤ect of introducing the exchange on the investor'
                                                                           s value function.
As before, the local market component of the investor'
                                                     s value function will be negatively
                            E1 (Wm )
a¤ected by the reduction in p        . This is not a statement that the investor is worse o¤,
                                      V1 (Wm )

but rather that she could be worse o¤, in which case the following policy option is available:


Proposition 7 For any parameters such that the introduction of the exchange makes in-
vestors worse o¤ (by altering security design in the local market), the regulator can decrease
  (e.g., via subsidy) to mitigate the e¤ect.


       Intuitively, lower       increases rm , which increases the payo¤ zm ( ) in each state and
therefore relaxes the feasibility constraint. This leads to a better asset-backed security,
all else constant, which helps to o¤set the deterioration in the quality of the asset-backed
security that results from the dilution of investor market power after the introduction of the
exchange. In summary, introducing the exchange increases zm ( ) but dilutes the investor'
                                                                                        s
market power. The e¤ect of the latter on security design is stronger than the e¤ect of the
former, at least in the example constructed here. A decrease in                  serves to further increase
zm ( ) without a¤ecting the investor'
                                    s market power, which helps o¤set the negative e¤ect of
the exchange on Wm .4
   4                                                                  reg
    In principle, an alternative would be to impose a constraint rm rm    on each intermediary m. We omit
the proof for brevity and because the choice of rm may be harder for the regulator to verify than the choice
of Km .



                                                    28
6     Conclusion

The vast majority of regulatory debates about the bene...ts of centralized trading assume that
the set of securities designed by ...nancial intermediaries is immune to the market structure
in which trade occurs. Will all securities trading in decentralized markets migrate to a
centralized platform rather than ceasing to be issued? How can a regulator ensure that they
do migrate? This paper has presented a framework to study these questions.
    In particular, we considered a regulator who redesigns the market structure for certain
...nancial contracts by introducing an exchange to increase liquidity, understanding that se-
curity design is endogenous. For a given market structure, investors would like to trade a
less risky security and, for a given security, they would like to trade in a larger market. We
...nd that intermediaries design lower quality securities for investors, in the sense of a lower
expected payo¤ per unit of standard deviation, after the introduction of the exchange. This
reects the relative dilution of investor market power, as investors have zero price impact on
the exchange and hence less inuence on intermediary security design. In an extension of
the model where intermediaries can choose the quality of the assets that back the securities
issued to investors, we ...nd that introducing the exchange leads to the origination of better
underlying assets but the creation of worse securities backed by those assets.
    With a large enough exchange, the decline in the quality of the securities designed by
intermediaries is so severe that investors can be worse o¤ as a result of the introduction of
the exchange, even though the exchange broadens their access to asset-backed securities and
allows them to trade in a more liquid market. In this case, the regulator can o¤er origination
subsidies to intermediaries to inuence the pool of underlying assets. More origination
of a given quality or the origination of higher quality underlying assets means that the
intermediary has more returns, in any given state, from which to design the payo¤ of the
asset-backed security. This allows him to create a security with higher average payo¤, without
increasing the variability of those payo¤s across states. The regulator could therefore use
origination subsidies to counter the negative e¤ects of introducing the exchange on security

                                              29
design and investor welfare. Alternatively, the regulator could impose explicit oors on
intermediaries'origination decisions (or asset purchases) and supervise to ensure compliance.
Either way, without such additional action, mandating centralized trade will result in a higher
market share for issuers of riskier securities.
   Our exposition of these issues has considered that the underlying assets, and consequently
the securities that intermediaries design, have independent payo¤s. When there is correla-
tion between assets, traders'demands are not generally separable across assets and there are
cross-asset price impact e¤ects (e.g., Malamud and Rostek (2017)). In this case, each inter-
mediary in our model would need to take into account the securities of other intermediaries
when designing his own. This introduces an additional layer of strategic thinking for the
intermediary and could be an interesting direction for future work.




                                                  30
References

Allen, F. and D. Gale. 1991. "Arbitrage, Short Sales, and Financial Innovation." Economet-
  rica, 59(4), 1041-1068.

Axelson, U. 2007. "Security Design with Investor Private Information." Journal of Finance,
  62(6), 2587-2632.

Babus, A. and K. Hachem. 2020. "Markets for Financial Innovation."NBER Working Paper
  25477.

Carvajal, A., M. Rostek, and M. Weretka. 2012. "Competition in Financial Innovation."
  Econometrica, 80(5), 1895-1936.

Cespa, G. and X. Vives. 2018. "Exchange Competition, Entry, and Welfare."Working Paper,
  IESE.

Chen, D. and D. Du¢ e. 2020. "Market Fragmentation."NBER Working Paper 26828.

Collin-Dufresne, P., B. Junge, and A. Trolle. 2020. "Market Structure and Transaction Costs
  of Index CDSs." Journal of Finance, 75(5), 2719-2763.

Du¢ e, D. and R. Rahi. 1995. "Financial Market Innovation and Security Design: An Intro-
  duction." Journal of Economic Theory, 65(1), 1-42.

Dugast, J., S. Üslü, and P. O. Weill. 2019. "A Theory of Participation in OTC and Central-
  ized Markets."Working Paper, UCLA.

Eisenbach, T. and G. Phelan. 2020. "Cournot Fire Sales." AEJ: Macro (forthcoming).

Geithner, T. 2009. "Testimony before the House Financial Services and Agriculture Com-
  mittees Joint Hearing on Regulation of OTC Derivatives,"July 10.

Giancarlo, J. C. 2015. "Pro-Reform Reconsideration of the CFTC Swaps Trading Rules:
  Return to Dodd-Frank."Commodity Futures Trading Commission, White Paper.

                                            31
Kyle, A. 1989. "Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition." Review of Economic
  Studies, 56(3), 317-355.

Lee, T. and C. Wang. 2018. "Why Trade Over-the-Counter? When Investors Want Price
  Discrimination."Working Paper, Wharton.

Malamud, S. and M. Rostek. 2017. "Decentralized Exchange." American Economic Review,
  107(11), 3320-3362.

Neuhann, D. and M. Sockin. 2020. "Risk-Sharing, Investment, and Asset Prices According
  to Cournot and Arrow-Debreu."Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.

O'
 Hara, M. and X. Zhou. 2020. "Anatomy of a Liquidity Crisis: Corporate Bonds in the
  COVID-19 Crisis." Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Rostek, M. and J.H. Yoon. 2020. "Innovation in Decentralized Markets." Working Paper,
  University of Wisconsin.

Rostek, M. and J.H. Yoon. 2020. "Exchange Design and E¢ ciency." Working Paper, Uni-
  versity of Wisconsin.

Spatt, C. 2017. "Designing Reliable Clearing and Settlement Systems for Enhancing the
  Transparency and Stability of Derivatives Markets." Prepared for Wharton e-book on
  Strengthening the Liquidity of the Financial System.

Vives, X. 2011. "Strategic Supply Function Competition with Private Information." Econo-
  metrica, 79(6), 1919-1966.

Wilson, R. 1979. "Auctions of Shares." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(4), 675-689.




                                            32
               Figure 1: E¤ect of Trade Centralization on Investors




Notes: The ...gure is drawn for n = 3 and     = = 1:25. The horizontal axis
varies the security o¤ered by the intermediary in the absence of an exchange
(e.g., higher s0 arises for lower ). The vertical axis varies the size of the
exchange introduced by the regulator relative to the local market size.




                                       33
                       Online Appendix for

"Regulation and Security Design in Concentrated Markets"


                  Ana Babus1 and Kinda Hachem2

           1
               Washington University in St. Louis and CEPR
                        2
                            UVA Darden and NBER



                                 April 2021




                                     1
Appendix A ­Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

Rearrange the ...rst order condition of investor i in Eq. (9) to isolate:

                   2          3                                8                  02         31         2          39
                        i                                      >
                                                               <                                                    >
                                                                                                                    =
                   6   qm     7      i             i       1        B6 Wm 7C
                                                                        i                               6 pm       7
                   4          5=         +                       E1 @4      5A                          4          5                 (A.1)
                       xE i                                    >
                                                               :       WE i                               pE i      >
                                                                                                                    ;


for any i 2 Nm .
   Since assets Zm are independent, any securities backed by Zm are also independent.
                         i                                                                                           i               @pm;   i
Hence, the matrix             is diagonal. We then conjecture and verify that                                            has entry      i
                                                                                                                                      @qm

...rst row, ...rst column, and 0 elsewhere. This implies that

                                                               i
                                           i                       E1 (Wm )            pm
                                          qm =             @pm;         i
                                                                                             ;                                       (A.2)
                                                              i
                                                            @qm
                                                                                + V1 (Wm )

and
                                                               i
                                                                   E1 W`j   p`j
                                             xi
                                              `j       =                        :                                                    (A.3)
                                                                     V1 W`j

   Given that investor i trades security W`j in a perfectly competitive centralized market,
it is straightforward that (A.3) gives the equilibrium demand (10). Substituting Eq. (10)
into the market clearing condition (5) then delivers the equilibrium price pe
                                                                            `j in Eq. (11).

   Since this holds in every market, we use the corresponding expression for (A.2) to sub-
stitute out Qj
             m ( ) in Eq. (4) for all investors j 6= i in market m:


                                             X                     j
                                                                       E1 (Wm )        pm
                                    i
                                   qm +             @pm;                    j
                                                                                                 = am                                (A.4)
                                                       j
                                          j 2m;j 6=i @qm                        + V1 (Wm )

                                                                                                        @pm;   j
We focus on symmetric linear equilibria in which the price impact                                          j
                                                                                                         @qm
                                                                                                                   does not vary across




                                                                            2
investors within the same market. This permits rearranging Eq. (A.4) to isolate:

                            X
                                           j
                                                                 i
                          j 2m;j 6=i                        am q m        @pm; j
                  pm =                         E1 (Wm )                      j   + V1 (Wm )
                           nm          1                     nm 1          @qm

which then implies:
                               @pm; i     1                   @pm; j
                                  i
                                      =                          j   + V1 (Wm )
                                @qm     nm 1                   @qm
                        @pm;   i       @pm;      j
Invoking symmetry (        i
                         @qm
                                   =      j
                                        @qm
                                                     ), we obtain:

                                                 @pm; i
                                                    i
                                                        =      m     V1 (Wm )                                      (A.5)
                                                  @qm

                1
where   m     nm 2
                   .
                                                                                                                       i
   Substituting Eq. (A.5) into Eq. (A.1) delivers the equilibrium demand function Qi
                                                                                   m pm ;

in Eq. (12). Substituting Eq. (12) into the market clearing condition (4) then delivers the
equilibrium price pm in Eq. (13).
                                                                                                           i
   Note that the equilibrium demands (12) and (10) verify our conjecture about                                 .


Proof of Propositions 2 and 3

Intermediary m'
              s expected payo¤ is:


                                                         e
               Vm (Wm ; Km jnm ;               m ; Am ; am ; Zm )


            = E1 (pm ) (Am             ae      e e
                                        m ) + pm am + [Km E1 (Zm )                Am E1 (Wm )]   u (Km )


where we obtain pe
                 m from Eq. (11) and E1 (pm ) from taking expectations of Eq. (13), i.e.,



                                                                                 ae
                                                                                  m
                                       pe
                                        m =           E1 (Wm )        V1 (Wm )                                     (A.6)
                                                                                 m


                                                                                      A m aem
                       E1 (pm ) =              E1 (Wm )       V1 (Wm ) (1 +      m)                                (A.7)
                                                                                         nm

                                                              3
Therefore,


                                                e
          Vm (Wm ; Km jnm ;           m ; Am ; am ; Zm )
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                   2               2
                                                                                     (Am        ae
                                                                                                 m)            (ae
                                                                                                                 m)
  = (                 ) E1 (Wm ) Am               V1 (Wm ) (1 +              m)                        +                   + Km E1 (Zm )           u ( Km )
                                                                                           nm                    m



The intermediary chooses wm ( ) and Km to maximize Vm ( ) subject to the feasibility con-
straint (1). Letting             m    ( s)    0 denote the Lagrange multiplier on the feasibility constraint
in state s, the Lagrangian for intermediary m'
                                             s problem is

                                Z    S
Lk = (                   ) Am            wm (s) dF (s)
                                 0
                                                                     ! "Z                                              Z                       2
                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                 2               2               S                                         S
                                     (Am      ae
                                               m)          ( ae
                                                              m)
                      (1 +     m)                     +                              (wm (s))2 dF (s)                          wm (s) dF (s)
                                             nm                m             0                                         0
                                                      Z    S
            + Km E1 (Zm )                 u (Km ) +            m   (s) [Km zm (s)                Am wm (s)] dF (s)
                                                       0



     The ...rst order condition with respect to wm (s) is

                                                                                                       !
                                                                                    2           2
                                             2                     (Am           ae
                                                                                  m)        (ae
                                                                                              m)
                m   ( s) =                         (1 +     m)                          +                  [wm (s)         E1 (Wm )]
                                             Am                          nm                      m



or equivalently

                                                          1+               + m
                                                                             m
                         m   ( s) =                 2 Am p                  p               2   [wm (s)          E1 (Wm )]               (A.8)
                                                                     m   m+   nm

after using the de...nition of                m   to substitute out all occurrences of ae
                                                                                        m.

                                                      Km
     If     m   (s) > 0, then wm (s) =                   z
                                                      Am m
                                                                   (s) by complementary slackness, so, to con...rm

 m   (s) > 0, we would need

                                                                             p        p                    2
                                 Am                                                  + nm
                                                                                     m m
                        zm (s) <    E1 (Wm ) +                                                                    zm (sm )               (A.9)
                                 Km            2 Km                              1+ m+ m




                                                                         4
where we have de...ned the right-hand side assuming an interior solution sm 2 (0; S ). If
                                                                                             Km
instead     m   (s) = 0, then Eq. (A.8) pins down wm (s) =                                      z
                                                                                             Am m
                                                                                                       (sm ). The optimal security is
therefore characterized by Eq. (15) with sm as de...ned in Eq. (A.9). Note that we can also
write
                           Z    sm                                                            p       p                2
                                                                                                     + nm
                                                                                                      m m
                                     [zm (sm )       zm (s)] dF (s)                                                               (A.10)
                            0                                                    2 Km            1+ m+ m

after using Eq. (15) to replace E1 (Wm ) in the de...nition of sm in Eq. (A.9).
      The ...rst order condition with respect to Km is

                                                                      Z      S
                                          0
                                      u (Km ) = E1 (Zm ) +                            m   (s) zm (s) dF (s)
                                                                         0



so we need to use Eq. (A.8) to sub out                         m   (s), which is positive if and only if s < sm . Doing
so gives

                   Z                                                                                                                  !
                                          sm
 0                                                                    1+               m+ m                 Km
u (Km ) = E1 (Zm )+                                        2 Am      p                   p             2       zm (s)      E1 (Wm )       zm (s) dF (s)
                                      0                                       m       m+  nm                Am

or equivalently

                                                                              Z       sm
  0                                               1+       m+ m
 u (Km ) = E1 (Zm )+2 Km                         p           p            2                zm (s) [zm (sm )        zm (s)] dF (s) (A.11)
                                                      m   m+  nm                  0



Combining Eq. (A.11) with u0 (Km ) = Km and Eq. (A.10) then delivers the expression in
the statement of Proposition 3.
      We now return to whether sm is in fact interior. Use Eq. (A.10) to substitute Km out of
the expression in the statement of Proposition 3. The result is:

            Z       sm                                                                         Z      sm
                                                                                 E1 (Zm )
                         zm (s) [zm (sm )            zm (s)] dF (s) +                                      [zm (sm )   zm (s)] dF (s)
                0                                                                                 0
                     p         p                 2
                           m m+ nm
        =                                                                                                                         (A.12)
            2             1+ m+ m




                                                                     5
The left-hand side of Eq. (A.12) is increasing in sm and thus takes on a maximum value

                   Z   S                                                                             Z    S
                                                                                        E1 (Zm )
                           zm (s) [zm (S )                  zm (s)] dF (s) +                                  [zm (S )    zm (s)] dF (s)
                   0                                                                                  0



or equivalently
                                                             E1 (Zm ) [zm (S )               E1 (Zm )]         V1 (Zm )

                               nm 1
With 1 +               m   =   nm 2
                                    ,      the right-hand side of Eq. (A.12) is increasing in nm . Therefore sm is
interior for nm < nm , where nm solves Eq. (17).


Proof of Corollary 1

Use Eq. (A.12). As above, the left-hand side of Eq. (A.12) is increasing in sm . For the
right-hand side,

                            p              p                 2
                                                                 !       p     p                 r             r
               @                nm +               m m                    nm +           m m         nm              m                 p
                                  nm 1                               =                      2                            (1 +   m)         m
           @       m              nm 2
                                            +          m                 (1 +   m   +     m)             m          nm

                   p              p                 2
                                                        !        p p                                p      p
      @                nm +            m m                    nm +   m m                       1      nm +   m m  1
                           nm 1                             =                                 p   +                                               >0
     @nm                   nm 2
                                  +        m                  1+ m+ m                          nm    1 + m + m (nm 2)2

                                                            nm 1                                                                @sm
where we have used 1 +                             m    =   nm 2
                                                                 .     It then follows immediately that (i)                     @ m
                                                                                                                                      > 0 if and only
                                       2                    @sm                               @sm                                           @sm
if    m   <    nm
                   m
                       (1 +       m)       and (ii)         @nm
                                                                     > 0. Note that           @nm
                                                                                                    > 0 can also be expressed as            @ m
                                                                                                                                                  < 0.
      From the intermediary'
                           s security design problem,

                                                                                Z       sm
                                          Km
                               E1 (Wm ) =                         zm (sm )                   [zm (sm )         zm (s)] dF (s)
                                          Am                                        0

                                           "Z                                                            Z                                        2
                                                                                                                                                      #
                                       2           sm                                                         sm
                            Km                                                      2
 V1 (Wm ) =                                             [zm (sm )         zm (s)] dF (s)                           [zm (sm )    zm (s)] dF (s)
                            Am                 0                                                          0




                                                                                    6
Therefore,

                                                                      R sm
      E (Wm )                                       zm (sm )             [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)
      p1        =r                                                        0
       V1 (Wm )    R sm                                                          R sm                                          2
                              0
                                     [zm (sm )               zm (s)]2 dF (s)      0
                                                                                      [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)


where
                      !                                                              R sm
                                                0
 @      E (Wm )                                zm (sm ) [1                F (sm )]          zm (s) [zm (sm )       zm (s)] dF (s)
        p1                =                                                           0
                                                                                                                                         3   <0
@sm      V1 (Wm )                    R sm                                       2               R sm                                 2   2

                                      0
                                              [zm (sm )             zm (s)] dF (s)               0
                                                                                                       [zm (sm )    zm (s)] dF (s)


                                               E1 (Wm )
i.e., any increase in sm implies a decrease in p        .
                                                                               V1 (Wm )

   Next, use Proposition 3 to sub Km out of the expression for E1 (Wm ). This gives E1 (Wm )
as a function of only sm , namely,

                                                         R sm                                                 !
                          1                                  0
                                                                   zm (s) [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)
        E1 (Wm ) =                    (              )            R sm                              + E1 (Zm )
                          Am                                           [ zm (s m ) zm (s )] dF (s )
                                                                   0
                                                     Z       sm
                                  zm (sm )                        [zm (sm )         zm (s)] dF (s)
                                                         0



where

                              R sm                                         !
                  @        0
                                 z m ( s ) [z m (s m ) zm  (s )] dF  ( s )
                              R sm
                @sm                   [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)
                                 0
                                     R sm                                    R sm                                     2
                           F (
                               1
                               s m )   0
                                            (zm (s))2 dF (s)       F (s
                                                                       1
                                                                        m  )   0
                                                                                  zm (s) dF (s)
                 0
              = zm  ( sm )                                     R sm                     2                                 >0
                                                          1
                                             zm (sm ) F (s m) 0
                                                                    z m   ( s ) dF (s )


and
                                      Z       sm
              @                                                                                   0
                      zm (sm )                     [zm (sm )          zm (s)] dF (s)           = zm (sm ) [1       F (sm )]
             @sm                          0

        @E1 (Wm )                                            @ V1 (Wm )                   @E1 (Wm )           E1 (Wm )
Thus,     @sm
                    > 0. We then deduce                         @sm
                                                                          > 0 from          @sm
                                                                                                      > 0 and p        < 0.
                                                                                                                   V1 (Wm )




                                                                           7
Proof of Proposition 4

Use Eq. (A.12). With the exchange, sm is given by Eq. (A.12) evaluated at                                    m   =   m
                                                                                                                     nm
                                                                                                                          , i.e.,

           Z       sm                                                            Z    sm
                                                                    E1 (Zm )
                        zm (s) [zm (sm )        zm (s)] dF (s) +                           [zm (sm )    zm (s)] dF (s)
               0                                                                  0
                                                   2
           nm (nm 2) (1 +                        m)
       =                nm                       2                                                                    (A.13)
         2   nm 1 1 + n  m                       1 m


Without the exchange, s0
                       m is given by Eq. (A.12) evaluated at                                m   = 0, i.e.,

          Z    s0                                                                Z    s0
                m
                                                                    E1 (Zm )           m
                    zm (s) zm      s0
                                    m           zm (s) dF (s) +                             zm s0
                                                                                                m        zm (s) dF (s)
           0                                                                      0
            nm (nm 2)
      =                                                                                                               (A.14)
          2   nm 1

                                                nm 1
where we have used 1 +                m   =     nm 2
                                                     .   The left-hand side of Eq. (A.12) is increasing in sm ,
hence s0
       m < sm for any             m   > 0. The rest follows from the derivatives in the proof of Corollary
1.
     In both cases (i.e., with or without the exchange), the equilibrium amount Km of the
asset Zm acquired by the intermediary is governed by the expression in Proposition 3. The
term that depends on sm in this expression is increasing in sm (see the proof of Corollary
           0
1). Thus, Km < Km follows from s0
                                m < sm .




Proof of Corollary 2

The expected payo¤ of an investor i 2 Nm who only trades the security Wm in her local
market m is:


         i                                i                                                       2
     E0 Vm;local            = E0              E1 (Wm )     pm Qi
                                                               m             V1 (Wm ) Qi
                                                                                       m
                                                                         2
                              1    1      1+2 m                      i                        2
                            =                      E0                    E1 (Wm )      pm
                              2 V1 (Wm ) (1 + m )2
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                      2
                              1+2         m
                                                   2
                                                       nm 1    1        (E1 (Wm ))2                          am
                            =                                         2             + V1 (Wm )
                                2                       nm (1 +     m)   V1 (Wm )                            nm

                                                                8
where the second line substitutes in the equilibrium demand function from Eq. (12) and the
third line substitutes in the equilibrium price from Eq. (13). Evaluating at am = nm delivers
                       i
the expression for E0 Vm;local in the main text, although we do not need that simpli...cation
here.
                  1
   With          m           (nm     2),

                                                                                                                                              !
                                                 2                     2                                                                  2
                     i                     1         (E1 (Wm )) nm                     2             nm                          am
                 E0 Vm;local =                                                           + V1 (Wm )
                                           2          V1 (Wm ) nm                      1            nm 2                         nm

where
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                         2
          @            2
                           (E1 (Wm ))2 nm             2             nm                          am
                                                        + V1 (Wm )
        @ sm                V1 (Wm ) nm               1            nm 2                         nm
            2                                                                                                                                 2
                   dE1 (Wm )            E1 (Wm ) dV1 (Wm )                   E1 (Wm ) nm                 2   nm                      am           dV1 (Wm )
  =              2                                                                                         +
                     dsm                V1 (Wm ) dsm                         V1 (Wm ) nm                 1 nm 2                      nm             dsm
                                                          2
                 0                  2
                                       Am
        2       zm   (sm )    (nm 1)a2      e 2
                                      m + (am )
                              nm (nm 2)      m
  =     R sm
            0
                 [zm (sm )          zm (s)] dF (s)
            2           0                       e 2                                                                                       1                       3
                                   (nm 1)a2
                                          m + (am )

            6         2B
                                   nm (nm 2)
                                               1 R sm [ z z m
                                                 m               (sm )F (sm )
                                                                                                                                          C E1 (Wm ) n            7
            6           B        2
                                      A m             0     m ( s m ) zm (s)]dF (s)                                                       C           m       2   7
            6           @ E (W ) (R sm [zm (sm ) zm (s)]dF (s))2 F (sm ) R sm [zm (sm ) zm (s)]2 dF (s)                                   A V1 (Wm ) nm       1   7
            6                 1    m     0                                        0                                                                               7
            6                V1 (Wm )                    R sm
                                                        ( 0 m m R m dF (s))
                                                                                      2                                                                           7
            6                     R
                                                              [ z  (s  )  z   (s )]                                                                               7
            4       nm    am
                                                              2
                              2 ( sm [zm (sm ) zm (s)]dF (s)) F (sm ) sm [zm (sm ) zm (s)]2 dF (s)
                                    0                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                  5
                 + nm  2 nm                        R                                2
                                                 ( 0sm [zm (sm ) zm (s)]dF (s))
                                                              2                                e 2
                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                          2                  a2
                                                                              m nm         2 (am )
                                           nm                              2 nm + nm       1       E1 (Wm )                     R sm
           0
        2 zm (sm )                  2
                                            e 2    6              ( )                           m
                                                                                                   V1 (Wm )
                                                                                                            [1       F (sm )]    0     zm (s)[zm (sm ) zm (s)]dF (s)   7
                              (nm 1)a2m + (am )    6                            R sm
                                                                                       2   Am
                                                                                                                       R sm
                                                                                                                                                                       7
  =     R sm
                              nm (nm 2)      m     6                                                     2
                                                                                    [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)          (       [zm (sm ) zm (s)]dF (s))
                                                                                                                                                         2             7
                                                   6                           0                                          0                                            7
            0
                 [zm (sm )          zm (s)] dF (s) 4                        nm    am 2
                                                                                  (        )
                                                                                          V1 (Zm js sm )                                                               5
                                                                           nm 2 nm
                                                                         1
                                                                             R sm                          2
                                                                  (   F (sm ) 0
                                                                                  [ z m m ) zm (s)]dF (s)
                                                                                       (s                        )
  < 0

                                                     R sm                                                R sm                              2
where V1 (Zm js               sm )            1
                                           F (sm )    0
                                                              (zm (s))2 dF (s)                    1
                                                                                               F (sm )    0
                                                                                                                 zm (s) dF (s) . A riskier
                                                                 i
security Wm , as captured by higher sm , therefore decreases E0 Vm;local . The statement of
the corollary then follows immediately from Proposition 4.




                                                                            9
Proof of Proposition 5

Let        0   denote the origination cost parameter before the introduction of the exchange and
 0
     the origination cost parameter implemented by the regulator (e.g., via a change in taxes)
                                                                                                                         0
alongside the introduction of the exchange. Then Eq. (A.13) is evaluated at                                                  , Eq. (A.14)
is evaluated at             0,   and

                                                                    nm 2
                                                   0
                                                           1+       nm 1        m
                                                       =                       2  0   <   0
                                                               (1 +       m)

induces sm = s0
              m from Eqs. (A.13) and (A.14).

      To highlight the direction of the policy that implements sm = s0
                                                                     m after the introduction

                                                                              reg
of the exchange, ...x                  and consider instead a regulatory oor Km   on asset purchases, i.e.,
                                                reg
the regulator mandates Km                      Km   . The Lagrangian for intermediary m'
                                                                                       s problem is then


                                                ek = Lk +
                                                L                     m   (Km          reg
                                                                                      Km   )


where Lk is the Lagrangian from the proof of Proposition 2 and                                             m      0 is the Lagrange
                                                                reg
multiplier on the new constraint Km                            Km   .
      The ...rst order condition with respect to wm (s) is the same as in the proof of Proposition
2, leading to sm as de...ned in Eq. (A.10). The ...rst order condition with respect to Km is

                                                               R sm
                                                                0
                                                                      zm (s) [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)
                     Km = E1 (Zm ) + (                     )         R sm                             +                  m
                                                                      0
                                                                          [zm (sm ) zm (s)] dF (s)

which is similar to the expression in Proposition 3 but with an extra term                                          m    that captures
the shadow cost of the regulatory oor.
                                   reg                                                                 nm 1
      If       m   > 0, then Km = Km   so, with                  m    =    m
                                                                          nm
                                                                                and 1 +        m   =   nm 2
                                                                                                            ,   Eq. (A.10) becomes

                      Z     sm                                                                                       2
                                                                     nm (nm 2) (1 +                               m)
                                 [zm (sm )   zm (s)] dF (s) =    reg
                        0                                     2 Km     nm 1 1 + n  m
                                                                                  nm
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                  1 m




                                                                      10
Thus, given nm and     m,      the regulator should set

                                                              2
            reg                 nm (nm 2) (1 +              m)                          1
           Km   =                                                 R s0
                       2          nm 1 1 + n  m             2        m
                                                                          [zm (s0
                                             nm             1 m     0           m)          zm (s)] dF (s)

to neutralize the e¤ect of the exchange on security design, where s0
                                                                   m solves Eq. (A.14). It is

                                                    reg
straightforward to con...rm        m   > 0 at this Km   .


Proof of Proposition 6

Intermediary m'
              s expected payo¤ is:


                                                  e
              Vm Wm ; rm jnm ;          m ; Am ; am ; K m


          = E1 (pm ) (Am           ae       e e
                                    m ) + p m am +          K m E1 (Zm )         Am E1 (Wm )              u (rm )


where pe
       m and E1 (pm ) are as in Eqs. (A.6) and (A.7). Letting                                  m   ( s)     0 denote the
Lagrange multiplier on the feasibility constraint Am wm (s)                      K m zm (s), the Lagrangian for
intermediary m'
              s problem is

                       Z   S
Lk = (          ) Am           wm (s) dF (s)
                       0
                                          ! "Z                        Z S                                              2
                                                                                                                           #
                              2         2       S
              nm  1 (Am ae m)     ( ae
                                     m)                   2
                                +                 (wm (s)) dF (s)         wm (s) dF (s)
              nm  2    nm             m       0                        0
                                 Z S
        + K m E1 (Zm ) u (rm ) +        m (s) K m zm (s)    Am wm (s) dF (s)
                                              0


                                       nm 1
where we have used 1 +         m   =   nm 2
                                              to sub   m    out of Eq. (A.7).
   The ...rst order conditions with respect to wm (s) and rm are respectively

            "                                                                                         !                        #
                                                                             2
    @ Lk                                                   nm     1 (Am aem)    (ae )2
0=         = (                     m   (s)) Am    2                            + m                        (wm (s)    E1 (Wm )) f (s)
   @wm (s)                                                 nm     2    nm          m
                                                                                                                    (A.15)
                                                                Z     S
                   @ Lk      @E (Zm )                                                   @zm (s)
            0=          = Km                       u0 (rm ) +             m   (s) K m           dF (s)
                   @rm         @rm                                0                      @rm

                                                       11
                       2                         2
where, using zm (s) = rm + rm s and u (rm ) = 2 rm , the latter becomes

                                                                                 Z        S
             @ Lk
          0=      = K m (2rm + E1 (s))                                 rm +                       m   (s) K m (2rm + s) dF (s)                  (A.16)
             @rm                                                                      0



     Rewrite Eq. (A.15) as

                                                               nm 1                                               Z     S
                                                               nm 2
                                                                           +    m
              m (s) =                              2 Am p                  p                  2       wm (s)                wm (s) dF (s)
                                                         nm +                  m m                                  0



                                                    Km
If    m   (s) > 0, then wm (s) =                       z
                                                    Am m
                                                            (s) by complementary slackness, so, to con...rm                                     m   (s) >
0, we would need

                                          Z    S                                                  p          p               2
                       Am                                                                             nm +        m m
              zm (s) <                             wm (s) dF (s) +                                    nm 1                           zm (sm )
                       Km                  0                                2 Km                      nm 2
                                                                                                             +     m



where we have de...ned the right-hand side assuming an interior solution sm 2 (0; S ). If
                                                            Km
instead      m   (s) = 0, then wm (s) =                        z
                                                            Am m
                                                                      (sm ). Therefore

                                                              8
                                                              >
                                                              <    Km
                                                                      z
                                                                   Am m
                                                                               ( s)               if s < sm
                                               wm (s) =
                                                              >
                                                              :    Km
                                                                      z        (sm ) if s                    sm
                                                                   Am m



and
                 Z    S                                        Z      sm
                                          Km
                          wm (s) dF (s) =                                  zm (s) dF (s) + zm (sm ) [1                           F (sm )]
                  0                       Am                      0

so the de...nition of sm simpli...es to

                          Z     sm                                                                      p           p                2
                                                                                                            nm +            m m
                                     [zm (sm )            zm (s)] dF (s) =                                   nm 1
                            0                                                         2 Km                   nm 2
                                                                                                                      +      m



and thus
                                      Z    sm                                                      p      p                      2
                                                                                                    nm +            m m
                                rm                 ( sm    s) dF (s) =                               nm 1                                       (A.17)
                                       0                                       2 Km                  nm 2
                                                                                                          +             m

after subbing out for zm ( ) in terms of rm .


                                                                            12
   Now return to Eq. (A.16) and sub out the multiplier                               m    ( ), which is positive if and only
if s < sm , to get

                                                 nm 1                      Z    sm
                                      2          nm 2
                                                           +   m
 K m (2rm + E1 (s))         rm +2    Km      p             p           2             [zm (sm )            zm (s)] (2rm + s) dF (s) = 0
                                                 nm +          m m          0



and thus

                                                      nm 1                           Z    sm
                                        2             nm 2
                                                             +     m
 K m (2rm + E1 (s))          rm + 2    Km        p           p              2 rm               (sm        s) (2rm + s) dF (s) = 0
                                                     nm +         m m                 0
                                                                                                                               (A.18)
after again subbing out for zm ( ) in terms of rm .
   Use Eq. (A.17) to isolate rm and rewrite Eq. (A.18) as

                                                                                          Z    sm
                                                                   1
 K m (2rm + E1 (s))         rm +K m (             ) R sm                                            (sm     s) (2rm + s) dF (s) = 0
                                                       0
                                                             (sm       s) dF (s)           0



which then simpli...es to

                                                                            R sm                                 !
                              Km                                             0
                                                                                     s (sm          s) dF (s)
                     rm =                    E1 (s) + (                    ) R sm                                              (A.19)
                              2 Km                                              0
                                                                                      (sm           s) dF (s)

Finally, equate rm from Eqs. (A.17) and (A.19) to get

   Z    sm                                   Z   sm                                                         p          p         2
                                    E1 (s)                                                     2 Km             nm +       m m
             s (sm   s) dF (s) +                      (sm      s) dF (s) =                          2           nm 1
    0                                        0                                             2 Km                 nm 2
                                                                                                                       +   m
                                                                                                                               (A.20)
The intermediary'
                s ...rst order conditions are thus characterized by Eqs. (A.19) and (A.20).
Assume         > 2 K m for a well-de...ned solution (i.e., if                        is too low, then global max is for
intermediary to choose rm arbitrarily large).




                                                             13
   Note

                   R sm                            !                          Z                                              Z                         2
                                                                                      sm                                         sm
    @               0
                          s ( sm      s) dF (s)         sign 1                              2              1
                    R sm                                =                                  s dF (s)                                   sdF (s)              >0
   @sm                       (sm     s) dF (s)            F (sm )                 0                     F (sm )              0
                     0
                                                                                                                                                           (A.21)
                              @     E1 (Zm )
and therefore                @sm
                                    p             > 0 after using Eq. (A.19) to sub out rm from the expression
                                       V1 (Zm )
    E1 (Zm )
for p        in the main text.
        V1 (Zm )

   For the asset-backed security sold to investors by the intermediary,

                                                                                       R sm
                             E (Wm )                           rm + sm             (sm s) dF (s)
                             p1        =r                                                  0
                              V1 (Wm )    R sm                                       R sm                                               2
                                                    0
                                                           ( sm         s)2 dF (s)    0
                                                                                          (sm s) dF (s)


where, after using Eq. (A.19) to sub out rm , we can show

                                    !
        @                E1 (Wm )      sign
                        p               =
       @sm                V1 (Wm )
                                 Z sm
           [1           F (sm )]      s (sm s) dF (s)
                                  0
                                 2          R sm 2         R sm         2                                            R sm                                       3
                                                                                                                          (sm         s)2 dF (s)
                          ) K m 6 F (sm ) 0 s dF (s)            sdF (s)                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                      0
           (                                                                                                         R sm
                                                            0                                                    (        (sm         s)dF (s))
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                       7
       +                         4               hR                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                     i 5
                        2 Km                        s                                                    E1 (s) R sm
                                      [1 F (sm )] 0 m s (sm s) dF (s) +                                                  0
                                                                                                                                 (sm        s) dF (s)


                     @         E1 (Wm )
Therefore,          @sm
                               p               < 0 if      >> 2 K m .
                                   V1 (Wm )

   With the exchange, sm is given by Eq. (A.20) evaluated at                                                 m   =       nm
                                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                                                 , i.e.,

   Z                                                       Z
        sm
                                                  E1 (s)           sm
                                                                                                         2 Km                  nm (1 + m )2
               s (sm           s) dF (s) +                              (sm           s) dF (s) =                2
    0                                                          0                                        2 Km                 1 + m 1 + 1+mm

Without the exchange, s0
                       m is given by Eq. (A.20) evaluated at                                                 m   = 0, i.e.,

               Z    s0                                                  Z    s0
                     m
                                                         E1 (s)               m
                                                                                                                         2 Km            nm
                         s    s0
                               m      s dF (s) +                                      s0
                                                                                       m        s dF (s) =                    2
                0                                                        0                                           2       Km         1+ m

The left-hand side of Eq. (A.20) is increasing in sm , so clearly sm > s0
                                                                        m.



                                                                              14
   With or without the exchange, rm is governed by Eq. (A.19) evaluated at the appropriate
value of sm . From sm > s0
                         m and Eq. (A.19) with (A.21), we conclude that introducing the

                                    0
exchange increases rm , i.e., rm > rm . Accordingly, introduction of the exchange increases
E1 (Zm )                                                            E1 (Wm )
p        . However, from   >> 2 K m and sm > s0
                                              m , it also decreases
                                                                    p        .
  V1 (Zm )                                                             V1 (Wm )



Proof of Proposition 7

Follows immediately from Eq. (A.20). On the margin, lowering        lowers sm , which helps
combat sm > s0
             m.




                                            15
Appendix B ­Construction of Figure 1

Suppose all securities are identical and the investor can trade one security on the exchange
(in addition to the security in her local market).
   Investor'
           s value function before the introduction of the exchange:
                                                                                                                         !
                                         2           0            2                                                  2
                 eh            1                (E (Wm )) nm                2      0  nm                    Am
               E V m         =                       0
                                                                              + V Wm
                               2                 V (Wm ) nm                 1        nm 2                   nm

   Investor'
           s value function after the introduction of the exchange:
                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                                              2                2
   h        1           2
                            (E (Wm ))2              nm        2                             nm          Am aem                          ae
                                                                                                                                         m
E Vm      =                                                     + 1 + V (Wm )                                                     +
            2                V (Wm )                nm        1                           nm       2      nm                               m
                    0                                                                                                                                      1
                        2                   2                                                                                                      2
               1B           (E (Wm ))               nm        2                                1       1         1            1            (Am )           C
          =      @                                              + 1 + V (Wm )                               +                               q              2A
               2             V (Wm )                nm        1                           nm       2    m        m            m                nm 1
                                                                                                                                      1+
                                                                                                                                               m       m



                                       Am ae             ae
   Fix per capita supplies               nm
                                            m
                                                    =     m
                                                                  = 1 in the post-exchange world. Then Am = nm +                               m
                                                          m

                                                                       Am
and   m   =   m
              nm
                   , with a per capita supply of                       nm
                                                                            = 1+   m
                                                                                   nm
                                                                                        > 1 when only the local market is
available to the investor (i.e., the pre-exchange world). The per capita assumption means
we are considering the introduction of an exchange with a market power                                               m    =       m
                                                                                                                                  nm
                                                                                                                                       for the
intermediary; we cannot consider independent variations in                                  m      since an assumption about
ae
 m has already been made.

   With Am = nm +             m   and           m   =    m
                                                         nm
                                                              :

                                                                                                                          !
                                        2        0                2
                eh            1             (E (Wm )) nm                    2      0  nm                              2
              E V m         =                    0
                                                                              + V Wm      (1 +                   m)
                              2              V (Wm ) nm                     1        nm 2

                                                                                                                              !
             h            1        2
                                       (E (Wm ))2                 nm    2                               nm
          E Vm          =                                                 + 1 + V (Wm )                          +1
                          2             V (Wm )                   nm    1                              nm    2

                       eh
where we recall that E V                        is the investor'
                                                               s utility before introduction of exchange, but
                        m

evaluated at the Am consistent with per capita supply in each market after introduction of


                                                                       16
the exchange, hence the appearance of                     m.

                                                                                   h
   Thus, the investor is worse o¤ with the introduction of this exchange, i.e., E Vm <
  em
E V h
      , if and only if

                                   2                      !2                      !2                      3
                               2                 0
                                   4       E (Wm   )                 E (Wm )                    nm    1 5
                                           p                         p                     1+                          (B.1)
                                                   0
                                             V (Wm )                  V (Wm )                   nm    2
                                               nm 2                 0                 2     nm (nm 1)
                    >    V (Wm ) 1 +                             V Wm (1 +          m)
                                                nm                                           (nm 2)2

   To ...x ideas, suppose state s 2 [0; 1] is uniformly distributed with S = 1 and zm (s) = s.
Then the equilibrium security in Proposition 2 is
                                                         8
                                                         >
                                                         <    Km
                                                              Am
                                                                 s       if s < sm
                                           wm (s) =
                                                         >
                                                         :    Km
                                                                 s       if s     sm
                                                              Am m



with
                                Z      S
                                                                                   Km                sm
                    E (Wm ) =              wm (s) dF (s) =) E (Wm ) =                 sm 1
                                   0                                               Am                 2
            Z   S                             Z     S                      2                              2
                           2                                                                         Km            1   sm
V (Wm ) =           (wm (s)) dF (s)                     wm (s) dF (s)          =) V (Wm ) =                   s3
                                                                                                               m
            0                                   0                                                    Am            3    4

and
                                                                p     p                2
                                                                     + nm
                                                                     m m
                                           Km =
                                                         s2
                                                          m      1+ m+ m

from Eq. (A.10).
                              0
   The pre-exchange security Wm has


                                                 0                   nm
                                                Km =                 2
                                                               (s0
                                                                 m)
                                                                    1+ m

and the post-exchange security Wm has

                                                                 nm (1 + m )2
                                           Km =
                                                         s2
                                                          m    1 + m 1 + 1+mm

                                                                17
                    nm 1
where 1 +   m   =   nm 2
                         .   Therefore, condition (B.1) becomes

                              2
                 (2       s0
                           m)               (2       sm )2                  nm      1
                      4                          4
                                                                   1+
                s0
                 m    3
                             s0
                              m            sm    3
                                                       sm                   nm      2
                                  2                                !2                                                   3
                              2
                                  42         1+          m                   1          1             1         1    nm 5
            >                                  nm        2
                                            1+ nm        1 m
                                                                            3sm         4            3s0
                                                                                                       m        4   nm 1


where, using Eq. (A.12),

                             0                                1
                             @s 0                    3        A s0          2       3 nm (nm 2)
                                m+                               m              =
                                            2            1                              nm 1

                      0                                  1
                                                                                                             2
                      @s m +                3      A s2   3 nm (nm 2) (1 +                                 m)
                                                      m =
                                  2              1            nm 1 1 + n  m
                                                                         nm
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                           1 m


The condition fails (i.e., introducing the exchange makes the investor better o¤) for every
   if and only if both of the following are true

                                                 2
                                  (2       s0
                                            m)      (2                  sm )2               nm       1
                                       4
                                                 <                 4
                                                                                    1+
                              s0
                               m       3
                                               0
                                              sm   sm              3
                                                                          sm                nm       2

                                                 !2
                              1+           m                  1         1             1          1         nm
                      2         nm         2                                    >
                             1+ nm         1 m
                                                             3sm        4            3s0
                                                                                       m         4       nm     1

Otherwise, there exist values of                     such that the investor is worse o¤ with the introduction
of the exchange.




                                                                   18
