                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HAVE U.S. GUN BUYBACK PROGRAMS MISFIRED?

                                     Toshio Ferrazares
                                      Joseph J. Sabia
                                     D. Mark Anderson

                                     Working Paper 28763
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28763


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2021, Revised July 2021




We acknowledge support from the Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies (CHEPS) at
San Diego State University, including grant funding from the Charles Koch Foundation and the
Troesh Family Foundation. We are grateful for excellent research assistance from Andrew
Dickinson, Kevin Hsu, Alicia Marquez, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Vincent Ta, and Alexander
Vornsand. We thank Matthew Harris, Dhaval Dave, Dean Weingarten, and participants at the
2019 Eastern Economic Association meetings and 2019 Southern Economic Association for
useful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Toshio Ferrazares, Joseph J. Sabia, and D. Mark Anderson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Have U.S. Gun Buyback Programs Misfired?
Toshio Ferrazares, Joseph J. Sabia, and D. Mark Anderson
NBER Working Paper No. 28763
May 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. I1,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Gun buyback programs (GBPs), which use public funds to purchase civilians' privately-owned
firearms, aim to reduce gun violence. However, next to nothing is known about their effects on
firearm-related crime or deaths. Using data from the National Incident Based Reporting System,
we find no evidence that GBPs reduce gun crime. Given our estimated null findings, with 95
percent confidence, we can rule out decreases in firearm-related crime of greater than 1.3 percent
during the year following a buyback. Using data from the National Vital Statistics System, we
also find no evidence that GBPs reduce suicides or homicides where a firearm was involved.
These results call into question the efficacy of city gun buyback programs in their current form.


Toshio Ferrazares                               D. Mark Anderson
Department of Economics                         Department of Agricultural Economics & Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara         Montana State University
2120 North Hall                                 P.O. Box 172920
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                         Bozeman, MT 59717
ferrazares@ucsb.edu                             and NBER
                                                dwight.anderson@montana.edu
Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu
                                            1. Introduction

         "This bill authorizes the Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) to
         make grants to states, local governments, or gun dealers to conduct gun buyback
         programs. The BJA may distribute smart prepaid cards for use by a state, local
         government, or gun dealer to compensate individuals who dispose of firearms."

                                       -   House Resolution (H.R.) 1259, Safer Neighborhoods
                                           Gun Buyback Act of 2019 (2019)


         "The people you're most worried about -- criminals -- they're either not going to turn in
         their guns, or if they do turn in their guns, they'll turn in some old broken-down guns, get
         some money for it, and buy a new gun."

                                       -   Professor Eugene Volokh, University of California-Los
                                           Angeles (2019)


         There are 1.2 guns for every person in the United States, with the total number of
firearms in circulation estimated to be over 393 million (Small Arms Survey 2015). Gun
violence is the leading cause of death among young men ages 15 to 19 (Xu et al. 2016), and
firearms are involved in 51 percent of completed suicides and 73 percent of all homicides (Xu et
al. 2016; FBI UCR, 2016). The link between the supply of firearms and gun violence has been
the subject of intense debate, both among policymakers (Spitzer 2015; Cook & Leitzel 1998) and
in the economics of crime literature (Lott 2013; Lott & Mustard 1997; Donohue & Ayres 2009;
Donohue et al. 2019). However, there is growing evidence that limiting access to firearms
reduces gun violence, both among adults (Donohue et al. 2017) and minors (Anderson et al.
2019).
         In an effort to reduce gun crime by limiting the supply of firearms in circulation, a
number of U.S. cities have implemented gun buyback programs (GBPs). GBPs use public funds
to purchase civilians' privately-owned firearms. The first GBP was launched in Baltimore,
Maryland in 1974, when the city paid anyone who turned in a firearm to a local police station
$50 ($259 in 2019 dollars), after which the gun was destroyed. There were no questions asked
of those who turned in their guns and no limits were placed on the type of firearm that could be
submitted to authorities (Parry 1974). In total, the GBP collected approximately 13,500
firearms, 8,400 of which were handguns, and cost taxpayers approximately $660,000 (Kansas



                                                  1
City Star 1992). 1 Reports suggested that those turning in firearms included those "afraid
someone would use [the firearm] in anger" and those who feared their firearms "would be
stolen" (Parry 1974). However, homicides and firearm-related assaults rose by over 50 percent
following the Baltimore GBP, raising concerns among policymakers about its effectiveness
(Parry 1974).
         Following the Baltimore experiment, dozens of U.S. cities have held GBPs, including a
flurry of buybacks in 2021. For instance, from April-May 2021, GBPs were held in Reading, PA
(Rearden 2021); Albany, Georgia (Godley 2021); Canton, Ohio (Goshay 2021); Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (Chinchilla 2021); Birmingham, Alabama (Birmingham PD 2021); Rochester,
New York (Ly 2021); and Albuquerque, New Mexico (Associated Press 2021), with more
planned in June and beyond (Daily Freeman Staff 2021; Milian 2021). 2 GBPs have generally
been funded by government dollars at the state and local, rather than federal, level (Mullin
2001). 3 However, following mass shootings in El Paso, Texas and Dayton, Ohio in 2019, 12
congressmen co-sponsored H.R. 1279, the Safer Neighborhoods Gun Buyback Act of 2019,
which would permit the U.S. Bureau of Justice Assistance to issue grants to state and local
governments to fund GBPs. While this legislation was not further pursued by Congressional
Democrats during the Trump presidency, the May 2021 introduction of H.R. 3143 to establish a


1
  A proposal put forth by the police commissioner for federal funding to continue the GBP was rejected by the
federal Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, which argued a GBP would encourage the manufacturing of
handguns and would be ineffective as long as a firearm can be purchased for less than $50. The LEAA statement
went on to state, "As long as it is possible to buy a gun...for less than $50 and turn it in to the police department for
$50, the profit motive is present and the law of economics indicates that if people can buy guns at a lower price and
sell them at a higher price they will do so." (Parry 1974)
2
  In addition, the possibility of expanding gun buybacks in New York City (NYC) took center stage in the 2021
Democratic primary race for NYC mayor. During a debate on May 13, 2021, Democratic candidate Eric Adams
claimed, "Gun buybacks don't work to get rid of the illegal guns we need to eliminate" (New York Post 2021). On
the other hand, Democratic candidate Kathryn Garcia suggested expanding GBPs by increasing the trade-in value
for surrendered firearms from $200 to $2000 per firearm (Rubinstein et al. 2021).

3
  An exception was during the period from 1999-2001, when President Bill Clinton approved $15 million for GBPs
through the Buyback America program, funded by the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Public
Housing Drug Elimination Program. Buyback America awarded $500,000 to each participating city with a goal of
removing 300,000 firearms from the national supply. The program suggested cities offer approximately $50 for each
firearm in either in the form of cash, food, gift certificates, toys or tickets to sporting events. However, this program
was abandoned in the first year of the George W. Bush Administration with the announcement,

         "Gun buyback program initiatives are limited in their effectiveness as a strategy to combat violent and gun-
         related crime." (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 2001).



                                                            2
federally funded gun buyback program suggests that this issue has continued salience
(Congresss.gov 2021).
        Proponents of GBPs, including New York Governor Andrew Cuomo (2019), former
President Bill Clinton (2000), and current President Joe Biden, argue that GBPs may be an
important tool in the fight against gun crime and firearm-related violence. 4 Some proponents,
including President Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders, have called for a Federal GBP that
specifically targets assault weapons (Hains 2019). 5 Opponents, including the National Rifle
Association, argue that GBPs will do little to reduce gun crime because potential criminals are
unlikely to participate in such programs and will waste taxpayers' dollars (Ellis and Hicken
2015). In March 2020, the Michigan House of Representatives passed House Bill 5479, which
would ban the use of state funds for local gun buybacks (Michigan Legislature 2020). Similar
legislation has been introduced in Wyoming (Coulter 2020).
        The impact of a GBP on firearm-related violence is a priori unclear. GBPs may reduce
gun crime if marginal criminals who would otherwise commit firearm-related crime sell their
firearms to local governments and eschew criminal activity. Moreover, GBPs may reduce gun
crime if law-abiding individuals sell their firearms, reducing the supply of guns available for
theft by would-be criminals. Finally, a reduction in the supply of firearms could reduce firearm-
related suicides if such acts are impulsive and influenced by ease of firearm access at a time of
high emotion (Barber and Miller 2014).
        On the other hand, GBPs may fail to reduce gun violence for a number of reasons. First,
if the price city governments are willing to pay gun owners is less than the value of the firearm
for most sellers, a relatively small number of firearms may be collected. Second, if criminals
believe law-abiding citizens (and potential victims) are relinquishing their firearms, then they
may be more willing to commit gun crimes following a GBP (Lott 1998). Moreover, if GBPs
induce gun owners to turn in older forearms that are not well-functioning (Kuhn et al. 2002;
Levitt 2004), or the income gained from the sale of the firearm is used to purchase newer, more
effective guns (Mullin 2001), gun violence could rise. Finally, repeated GBP programs may


4
 In 1999, President Bill Clinton enacted Buyback America, stating "Every gun turned in through a buyback program
means potentially one less tragedy."
5
 During his aborted run for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination, Beto O'Roarke supported a mandatory
buyback of assault rifles as part of a comprehensive plan to curb gun violence (Bradner 2019).


                                                       3
permanently lower the ownership cost of a firearm, also leading to an increase in newer firearm
purchases (Mullin 2001).
        While policymakers are fiercely debating whether to allow public funds to be used for
GBPs, next to nothing is known about the effectiveness of prior GBPs in U.S. cities. This paper
is the first to present evidence on this question. We highlight three key findings. First, using data
from the 1991-2015 National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS), we find no evidence
that GBPs are effective at deterring gun crime either in the short- or longer-run. The precision of
our estimates is such that, with 95 percent confidence, we can rule out decreases in gun crime of
1.3 percent in the 12 months following a GBP and 2.3 percent a year or more after a GBP.
Second, in the two months following a GBP, we detect a small increase in gun crimes with no
corresponding change in non-gun crimes. This finding is consistent with a possible criminal
response to perceptions about the likelihood of self-defense among law-abiding gun owners.
Finally, turning to data from the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS), we find no evidence
that GBPs affected firearm-related suicides or homicides.
        We conclude that GBPs are an ineffective policy strategy to reduce gun violence, a
finding consistent with descriptive evidence that (i) firearm sales prices are set too low by cities
to appreciably reduce the local supply of firearms (Reuter and Mouzos 2004), (ii) most GBP
participants are drawn from populations with low crime risk (Planty and Truman 2013; Violano
et al. 2014; Romero et al. 1998), and (iii) firearms sold in GBPs tend to be older and less well-
functioning than the average firearm (Kuhn et al. 2002; Levitt 2004).


                                                 2. Background
2.1 Firearm Availability and Crime
        The United States has more guns per capita than any country in the world. The estimated
per capita supply of firearms in the United States is 128 percent higher than in its closest
competitor, Yemen (Small Arms Survey 2015). 6 In 2015, 9.4 million firearms were
manufactured domestically in the United States, a 71 percent increase from the 5.5 million
manufactured in 2010 (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 2016). Firearms



6
  The territory Falkland Islands have 9.3 more firearms per 100 civilians than Yemen's 52.8 but still much fewer
than the United States' 120.5.



                                                         4
account for 645 deaths and 1,565 emergency room visits per week, making firearm-related
injuries among the five leading causes of death for individuals under the age of 65 (Fowler et al.
2015). Firearms are also present in more than half of all completed suicides (Xu et al. 2016).
         Researchers attempting to estimate the relationship between the supply of firearms and
gun crime have been limited by the lack of data on firearm ownership. However, a handful of
studies have used proxies for ownership. For instance, Duggan (2001) uses changes in rates of
gun magazine sales and National Rifle Association membership to proxy for firearm ownership
at the county-level and finds that increases in firearm ownership are significantly positively
related to changes in the homicide rate, driven by increases in gun-related murders. Lang (2016)
uses data on state-level background checks as a proxy for new firearms purchases and finds that
background checks are negatively related to property crime, though essentially unrelated to
violent crime.
         Other studies have used policy shocks that might affect the supply of firearms, including
background checks (Sen and Panjamapirom 2012), longer waiting periods (Ludwig and Cook
2000), stricter safe storage laws (DeSimone et al. 2013; Grossman et al. 2005; Anderson and
Sabia 2018; Anderson et al. 2019), trigger lock requirements (Shuster et al. 2000), and right-to-
carry laws (Lott and Mustard 1997; Donohue and Ayers; Donohue et al. 2019). For the most
part, these studies suggest that the supply of available firearms is positively related to crime. 7,8




7
  Sen and Panjamapiro (2012) find that stricter background checks are associated with a decline in homicide and
suicide rates among those ages 55 and older but find no evidence of reductions in deaths for younger age groups.
Grossman et al. (2005) find that tougher safe storage laws that require storing firearms unloaded, locked, and away
from ammunition are associated with a decline in youth suicide and accidental injury. DeSimone et al. (2010) find
that CAP laws, which impose criminal liability on owners who allow children unsupervised access to firearms, are
associated with reductions in nonfatal gun injuries among children. Finally, Anderson et al. (2019) find that CAP
laws reduce gun carrying and unsafe behaviors at school.
8
  The literature on shall issue laws is much more controversial than the other-mentioned laws. Lott and Mustard
(1997) find that shall issue laws are associated with a 7.7 percent decrease in murders and a 5 to 7 percent decrease
in rapes and aggravated assaults. The authors argue that by limiting the ability of law-abiding gun owners to obtain
firearms for self-defense, criminals are more willing to engage in criminal acts (Lott 1998). However, this finding is
quite controversial. Ayres and Donohue (2003) find evidence that the results found by Lott and Mustard (1997) are
sensitive to functional form of the empirical specifications, years used for the analysis, and choice of controls.
Donohue and Ayers (2009) continue to find no evidence that shall issue laws reduce crime with more years of data,
and also show that right-to-carry laws are associated with an increase in aggravated assaults. Other studies, using
the same data, have also found no evidence that shall issue laws reduce crime (Black and Naggin 1998; Kovandzic
2005; Durlauf et al. 2016). Finally, Donohue et al. (2019) uses both event-study analyses and synthetic control
approaches and finds that right-to-carry laws were associated with increases in violent crime rates.


                                                          5
2.2 Gun Buyback Programs
         National gun buyback programs achieved worldwide prominence in the mid-1990s with a
massive gun buyback effort in Australia. On April 28, 1996, a psychologically disturbed 28-
year-old man shot and killed 35 people and injured 28 others as part a mass shooting spree across
Port Arthur, Australia (Associated Press 1996). The killer used an AR-15 assault rifle, a firearm
not required to be registered in his home state of Tasmania (Bilowol & Davis 2007).
         Twelve days after the mass shooting, the Australasian Police Ministers' Council enacted
the National Firearms Agreement (NFA) with the goal of combatting gun violence and
preventing further tragedies. This legislative package included prohibitions on gun ownership,
including several categories of firearms deemed to be high-risk such as self-loading rifles and
pump shotguns. To facilitate the removal of these firearms from circulation, Australia
implemented one of the largest gun buyback in world history, and largest ever in terms of
percentage of privately-owned firearms relinquished. 9
         In total, the GBP collected over 640,000 firearms, representing 20 percent of privately-
owned firearms in Australia and cost taxpayers $230 million (Wintemute 2013). 10 In terms of
firearms per capita, a comparable GBP in the United States would collect 78.6 million firearms
(Small Arms Survey 2015). The NFA also expanded the Australian national firearm registry,
which required potential gun owners to affirm a "legitimate need" for a firearm, 11 mandated a
28-day waiting period before purchase, implemented a minimum legal purchasing age of 18, and
banned the ownership of several types of semi-automatic and self-loading firearms (Reuter and
Mouzos 2004).
         Early studies of Australia's NFA, based on time-series variation, have produced mixed
findings (Reuter and Mouzos 2004; Chapman et al. 2006; Baker and McPhedran, 2007,2008;


9
  Brazil collected the largest number of guns with their GBP, with as many as 1.1 million firearms collected over a
6-year period. Policy changes in October 2003 preempted the GBP, which included increasing the minimum
purchase age to 25 and increasing fines, penalties, and prison sentences for those in violation of these policies. By
the conclusion of the first 6-month program that began on July 2004, a reported 450,000 firearms were collected.
10
   This number is the most widely-agreed upon estimate but is potentially a lower bound (Braga & Wintemute,
2013). It is interesting to note that Australia has no domestic firearm manufacturers and only imports 30,000
firearms per year (Neill and Leigh 2010).
11
  This occupational use, being an authorized member of target shooting club, or hunting with proof of permission
from rural landowner, to pass a written exam, and participate in an accredited training course on firearm safety by a
State-controlled firearm licensing body. Personal safety was not considered an adequate reason to own a firearm.



                                                          6
Neill and Leigh, 2008; Lee and Suardi, 2009). Leigh and Neill (2010) exploit state-level
variation in the number of firearms bought back and, using a two-way fixed effects model, find
that a 3,500 increase in firearms turned in per 100,000 population was associated with a 45 to 78
percent reduction in the firearm-related suicide rate. However, Chapman et al. (2016) find that
the results reported by Leigh and Neill (2010) could also be detected for non-firearm related
deaths, suggesting that the buybacks generated important spillovers unrelated to guns or that the
research design employed failed to isolate the causal impact of the buyback. 12 Taylor and Li
(2015) find that Australia's NFA led to decreases in armed robberies and attempted murders
relative to sexual assaults, which they argue should be unaffected by changes in Australia's gun
supply.
           In the United States, gun buyback efforts have largely occurred at the city-level.
Typically, these GBPs have destroyed 1,000 or fewer firearms, with city governments generally
paying gun owners between $25 to $200 per firearm (Braga and Wintemute 2013). 13 Only two
studies of which we are aware have studied the relationship between U.S. city GBPs and gun
crime, each a case study of a particular city.
           Callahan et al. (1994) examine a 1992 GBP in Seattle, Washington, which collected
1,171 firearms. 14 Using time-series variation, these authors find no evidence that the Seattle
program was associated with a significant decline in gun crime or assault-related firearm
injuries. 15 Braga and Wintemute (2013) studied Boston's Operation Ceasefire, a broader anti-
crime effort that included a GBP. This 2006 buyback, which paid firearm owners $200 per
weapon, collected 1,019 firearms, all of which were handguns. This GBP differed from the
typical city buyback in that required participants to document Boston residency and specifically


12
   Several other nations have implemented large-scale GBPs similar to Australia, but have not been widely studied.
For example, Brazil collected 1,100,000 firearms between 2003 and 2009, the United Kingdom collected 162,000
firearms in 1996, and Argentina collected 105,000 firearms in 2007. To our knowledge, no studies have examined
the impact of these national buybacks.
13
   Funds to pay for firearms could be collected from small businesses, financial institutions, and civilians (Callahan
et al. 1994).

14
  Community leaders found funding from the state and urban civic leaders, financial institutions, and local small
business owners with the goal to purchase 2,000 firearms for $100,000. This buyback collected 1,172 firearms, 95
percent of which were handguns, and 83 percent of which in working condition. The mean age of participants was
51.
15
     The magnitude of the decline was fairly substantial, however, reaching nearly 18 percent.


                                                            7
targeted high-crime areas for firearm drop-off points and advertising. These authors find that in
the four years following Operation Ceasefire, there was a 30 percent decline in shootings (Braga
and Wintemute 2013).


                                             3. Data and Methods
3.1 National Incident-Based Reporting System Data
        Our primary data source is the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS).
Compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the NIBRS provides detailed
information on criminal incidents, including offenders, victims, and circumstances of the crime.
Approximately 29 percent of the U.S. population is covered by the NIBRS, a population that is
responsible for about 27 percent of all crime committed (FBI 2013). Law enforcement agencies
that report to the NIBRS comprise more than one third of all agencies in the U.S.
        Our main analysis sample consists of 36,516 law enforcement agency-year-months from
1991 to 2015. We restrict our sample to the 245 agencies that serve populations of at least 50,000
individuals. The NIBRS is very useful for our analyses because these data include information
on whether a firearm was used in each criminal incident. 16
        Our main dependent variable is Gun Crime. Gun Crime is an agency-by-month count of
criminal incidents involving a handgun, shotgun, automatic weapon, or long gun. As shown in
Table 1, the average number of criminal incidents involving a firearm was 25.9. This represents
approximately 2.9 percent of all crimes and 29.4 percent of all violent crimes. As shown in
Appendix Table 1, the vast majority (71.4 percent) of firearm-related offenses were violent in
nature (robberies and aggravated assault), with non-violent firearm-related crimes predominately
consisting of weapon law violations (18.4 percent) and drug/narcotic offenses (5.6 percent). 17
The average number of non-firearm-related criminal incidents (Non-Gun Crimes) per month-year
was 870.3. Also in Appendix Table 1, we show means of the dependent variable by gender, age,



16
  There are limitations of the NIBRS worthy of note. In contrast to the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), geographic
coverage of the NIBRS is much more limited. Only 15 states report all of their crime data through the NIBRS,
though the NIBRS collects crime data from 37 states. The Midwest and North central regions have a large
participation rate of policing agencies to the NIBRS while coverage in the West is fairly limited.
17
  We use definition the FBI definition for violent offenses that includes murder/non-negligent manslaughter,
forcible sex offenses, robbery, and aggravated assault.



                                                         8
and race/ethnicity of the offender. Males, African Americans, and those under age 35 are
disproportionately likely to be arrested in connection with a gun crime.


3.2 National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) Data
       We supplement our detailed crime data with administrative death records from the
National Vital Statistics System (NVSS). The NVSS, collected by the National Center for
Health Statistics, consists of individual level death records by cause and county. The NVSS
covers deaths for all U.S. residents. For our analysis we focus on firearm related homicide and
firearm related suicide and use the years 1991 to 2015. We restrict our sample to counties that
have at least one city with 50,000 population to ensure we have identified all enactment dates.
       Our main dependent variables from these data are Firearm Death, Firearm Homicide,
and Firearm Suicide. As shown in Table 1, the mean rate of firearm-related deaths was 2.4 per
10,000 county population, 54.9 percent of which were suicides and 45.1 percent of which were
homicides.
       There are several important advantages of the NVSS data. First, the data include every
county in the United States, which allows us to expand the number of buybacks that contribute to
identification and increase the external validity of our research design. Second, these data allow
us to explore the impact of GBPs on completed suicides.


3.3 Gun Buyback Program Data
       Data on GBPs were collected through searches of national, state and local media outlets,
as well as city legislative histories. A GBP is defined as an event where gun owners could
legally sell their firearms to their local law enforcement agencies, after which the firearms were
destroyed. The price per firearm set by city governments typically ranged from $25 to $450,
with the highest prices paid for self-loading rifles. Payments were typically made in cash, but
occasionally made in the form of gift cards for gas and groceries. In some cases, a GBP required
participants to redeem their reward within days following the GBP.
       From 1991-2015, we identified 339 GBPs held in 277 cities (in 110 counties). We used
public records to uncover the number of firearms sold in each GBP. Among these buybacks, the
mean (median) buyback consisted of 397 (157) firearms, or 14 (4) firearms per 10,000 county
population. The largest one-time buyback took place in St. Louis, Missouri on November 16,



                                                 9
1991, when 7,469 firearms were sold. Approximately 53 percent of these GBP cities had one
buyback, 23 percent had two buybacks, and 25 had three or more buybacks. The city with the
largest number of gun buybacks in our sample was Worcester, Massachusetts with 14 buybacks.
Table 2 lists cities that identify variation in our NIBRS analysis. 18


3.4 Empirical Strategy: NIBRS
           First, we use data from the 1991-2015 NIBRS to estimate the following regression
equation via a Poisson model: 19


 =   (0 + 1 0to2 + 2 3to5 + 3 6to11 +
                                          
                         4 12More +  5 + Z 6 +  +  +  )                                                  (1)


where  indexes law enforcement agency in county c in state s in month-by-year t. 20 Gun
Crime measures criminal incidents involving a firearm and  proxies exposure using agency
level-population served. 21 Our key right hand-side variables are a set of dichotomous variables
indicating time periods following a GBP: 0 to 2 months after (GBP0to2), 3 to 5 months after
(GBP3to5), 6 to 11 months after (GBP6to11) and 12 or more months after (GBP12More).
Additionally, we include agency-level fixed effects ( ) and month-by-year fixed effects ( ).
           
The vector  includes controls for demographic, socioeconomic, and policy controls measured
at the county and state levels. Demographic controls are measured at the county-level and
include the percent of the population (i) with a Bachelor's degree or higher, (ii) ages 15-to-19,



18
     Online Appendix 1 documents the source for each city gun buyback program.
19
  See Osgood (2000) for the strength and weaknesses of Poisson models to analyze crime rates. OLS cannot be used
because of two problems (i) precision of reporting is increasing in population size, violating the homogeneity of the
error term, and (ii) crime rates are bounded by zero, leading to an abnormal error term. Poisson models deal with
these problems by setting the variance as a function of the mean and uses only positive values. Additionally, Poisson
models handle fixed effects well without suffering from the incidental parameters problem.

20
  Within the NIBRS, agency and city are not interchangeable in all cases since the NIBRS accepts crime reports
from university police, tribal police, state police, and other agencies which do not have a population attributed.
Because we have restricted our population to agencies that serve a minimum of 50,000 people, none of these
agencies are in our sample.

21
     The NIBRS compiles agency-level population at the year-level.



                                                         10
(iii) ages 20-to-29, (iv) that were male, and (v) that were White, Black or Hispanic. 22
Socioeconomic and political controls include county-level per capita income, the county
unemployment rate, the larger of the state or Federal minimum wage, and an indicator for
whether the Governor of the state was a member of the Democrat party. Finally, crime control
policies are measured at the state-level and include indicators for whether the state has a shall
issue law for concealed carry permits, a child access prevention (CAP) law with a reckless
endangerment prosecutorial standard, a CAP law with a negligent storage prosecutorial standard,
a stand your ground law, a law requiring a trigger lock for firearms sold, and a law requiring a
minimum gun purchase age of 18. 23 In addition, we also include controls for police employees
per capita, police expenditure per capita, and the number of firearm background checks per
100,000 population.
        Identification of our key policy parameters of interest, 1, 2, 3, and 4 comes from 96
GBPs held across 42 cities with populations greater than 50,000. Table 1 lists each city's gun
buyback program, the date of the initiative, and the number of guns sold, where such information
was publicly available (in 81 percent of all cases). The geographic dispersion of all GBPs,
including those not contributing to identification in the NIBRS, but which do contribute to
identification in the NVSS-based analysis below, is shown in in Figure 1, with larger dots
representing larger average gun buybacks, as measured by per-capita number of guns sold.
        The credibility of our identification strategy relies on the parallel trends assumption being
satisfied. We take a number of tacks to bolster the case for a causal interpretation of our
estimated policy effects. First, to disentangle the effects of a GBP from jurisdiction-specific
time-varying unobservables, we add controls for agency-specific linear time trends and census
region-specific year effects to the right hand-side of the estimating equation:




22
  Population distribution and per capita income come from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER), Educational attainment by state comes from the American Community Survey (ACS), and Unemployment
Data comes from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
23
  Background check counts come from the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS), state CAP
law policies are taken from Sabia and Anderson (2018), state policing expenditure are collected from the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS), county-level minimum wage data are collected from Vaghul and Zipperer (2016), and state
shall issue laws, gun lock requirement laws, stand your ground laws, and minimum purchase age laws are collected
from the Gifford Law Center.


                                                       11
 =   (0 + 1 0to2 + 2 3to5 + 3 6to11 +
                        
          4 12M +  5 + Z 6 +  +    +  +  +  )                                                         (2)


where    is an agency-specific linear time trend, r indexes one of the four census regions, y
indexes the years 1991 to 2015, and  is a census region-specific year effect. This approach is
designed to control for unmeasured time shocks across law enforcement agencies and census
regions.
           Second, we conduct an event-study analysis by allowing the above 1 through 4 to vary
over time before and after the gun buyback was held:


             =  (0 + 12                  
                     =-12,-1    +   5 + Z 6 +  +

                                             +  +  +  )                                               (3)


      
where  is a set of indicators set equal to 1 if a GBP occurred i months from period t and

 is a set of indicators that are set equal to 1 if a GBP occurred i years from period t. For our
monthly event-study analyses, we focus on the year before and after the buyback, with the
reference period being the month prior to the GBP. We also present a longer-run event study
where we examine the periods four years prior to through four years after the buyback. Note that
because a single city may conduct multiple GBPs, our event-study framework accounts for
multiple events (Sandler and Sandler 2014). 24 Common pre-treatment trends may lend
credibility to the parallel trends assumption underlying our research design.
           Third, we replace Gun Crime with Non-Gun Crime in equations (1) and (2). To the
extent that GBPs have little effect on non-gun crime, estimates from such regressions could be
interpreted as falsification tests. Detecting effects of GBPs on non-gun crime could suggest that
the presence of a GBP is simply a marker of other unobserved crime trends, perhaps driven by
unmeasured gun policies or macroeconomic trends. However, this is not a perfect falsification
test. There may be general equilibrium effects through which GBPs affect non-gun crime. For
instance, criminals may substitute toward other weapons in response to GBPs. Still, we would
expect that GBPs should have a smaller effect on non-gun than gun crime. We also estimate a


24                                                   
     In this framework the set of indicators,  and  , are not individually mutually exclusive sets.


                                                        12
formal difference-in-difference-in-differences model to control for unobserved shocks that are
common to gun and non-gun crime.
      Finally, we explore spillover effects of GBPs. If buybacks have spillover effects to nearby
jurisdictions without GBPs, and the effects are similar to that in "treatment" cities, this could
bias estimated effects of GBPs toward zero. Thus, we explicitly model spillover effects of GBPs
to neighboring jurisdictions by including controls in equations (1) and (2) for whether a GBP
was held in another city within the same county or in a border county.


3.5 Synthetic Control Estimates
       As noted above, there is substantial heterogeneity across city GBPs, including the size of
the gun buyback program and characteristics of the affected population. While we experiment
with interacting our gun buyback variables in equations (1) and (2) with indicators for the size of
the buyback (i.e., number of guns sold), we can more flexibly address heterogeneous treatment
effects via a synthetic control design (Abadie et al. 2010). Our donor pool for each buyback city
is comprised of cities that did not enact a GBP over the period from 1991 to 2015. We generate
each synthetic city by requiring pre-treatment rates of gun crime per 10,000 population to be
similar in each pre-treatment year (Botosaru and Ferman 2019; Ferman and Pinto 2019). In
unreported results available upon request, we also explored "matching" on every other pre-
treatment year and on observable economic and gun policy variables described above. To
conduct statistical inference, we assign a placebo GBP to each city in the donor pool (on the date
of the treatment city GBP) and generate a p-value for the estimated treatment effect by ranking
the treatment city's pre-post mean squared prediction error (MSPE) ratio to each donor city's
pre-post MSPE (Abadie et al. 2010).


3.6 Empirical Strategy for NVSS
      Finally, to explore the relationship between GBPs and firearm-related deaths, we conduct
an event-study analysis comparable to equation (3a) above, using a Poisson specification:


        =  (0 + 12                  
                =-12,-1    +   5 + Z 6 +  +

                                        +  +  +  )                                        (5)




                                                 13
where FirearmDeathscst measures firearm-related deaths in county c and state s at year t. A
county is coded as having a gun buyback program if a city with a population greater than 50,000
held a buyback. We also disaggregate firearm-related deaths into homicides and suicides, as well
as conduct an event-study analysis using up to four years before and four years after the
buyback. Note that our main NVSS-based analysis is conducted at the county-level because
only 35 percent of all deaths in the NVSS data include city identifiers. To the extent that the
effects of city GBPs are very localized, a county-based analysis may be biased toward zero.
Supplemental analysis on the city-level subsample, available upon request, generates results on
firearm-related deaths that are qualitatively similar to those reported below.


                                              4. Results
       Tables 3 through 11 present the main findings for this study. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering at the city level (Bertrand et al. 2004).


4.1 Main Findings from NIBRS
       Estimates of 1 through 4 from equation (1) are reported in Panel I of Table 3. Estimates
from our most parsimonious specification, which includes controls for agency and month-by-
year fixed effects, provide no evidence that GBPs are associated with reductions in gun crime,
either during the first year following the buyback or in the years following. The inclusion of
controls for demographic characteristics (column 2), socioeconomic and political controls
(column 3), and other gun policies and anti-crime investments (column 4) does not change this
finding. The stability of our estimated gun buyback program effects across specifications adds to
our confidence that the timing of GBPs is exogenous to gun crime. The precision of our
estimates is such that, with 95 percent confidence, we can rule out gun crime declines in the 12
months following a GBP of greater than 1.3 percent and gun crime declines of greater than 2.2
percent a year after a GBP is held. Moreover, during the first two months following the gun
buyback, we find that a GBP is associated with an increase in incidents of firearm-related crime.




                                                  14
The 7.6 percent increase in gun crime we detect in column (4) is relatively modest, suggesting at
most, two additional gun crimes. 25
        In columns (5) and (6), we test the robustness of our findings to controls for spatial
heterogeneity. We find that the estimated effects of GBPs on gun crime is not sensitive to added
controls for agency-specific linear time trends (column 5) or census region-specific year effects
(column 6).
        Figure 2 presents the coefficient estimates from leads and lags the event-study analysis
described in equation (3a). We find no evidence of differential pre-treatment trends in gun crime
in "treatment" and "comparison cities" in the months leading up to a city GBP. During the
period 0 to 2 months following a GBP, we find evidence of a 4.9 to 6.8 percent increase in gun
crime, followed by no change in gun crime after 2 months following a buyback. Figure 3
presents results from equation (3b), where we examine longer-run annual leads and lags. Again,
the findings in the pre-treatment period are consistent with the common trends assumption. In
the post-treatment period, we find a small increase in gun crime over the first year following a
GBP, followed by longer-run null results.
        In Panel II of Table 3, we present estimates of the effect of GBPs on non-gun crime. We
find no evidence that a city GBP significantly affected the probability of a non-gun crime, either
in the short- or longer-run. These results add to our confidence that the short-run positive gun
crime effect we detect in Panel I of Table 3 is not driven by time-varying agency-specific
unmeasured heterogeneity.
        Difference-in-difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of GBPs on gun versus
non-gun crime, shown in Table 4, control for jurisdiction-specific time-varying unobservables
that may commonly affect gun and non-gun crime, such as increased investments in law
enforcement community policing. Across the three specifications presented in Table 4, we show
that GBPs are associated with a 6.7 percent increase in gun as compared to non-gun crime in the
two months following a gun buyback. We find no change in gun versus non-gun crime
thereafter. An event-study analysis, shown in Figure 4, confirms that this effect is not
contaminated by differential pre-treatment crime trends.



25
  Using a wild cluster bootstrap approach to conduct inference (Cameron et al. 2015), we obtain a p-value of 0.153
for the period 0-2 months following the gun buyback. Estimated p-values for the remaining post-treatment windows
range from 0.490 to 0.869.


                                                       15
4.3 Robustness Tests
           In Table 5, we conduct a number of sensitivity checks on our main difference-in-
difference (Panel I) and triple-difference (Panel II) specifications. Column (1) replicates
estimates reported in column (6) of Table 4 (Panel I) and column (3) of Table 5 (Panel II).
           In column (2), we restrict our buyback jurisdictions to those who implemented a GBP,
thus identifying our effects entirely from differences in timing of enactment. Our findings are
quantitatively similar to those shown in column (1).
           In column (3), we require a strictly balanced panel of law enforcement agency-months
and limit our sample to the 2005-2015 period, when electronic news sources in larger cities are
likely to have information on city GBP. The pattern of results is similar to our main sample, with
triple-difference estimates providing the strongest evidence for increases in gun crime in the first
two months following the buyback, but no effect thereafter.
           One concern with our "two-way fixed effects" estimates is that they may lead to biased
estimates -- and misleading diagnostic tests on pre-treatment trends--in the presence of
dynamic treatment effects and the use of early-adopting GBP cities as controls for late-adopting
GBP cities (Goodman-Bacon 2021). 26 In Figure 5, we present the results of an event-study
analysis using the approach advanced by Callaway and Sant'Anna (2021). Using cities that
never hold a GBP as the sole counterfactuals for our GBP-holding cities, we continue to find that
pre-treatment crime trends are consistent with the common trends assumption. In the post-
treatment period, we find no evidence that GBPs reduce gun crime (panel a) or non-gun crime
(panel b) in the 24 months following its enactment. 27 We find a small, short-run (month of
enactment) increase in gun relative to non-gun crime.
           To test the sensitivity of our estimates to additional data quality controls, we drop
agency-months where crime counts are greater than or less than two standard deviations from the
city-specific mean (column 4). The estimates from these exercises are consistent with those in
column (1).

26
     Of the 251 large cities in our sample, 207 never held a GBP.

27
  The event studies in Figure 5 are generated using a balanced panel from the sample described in column (3) of
Table 5. Regression results are obtained from linear models, which are, at the time of this writing, the only
regressions permitted in the available R package for this estimator. The dependent variable is equal to the inverse
hyperbolic sign of gun (or non-gun) crimes, adjusting for agency population. In Appendix Figure 1 we show event-
study analyses from two-way fixed effects models.



                                                           16
         In the final three columns of Table 5, we explore the sensitivity of results to weighting
the regression by the population served by the law enforcement agency (column 5), adding
controls for agency-specific quadratic time trends (column 6), and adding controls for census
division-specific year effects (column 7). The pattern of results is consistent with our baseline
estimates. 28


4.4 Jurisdictional Spillovers and Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
         Could the null estimates we observe be driven by spillover effects of GBPs into nearby
jurisdictions? In Table 6, we explore whether GBPs generate gun crime spillovers to (i)
neighboring cities within the county, or (ii) cities in a bordering county. To that end, we
generate two variables: GBP in County, set equal to 1 if a city within the county held a gun
buyback and 0 otherwise, and Border County GBP, set equal to 1 if a city in a border county held
a gun buyback and 0 otherwise. Note that in the creation of these variables, we also include
GBPs held in neighboring cities even if those cities were not themselves included in the NIBRS.
Our findings in Table 6 provide very little evidence of spillover effects of GBPs on gun crime in
neighboring jurisdictions.
         In Table 7, explore whether city GBPs had differential effects on violent (Panel I) as
compared to non-violent (Panel II) gun crime. We find no evidence that GBPs significantly
reduced violent or non-violent crime in either the short-run or longer-run. Rather, we find
holding a GBP is associated with short-run increases in firearm-involved robberies (Panel I,
column 2), rape/sexual assault (Panel I, column 5), weapons law violations (Panel II, column 2),
and kidnapping (Panel II, column 5). 29
         We next examine whether the effects of GBPs on gun crime differ by age, gender, or race
of the offender. The findings in Table 8 provide no support for the hypothesis that GBPs
reduced gun crime for any demographic group. Instead, we find short-run increases in gun crime
for those ages 18 to 23 (column 3), individuals over age 35 (column 5), males (column 6),
females (column 7), and African Americans (column 9).

28
  Finally, in Appendix Table 2, we aggregate our data to the annual-level and estimate both Poisson and ordinary
least squares estimates of the effect of GBPs on gun crime. Our results show no evidence of declines in gun crime
following a GBP.
29
  Our findings in Appendix Table 3, which include controls for spatial heterogeneity, produce a qualitatively similar
pattern of results.


                                                         17
         Finally, in Table 9, we examine whether our null results for the average city GBP masks
heterogeneity in their effects by the number of guns bought back. We measure the size of the
buyback by whether guns sold per capita (or raw number of guns sold) exceeded the (i) median
city GBP (columns 1 and 2), (ii) 75th percentile of the gun sale distribution (columns 3 and 4),
and (iii) 90th percentile of the gun sale distribution (columns 5 and 6). We find no evidence that
relatively larger gun buyback efforts, in absolute or per capita terms, reduced gun crime in either
the short- or long-run. Moreover, we find that the short-run increases in gun crime in the first
two months following the gun buyback were driven by relatively larger GBPs.


4.5 Synthetic Control Estimates
         To most flexibly test for heterogeneity in the gun crime effects of city GBPs, we next
turn to a synthetic control analysis (Abadie et al. 2010). Figure 6 shows synthetic control figures
for each city GBP when we impose the requirement that each of up to six pre-treatment periods
have comparable gun crime rates. Appendix Table 4 lists the donor cities that received positive
weights for each treatment city and Table 10 shows estimated treatment effects for up to five
years following a GBP. Also shown in Table 10 are p-values generated from permutation-type
tests of how frequently one would expect to observe the estimated treatment effect of an actual
GBP when randomly assigned a placebo (false) GBP in each donor city. 30 Note that there are a
total of 211 cities that have never enacted a GBP in the donor pool. 31
         We highlight two key findings from the synthetic control analysis. First, across treatment
cities, our synthetic procedure generates pre-intervention trends in gun crime that are similar
across treatment and synthetic control jurisdictions. Second, we find very little evidence that
GBPs are associated with significant post-treatment reductions in gun crime across GBPs. In 29
out of 38 cases, we can reject the hypothesis that GBPs affected gun crime following the first
year of buyback. When p-values generated from permutation tests were less than .05, the


30
  Appendix Figure 2 displays the results for placebo tests where we apply the synthetic control method to cities did
not have a gun buyback during our sample period. We assign a placebo date to each donor state that is equivalent to
the treatment city GBP date. The gray lines represent the gap in the gun crime rate associated with each placebo
run.
31
  One GBP city, Battle Creek, did not report crime in December of 2013, we impute the average crime rate of
previous months in that year for analysis. Three cities (Flint, Milwaukee, Springfield) did not have a full
pretreatment year and thus could not be used for synthetic controls.



                                                         18
estimated effect is positive in seven of these cases. Only for two Ohio cities -- Cincinnati and
Columbus -- do we find evidence of significant declines in the rate of gun crime rate following a
GBP. And in each case, the effect is rendered statistically indistinguishable from zero following
the inclusion of a second year of post-treatment data.


4.6 Firearm-Related Homicides and Suicides
         Finally, we use NVSS mortality data to estimate the impact of a gun GBP on county-level
firearm-related deaths (column 1), which are then disaggregated into firearm-related suicides
(column 2) and homicides (column 3). 32 The event-study coefficients reported in Table 11,
along with those depicted in Figures 6 through 8, provide no evidence that GBPs reduce firearm-
related deaths in the year following a GBP. There is also no evidence that firearm-related
suicides and homicides declined in the years following a GBP (Figures 9 and 10). Triple-
difference estimates, shown in Appendix Figures 3 through 5, suggest no evidence that firearm-
related deaths fell relative to non-firearm related deaths following a GBP.
         Finally, when we explore whether firearm-related deaths were affected by larger gun
buybacks (Table 12 and Appendix Table 5), we find little evidence that firearm-related deaths
were differentially affected by the size of the buyback. Furthermore, event study analyses
provide no evidence that larger GBPs reduce firearm-related suicides (Appendix Table 6) or
homicides.


                                                  5. Discussion
         Our findings provide compelling evidence that GBPs held over the last three decades
have done little to reduce gun crime or firearm-related violence. This finding is of substantial
policy relevance, as current policymakers continue to hold city GBPs of similar scope (Godley
2021; Goshay 2021; Chinchilla 2021; Birmingham PD 2021; Ly 2021; Associated Press 2021;
Daily Freeman Staff 2021; Milian 2021; Rubinstein et al. 2021). There are a number of
explanations for this result. First, the number of firearms sold in a typical GBP is relatively
modest, perhaps owed to a city buyback price of $25 to $450 per firearm. This price is often
well below the cost of a new, or even used, firearm, which can easily exceed $500 (Willis 2018).


32
  City-level identifiers are only available for 35 percent of all firearm-involved deaths. Supplementary analysis on
this sample, shown in Appendix Table 2, produced a qualitatively similar pattern of results.


                                                         19
If a gun owner values his/her firearm at more than the city buyback price, perhaps because of its
self-defense benefits or its usefulness in facilitating income-generating crime, the firearm will
not be sold.
       When compared to the number of licensed gun owners and firearm sales, it may not be
surprising that GBPs have small effects on gun crime. For instance, the 2014 GBP in
Somerville, Massachusetts collected 15 firearms. But just two years prior, 1,593 firearm permits
were held by Somerville residents (Ouellette 2013). To take another example, a 2015 GBP in
Worcester, Massachusetts collected 271 firearms. However, annual firearm sales at The Gun
Parlor, a retail establishment in Worcester, exceeded 3,100 during this period (Gross 2018).
Finally, GBPs in Gary, Indiana (2012), Indianapolis, Indiana (2006), and South Bend, Indiana
(2007) netted 90 to 253 firearms per buyback. To put these numbers in context, Indiana has a
gun ownership rate of 44.8 percent, suggesting that approximately 467,037 individuals own at
least one firearm (World Population Review 2020). Most buybacks have a very small effect on
the local supply of firearms, which could be one reason for their ineffectiveness.
       Second, most participants in buyback programs tend to be drawn from populations with
relatively lower crime risk (Planty and Truman 2013; Violano et al. 2014; Romero et al. 1998).
Case studies of GBPs find that the modal participant is white (81 percent), male (74 percent), and
over the age of 55 (59 percent) (Violano et al. 2014). Those who participated in GBPs lived, on
average, 19 miles from the city in more suburban and rural areas, and had a median household
income of $65,731.
       GBPs also do not appear to reduce the number of households without firearms. More than
half of respondents who sold their firearms at a buyback had another firearm in their home
(Kasper et al. 2017; Green et al. 2017; Violano et al. 2014).
       In addition, firearms sold in buybacks do not appear to be those that would typically be
used to commit gun crime. Approximately 25 percent of GBP participants reported that the
firearms they sold were not in good working order (Romero et al. 1998). A study of a series of
gun buybacks in Milwaukee, Wisconsin between 1994 and 1997 found that the types of firearms
turned in were more likely to be older weapons with longer barrels and smaller magazine size
(Kuhn et al. 2002). Such weapon traits are not commonly linked to firearm-related homicides
and suicides (Planty and Truman 2013). These findings are consistent with adverse selection in
firearm quality that one would expect to observe with a relatively low offer price and no price



                                                 20
discrimination. Moreover, income gains to GBP participants selling poorer quality firearms --
which are often destroyed -- could result in an increase in the sale of newly manufactured,
properly functioning guns.
         Finally, over half of all firearms turned in were not originally purchased by the gun
owner, but instead were inherited or gifted (National Research Council 2005). To the extent that
inherited or gifted firearms are less desired than firearms that are purchased with one's own
income, this finding could suggest that GBPs are one way to transfer unwanted firearms.
         Given that most buybacks are small in scope, involve poorly functioning firearms, and
involve participants with low propensity for crime, how can we explain the short-run small crime
increase that we observe following a GBP? This result is consistent with a number of
hypotheses. As noted above, the marginal participant may have sold a poorly functioning
firearm to obtain income used to purchase well-functioning firearms that may be used in or
stolen for commission of gun crime. 33 Moreover, the GBP may induce some potential gun
criminals to engage in more crime because they perceive that law-abiding citizens participating
in GBP will be less likely to defend themselves with deadly force (Lott 1998). Additionally,
some buybacks, particularly those that are repeated, may induce stocking up of firearms among
those who (i) fear that repeated buybacks may lead to tighter compulsory gun control policies, or
(ii) are responding to a reduction in the ownership cost of firearms and expect to sell the firearm
back in the future (Mullin 2001).


                                                 6. Conclusion
         A recent surge in U.S. city gun buyback programs has raised hopes that such efforts can
serve as an effective strategy to curb gun crime in the United States. Congressman Donald
Payne (D-New Jersey), a lead sponsor of H.R. 1279, Safer Neighborhoods Gun Buyback Act,
predicted that if federal funding for local buybacks is expanded, "there will be fewer guns in
circulation, which will help reduce crime" (Payne 2019). On the other hand, North Dakota
Representative Luke Simons, the sponsor of a bill that would ban funding GBPs in his state,
argued "firearm buybacks do nothing to increase public safety and shouldn't be subsidized by


33
   While not a common occurrence, one GBP from Detroit in 2012 was faced with protesters who offered cash for
guns adjacent to the GBP. In this case, we may actually see a GBP facilitating the exchange of firearms, albeit an
illegal exchange since protestors presumably did not have a license to conduct such transactions.



                                                         21
taxpayer money" (MacPherson 2019), sentiments echoed by the National Rifle Association (Ellis
and Hicken 2015).
         Over the last decade, more than 100 U.S. cities have adopted GBPs with the hope of
reducing gun crime. However, while local policymakers continue to advocate for and hold
GBPs, little is known about their effect on gun violence. Using data from the 1991-2015
National Incident­Based Reporting System (NIBRS) and National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS), this study is the first to comprehensively assess the impact of city GBPs on gun crime
and firearm-related violence.
         Our findings provide compelling evidence that U.S. GBPs have been ineffective at
deterring gun crime, firearm-related homicides, or firearm-related suicides in the short- or long-
run. The precision of our estimates is such that, with 95 percent confidence, we can rule out gun
crime declines of greater than 1.3 percent in the 12 months following a buyback and gun crime
declines of greater than 2.3 percent more than one year after a buyback. These null findings are
consistent with descriptive evidence that (i) firearm sales prices are set too low by cities to
appreciably reduce the local supply of firearms (Reuter and Mouzos 2004), (ii) most GBP
participants are drawn from populations with low crime risk (Planty and Truman 2013; Violano
et al. 2014; Romero et al. 1998), and (iii) firearms sold in GBPs tend to be older and less well-
functioning than the average firearm (Kuhn et al. 2002; Levitt 2004).
         Moreover, we find some evidence of a small, short-run increase in gun crime in the two
months following a GBP. This result is consistent with the notion that GBPs primarily target
low-risk firearms that are more likely to deter crime than be used in the commission of a crime
(Kuhn et al. 2002) and with the hypothesis that some criminals may be emboldened by their
perception that victims will be less likely to defend themselves with deadly physical force (Lott
1998).
         Our results suggest that GBPs have been an inefficient use of taxpayers' dollars in the
United States. Perhaps alternative firearm-related policies, such as safe storage laws (Anderson
et al. 2019) or stricter background checks (Gius 2015), would be more effective at deterring gun
violence. Our findings also suggest that prior city GBPs have been poorly designed to achieve
their policy objectives. In contrast, buyback programs that target high crime neighborhoods,
offer higher rewards for firearms more likely to be used to commit violent crimes, or price




                                                 22
discriminate across weapons of heterogeneous quality may affect gun violence differently. 34
However, the limited public appetite for large-scale government spending on voluntary gun
confiscation, coupled with the inherent difficulties of targeting weapons used by criminals but
not those used by those who would defend themselves, make gun buybacks an unlikely anti-gun
crime-fighting tool.




34
  While not specifically targeting persons who are more likely to use firearms in the commission of a crime, 2021
New York City mayoral candidate Kathryn Garcia proposed a tenfold increase in the price paid (by the local
government) for each firearm, which would amount to $2000 per firearm (Rubinstein et al. 2021).


                                                        23
                                         7. References
Abadie, A., Diamond, A., & Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic control methods for comparative
       case studies: Estimating the effect of California's tobacco control program. Journal of the
       American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493-505.
Anderson et al. (2019). Child Access Prevention Laws and Juvenile Firearm-Related Homicides.
       (No. 25209). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anderson, D. M., & Sabia, J. J. (2018). Child-access-prevention laws, youths' gun carrying, and
       school shootings. The Journal of Law and Economics, 61(3), 489-524.
Andrés, A. R., & Hempstead, K. (2011). Gun control and suicide: The impact of state firearm
       regulations in the United States, 1995­2004. Health Policy, 101(1), 95-103.
Associated Press (1996). Australia Gunman Kills at Least 32. The New York Times, pp. 1.
Associated Press (2021, May 22). City of Albuquerque collects 166 guns in a buyback program.
       AP News. Retrieved from https://www.abqjournal.com/2392689/gun-buyback-event-set-
       for-saturday-ex-the-noquestionsasked-event-aims-to-decrease-gun-violence-in-
       albuquerque.html
Ayres, I., & Donohue III, J. J. (2002). Shooting down the more guns, less crime hypothesis (No.
       w9336). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baker, J., & McPhedran, S. (2007). Gun laws and sudden death: Did the Australian firearms
       legislation of 1996 make a difference? The British Journal of Criminology, 47(3), 455-
       469.
Barber, C. W., & Miller, M. J. (2014). Reducing a suicidal person's access to lethal means of
       suicide: a research agenda. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 47(3), S264-S272.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust differences-in-
       differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-275.
Bilowol, J., & Davis, B. (2007). Struggling with its Massacre in Silence. The Sydney Morning
       Herald.
Birmingham PD (2021). Media Release 109: Gun Buyback "No Questions Asked". Press
       Release. Retrieved from https://police.birminghamal.gov/media-release-109-2/
Botosaru, I., & Ferman, B. (2019). On the role of covariates in the synthetic control method. The
       Econometrics Journal, 22(2), 117-130.
Bradner, E. (2019). O'Rourke calls for licensing in plan to curb gun violence and white
       nationalism. CNN. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2019/08/16/politics/beto-
       orourke-plan-gun-violence-white-nationalism/index.html
Braga, A. A., & Wintemute, G. J. (2013). Improving the potential effectiveness of gun buyback
       programs. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 45(5), 668-671.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, & United States Department of Justice,
       (2016). Firearms Commerce in the United States 2015, Annual Statistical Update.
Callahan, C. M., Rivara, F. P., & Koepsell, T. D. (1994). Money for guns: evaluation of the
       Seattle gun buy-back program. Public Health Reports, 109(4), 472­477.
Callaway, B. and Sant'Anna, P. (2021). Difference-in-differences with multiple time periods. In
       press at Journal of Econometrics.


                                               24
Chapman, S., Alpers, P., & Jones, M. (2016). Association between gun law reforms and
        intentional firearm deaths in Australia, 1979-2013. JAMA, 316(3), 291-299.
Chapman, S., Alpers, P., Agho, K., & Jones, M. (2006). Australia's 1996 gun law reforms: faster
        falls in firearm deaths, firearm suicides, and a decade without mass shootings. Injury
        Prevention, 12(6), 365-372.
Chinchilla, Rudy (2021, May 22). With Gun Buybacks, Philadelphia Fighting Uphill Battle.
        NBC Philadelphia. Retrieved from https://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/broke-
        in-philly/with-gun-buybacks-philadelphia-fighting-uphill-battle/2823158/
Congress.gov. (2021). H.R. 3143. To Establish a Gun Buyback Grant Program.
        https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/3143/text
Cook, P. J., & Leitzel, J. A. (1998). Gun control. Available at SSRN 10493.
Coulter, T. (2020). Committee advances bill prohibiting firearm buyback programs. Wyoming
        News. Retrieved from https://www.wyomingnews.com/news/local_news/committee-
        advances-bill-prohibiting-firearm-buyback-programs/article_4981040b-d418-5cde-be33-
        8182214fc72a.html
de Fatima Marinho de Souza, M., Macinko, J., Alencar, A. P., Malta, D. C., & de Morais Neto,
        O. L. (2007). Reductions in firearm-related mortality and hospitalizations in Brazil after
        gun control. Health Affairs, 26(2), 575-584.
Daily Freeman Staff. (2021, May 21). Kingston Gun Buyback Event Offers Gift Cards of up to
        $250. Daily Freeman. Retrieved from https://www.dailyfreeman.com/news/local-
        news/kingston-gun-buyback-event-offers-gift-cards-of-up-to-250/article_39015cd8-ba43-
        11eb-99b0-cb5a1f5ed503.html
Department of Housing and Urban Development. Notice terminating funding availability for
        public housing drug elimination program gun buyback violence reduction initiative.
        Federal Register Docket No. FR-4451-N-08, 01-18331 (July 23, 2001)
DeSimone, J., Markowitz, S., & Xu, J. (2013). Child access prevention laws and nonfatal gun
        injuries. Southern Economic Journal, 80(1), 5-25.
Donohue, J. J., Aneja, A., & Weber, K. D. (2017). Right-to-carry laws and violent crime: a
        comprehensive assessment using panel data and a state-level synthetic controls analysis
        (No. w23510). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Donohue, J., & Ayres, I. (2009). More guns, less crime fails again: the latest evidence from
        1977­2006. Econ Journal Watch 6(2), 218-238
Duggan, M. (2001). More guns, more crime. Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 1086-1114.
Ellis B., & Hicken M. (2015). New laws force police to put guns back on the street. CNN Money.
        Retrieved from https://money.cnn.com/2015/10/21/news/police-selling-seized-guns/
Federal Bureau of Investigation, (2016). Uniform Crime Report, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
        Washington, DC.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2013). NIBRS Participation by Population Group, Retrieved
        from https://ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/2013/resources/nibrs-participation-by-population-group
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2016). Expanded Homicide Data Table 4, 2012-2016
Ferman, B., & Pinto, C. (2019). Synthetic controls with imperfect pre-treatment fit. arXiv
        preprint arXiv:1911.08521.


                                               25
Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2017. [Washington, DC]:
        Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives. (2017)
Fowler, K. A., Dahlberg, L. L., Haileyesus, T., & Annest, J. L. (2015). Firearm injuries in the
        United States. Preventive Medicine, 79, 5-14.
Gius, M. (2015). The effects of state and federal background checks on state-level gun-related
        murder rates. Applied Economics, 47(38), 4090-4101.
Godley, Molly (2021, April 22). Albany public safety committee talks another gun buyback
        event, safety app trial. WALB News 10. Retrieved from
        https://www.walb.com/2021/04/22/albany-public-safety-committee-talks-another-gun-
        buyback-event-safety-app-trial/
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew (2021). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.
        In press at Journal of Econometrics.
Goshay, Charita M. (2021, May 8). Gun violence has pastors urging support for Canton gun
        buyback program. Canton Repository. Retrieved from
        https://www.cantonrep.com/story/news/2021/05/08/pastors-join-safer-streets-initiative-
        canton/4953582001/
Green, J., Damle, R. N., Kasper, R. E., Violano, P., Manno, M., Nazarey, P. P., ... & Hirsh, M. P.
        (2017). Are "goods for guns" good for the community? An update of a community gun
        buyback program. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 83(2), 284-288.
Gross, S. (2018). Obtaining license to carry a firearm in Massachusetts may be easier than you
        think. Retrieved from https://www.telegram.com/news/20180326/obtaining-license-to-
        carry-firearm-in-massachusetts-may-be-easier-than-you-think
Grossman, D. C., Mueller, B. A., Riedy, C., Dowd, M. D., Villaveces, A., Prodzinski, J., ... &
        Harruff, R. (2005). Gun storage practices and risk of youth suicide and unintentional
        firearm injuries. JAMA, 293(6), 707-714.
Hains, T. (2019). Biden calls for federal gun buyback program, making assault weapons "illegal,
        period." Retrieved from
        https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/08/06/biden_calls_for_gun_buyback_progr
        am_making_assault_weapons_illegal_period.html
Kansas City Star. (1992, December 29). Plagued cities buy back guns, but effect is doubted. The
        Baltimore Sun.
Kasper, R. E., et al. (2017). And the survey said.... evaluating rationale for participation in gun
        buybacks as a tool to encourage higher yields. Journal of Pediatric Surgery 52(2), 354-
        359.
Kuhn, E. M., et al. (2002). Missing the target: a comparison of buyback and fatality related guns.
        Injury Prevention, 8(2), 143-146.
Lang, M. (2016). State firearm sales and criminal activity: evidence from firearm background
        checks. Southern Economic Journal, 83(1), 45-68.
Lee, W. S., & Suardi, S. (2010). The Australian firearms buyback and its effect on gun deaths.
        Contemporary Economic Policy, 28(1), 65-79.
Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain the
        decline and six that do not. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 163-190.


                                                26
Lott, J. R. (2013). More guns, less crime: Understanding crime and gun control laws. University
         of Chicago Press.
Lott, Jr, J. R. (1998). The concealed-handgun debate. The Journal of Legal Studies, 27(1), 221-
         243.
Lott, Jr, J. R., & Mustard, D. B. (1997). Crime, deterrence, and right-to-carry concealed
         handguns. The Journal of Legal Studies, 26(1), 1-68.
Ludwig, J., & Cook, P. J. (2000). Homicide and suicide rates associated with implementation of
         the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act. Journal of the American Medical
         Association, 284(5), 585-591.
Ludwig, J., & Cook, P. J. (Eds.). (2004). Evaluating gun policy: Effects on crime and violence.
         Brookings Institution Press.
Ly, Jennifer (2021, May 20). Gun buyback being held in Rochester next week. WHEC News.
         Retrieved from https://www.whec.com/rochester-new-york-news/gun-buyback-being-
         held-in-rochester-next-week/6116116/
MacPherson, J., (2019, February 7). North Dakota ponders ban on public firearm buyback
         programs. The Washington Post.
McPhedran, S., & Baker, J. (2008). Australian firearms legislation and unintentional firearm
         deaths: A theoretical explanation for the absence of decline following the 1996 gun laws.
         Public Health, 122, 297-299.
Michigan Legislature (2020) House Bill 5479. Retrieved from
         http://www.legislature.mi.gov/(S(eqncvtnsak4xafw5iqlxirch))/mileg.aspx?page=getObjec
         t&objectName=2020-HB-5479
Mullin, W. P. (2001). Will gun buyback programs increase the quantity of guns?. International
         Review of Law and Economics, 21(1), 87-102.
National Center for Health Statistics. 1989­2015 Detailed Mortality Files­ All Counties, as
         compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital
         Statistics Cooperative Program.
National Research Council. (2005). Firearms and violence: A critical review. National
         Academies Press.
Neill, C., & Leigh, A. (2008). Do gun buy-backs save lives? Evidence from time series variation.
         Current Issues in Criminal Justice, 20(2), 145-162.
New York State Senate. (2019). NYS Senate Session - 1/14/19 [YouTube]. Retrieved from
         https://youtu.be/hStb-SUav_M
New York Post. (2021, May 14). The Choice for Next NYC Mayor is Clearer Than Ever.
         Retrieved from https://nypost.com/2021/05/14/the-choice-for-next-nyc-mayor-is-clearer-
         than-ever/?utm_campaign=iphone_nyp&utm_source=message_app
Osgood, D. W. (2000). Poisson-based regression analysis of aggregate crime rates. Journal of
         Quantitative Criminology, 16(1), 21-43.
Ouellette, M. (2013). See Somerville's active firearms licenses. Retrieved from
         https://patch.com/massachusetts/somerville/see-somerville-s-active-firearms-licenses
Parry, R. (1974, December 8). Guns of Baltimore: Why did bounty stop? Toledo Blade.



                                               27
Payne, Donald M. (2019, February 13). Payne, Jr. introduces gun buyback legislation [Press
        release]. Retrieved from https://payne.house.gov/press-release/payne-jr-introduces-gun-
        buyback-legislation-0
Planty, M., & Truman, J. L. (2013). Firearm Violence, 1993-2011. Washington, DC: US
        Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Rearden, Caitlin (2021, April 8). Reading finalizes plans for pair of gun buyback events. WFMZ
        News. Retrieved from https://www.wfmz.com/news/area/berks/reading-finalizes-plans-
        for-pair-of-gun-buyback-events/article_a05aacc6-98a7-11eb-b4e9-5f022dea0af9.html
Reuter, P., & Mouzos, J. (2004). Low-risk guns. Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and
        Violence, 121.
Romero, M. P., Wintemute, G. J., & Vernick, J. S. (1998). Characteristics of a gun exchange
        program, and an assessment of potential benefits. Injury Prevention, 4(3), 206-210.
Rubinstein, D., Mays, J. C. & Bromwich, J. E. (2021, May 13). ow Would the Mayoral
        Candidates Get Guns Off New York Streets?. The New York Times.
Sandler, D. H., & Sandler, R. (2014). Multiple event studies in public finance and labor
        economics: A simulation study with applications. Journal of Economic and Social
        Measurement, 39(1, 2), 31-57.
Schuster, M. A., Franke, T. M., Bastian, A. M., Sor, S., & Halfon, N. (2000). Firearm storage
        patterns in US homes with children. American Journal of Public Health, 90(4), 588.
Sen, B., & Panjamapirom, A. (2012). State background checks for gun purchase and firearm
        deaths: an exploratory study. Preventive Medicine, 55(4), 346-350.
Sherman, L. W. (2001). Reducing gun violence: What works, what doesn't, what's promising.
        Criminal Justice, 1(1), 11-25.
Small Arms Survey, Geneva. (2017). Small Arms Survey 2017: Weapons and the World (Small
        Arms Survey). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        doi:10.1017/CBO9781107323636
Spitzer, R. (2015). Guns across America: Reconciling gun rules and rights. Oxford University
        Press.
Taylor, Benjamin and Jing Li. 2015. "Do Fewer Guns Lead to Less Crime? Evidence from
        Australia." International Review of Law and Economics, 42: 72-78.
Vaghul, K., & Zipperer, B. (2016). Historical state and sub-state minimum wage data.
        Washington Center for Equitable Growth.
Violano, P., et al. (2014). Gun buyback programs: a venue to eliminate unwanted guns in the
        community. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, 77(3), S46-S50.
Willis, J. (2018). Owning a gun in America is a luxury. Retrieved from
        https://www.gq.com/story/gun-ownership-cost
World Population Review. (2020). Gun per capita 2020. Retrieved from
        http://worldpopulationreview.com/states/guns-per-capita/
Xu, J., Murphy, S. L., Kochanek, K. D., Bastian, B., & Arias, E. (2018). Deaths: Final data for
        2016. CDC.




                                              28
                           Figure 1: Gun Buyback Programs in Cities with Greater than 50,000 Population




Black dots indicate that a GBP occurred in this indicated city. Larger dots represent cities with more guns bought back per capita.




                                                                        29
   Figure 2: Event Study Analysis of Gun-Related Crimes, Short-Run




 Figure 3: Event-Study Analysis of Gun-Related Crimes, Long-Run




Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). All regressions include all socioeconomic,
demographic, and policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific
linear time trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are
clustered at the state-level.



                                            30
     Figure 4: Event-Study Analysis of Gun Crimes vs Non-Gun Crimes




Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-
Based Reporting System (NIBRS). All regressions include all socioeconomic, demographic, and
policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time trends. The
gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered at the state-level.




                                               31
Figure 5: Callaway-Sant'Anna Event-Study Analysis of Effect of GBP on Crime,
                 Using Cities without GBP as Counterfactual

                                 (a) Gun Crime




                              (b) Non-Gun Crime




                                    32
Figure 6: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of GBP on Gun Crime
    (a) Akron, OH                                 (b) Battle Creek, MI




   (c) Cambridge, MA                              (d) Cedar Rapids, IA




                                                  (f) Cincinnati, OH
  (e) Chesapeake, VA




    (g) Columbia, SC                              (h) Columbus, OH




                                33
                              Figure 5, Continued
(i) Davenport, IA                                   (j) Fall River, MA


           Battle Creek, MI




(k) Greenwich, CT                                   (l) Haverhill, MA




(m) Jackson, TN                                     (n) Kalamazoo, MI




(o) Lansing, MI                                      (p) Lowell, MA




                                      34
                           Figure 5, Continued
 (q) Lynchburg, VA                               (r) Memphis, TN




 (s) Murfreesboro, TN                            (t) Nashville, TN




 (u) New Bedford, MA                             (v) New Haven, CT




(w) North Charleston, SC                         (x) Norwalk, CT




                                   35
                       Figure 5, Continued
(y) Pawtucket, RI                             (z) Providence, RI




(aa) Pocatello, ID                           (bb) Sommerville, MA




(cc) Springfield, OR                          (dd) Stamford, CT




(ee) Waltham, MA                              (ff) Warwick, RI




                               36
                     Figure 5, Continued
(gg) Waterloo, IA                          (hh) Wilmington, DE




(ii) Worcester, MA




                             37
Figure 6: Event-Study Analysis of Effect of GBP on Firearm-Related Deaths, NVSS




Figure 7: Event-Study Analysis of Effect of GBP on Firearm-Related Suicides, NVSS




      Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
      Vital Statistics System (NVSS). All regressions include socioeconomic, demographic, &
      policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time
      trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at
      the state-level.



                                                 38
Figure 8: Event-Study Analysis of Effect of GBP on Firearm-Related Homicides, NVSS




   Figure 9: Longer-Run Event-Study Analysis of Firearm-Related Suicides, NVSS




      Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
      Vital Statistics System (NVSS). All regressions include all socioeconomic, demographic,
      and policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time
      trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered at
      the state-level.


                                                  39
Figure 10: Longer-Run Event-Study Analysis of Firearm-Related Homicides, NVSS




     Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
     Vital Statistics System (NVSS). All regressions include all socioeconomic, demographic,
     and policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time
     trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered at
     the state-level.




                                                 40
                     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, 1991-2015
                                                  Mean           SD                          Min           Max
Dependent Variables, NIBRS
 Gun Crime Count                                  25.879        68.140                       0.00        1, 020.00
  Gun Crime Count, Non-Violent                     7.399        16.674                       0.00         328.00
  Gun Crime Count, Violent                        18.480        53.282                       0.00         849.00
 Non-Gun Crime Count                             870.266      1,208.272                      0.00        10,940.00
  Non-Gun Crime Count, Non-Violent               825.931     1, 139.367                      0.00        9, 961.00
  Non-Gun Crime Count, Violent                    44.336        77.038                       0.00        1, 255.00
Dependent Variables, NVSS
 Firearm-Related Deaths                                       2.370           6.036          0.00          219.00
 Firearm-Related Homicide                                     1.068           4.260          0.00          175.00
 Firearm-Related Suicide                                      1.302           2.363          0.00           58.00
Demographic Controls
 Population % Age 15-19a                                      0.072           0.010          0.03           0.12
 Population % Age 20-29 a                                     0.149           0.035          0.08           0.30
 Population % White a                                         0.734           0.141          0.14           0.98
 Population % Black a                                         0.132           0.133          0.00           0.58
 Population % Hispanic a                                      0.092           0.088          0.00           0.82
 Population % Male a                                          0.490           0.009          0.46           0.52
 Percentage College Graduatesb                                0.293           0.066          0.14           0.46

Socioeconomic and Political Controls
 Per Capita Income ($2015)b                                45,799.965     13,576.492      22,745.69     114,636.08
 Unemployment Ratec                                           5.868          2.494           0.80         28.30
 Minimum Wage ($2015)d                                        7.504          0.945           5.90         15.24
 Democrat Governor e                                          0.432          0.495           0.00          1.00

Crime Control Policy Controls
 Background Checks per 100,000 Populationf                   5,012.952     5,317.951         0.00        72,737.94
 Stand Your Ground Lawg                                        0.335          0.471          0.00           1.00
 Shall Issue Lawg                                              0.757          0.429          0.00           1.00
 Gun Lock Required for Saleg                                   0.330          0.470          0.00           1.00
 Negligent Child Access Prevention Lawh                        0.305          0.460          0.00           1.00
 Reckless Child Access Prevention Lawh                         0.248          0.432          0.00           1.00
 Police Expenditure per 100,000 ($2015)i                      263.838        45.656         108.87        396.32
 Police Officers per 100,000 Populationi                       2.147          0.425          1.25           3.67
 State/Federal Minimum Age Law 18g                             0.993          0.084          0.00           1.00
  Notes: NIBRS sample includes all reporting agencies with population mean greater than or equal to 50,000. NVSS
  sample includes all counties with at least one city with 50,000 population.



  Observation Level:


                                                        41
State: State/Fed Min Age Law, Shall Issue Law, Background Checks per 100,000, Gun Lock Required, CAP Law,
Police Expenditure, Police Expenditure per Capita, Stand Your Ground, Percent College Grad, Democratic Governor.

County: Age 15-19, Age 20-29, Population % Hispanic, Population % Black, Population % White, Population %
Male, Per Capita Income (2015$), Minimum Wage (Average), Unemployment Rate

Sources:

a
  Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER).
b
  American Community Survey (ACS)
c
  Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
d
  Vaghul and Zipperer (2016)
e
  Ballotpedia
f
  National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
g
  Giffords Law Center
h
  Sabia and Anderson (2018)
i
  Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)




                                                       42
                         Table 2: Dates of GBPs in NIBRS Larger Cities, 1991-2015
                   Date of GBP             Guns                             Date of GBP          Guns
City                                                 City
                   Initiative              Bought                            Initiative         Bought
Akron, OH          December 12, 2007        950      New Bedford, MA        June 6, 2007           18
                   November 11, 2008        650                             October 10, 2009       41
                   November 11, 2010        NR       New Haven, CT          December 12, 2006     235
Cambridge, MA      June 6, 2015              55                             December 12, 2007     100
Cedar Rapids, IA   September 9, 2014         34                             December 12, 2011      60
Chesapeake, VA     December 12, 2008        309                             December 12, 2012      65
Cincinatti, OH     January 1, 2012           50                             June 6, 2014          106
                   January 1, 2012          135      North Charleston, SC   December 12, 2008     245
Clevelend, OH      November 11, 2007         41                             December 12, 2009     127
                   November 11, 2008        NR                              January 1, 2011       NR
                   November 11, 2010        NR                              March 3, 2012         135
                   September 9, 2011        706      Norwalk, CT            February 2, 2013       18
                   October 10, 2012         298                             June 6, 2014           20
                   June 6, 2013             NR       Pawtucket, RI          June 6, 2013           50
                   September 9, 2014        270      Pocatello, ID          April 4, 1995          22
                   August 8, 2015           150      Providence, RI         June 6, 2010          NR
Columbia, SC       October 10, 1994         NR                              April 4, 2013         186
                   November 11, 1994        NR       Pueblo, CO             December 12, 2012       7
                   December 12, 2004        300      Sommerville, MA        August 8, 2014         15
                   February 2, 2009         NR       Springfield, MA        March 3, 2013         333
Columbus, OH       June 6, 2013             352      Springfield, OR        October 10, 2007      500
Davenport, IA      September 9, 2001        450                             March 3, 2013         330
Denver, CO         December 12, 2008         15      Stamford, CT           January 1, 2009        56
Detroit, MI        July 7, 2006             NR                              December 12, 2012      54
                   September 9, 2010        NR                              March 3, 2014          32
                   December 12, 2010        NR                              September 9, 2014     NR
                   August 8, 2012           365                             October 10, 2014      NR
                   May 5, 2013              NR       Waltham, MA            September 9, 2014      46
                   November 11, 2013         24      Warwick, RI            April 4, 2013         186
Fall River, MA     December 12, 2010        115      Waterloo, IA           December 12, 2001     100
Flint, MI          April 4, 2000           1000                             April 4, 2002         NR
                   March 3, 2007            NR                              June 6, 2011           34
                   June 6, 2009             178      Wilmington, DE         December 12, 2011    2040
Greenwich, CT      February 2, 2013          11                             August 8, 2013         67
Haverhill, MA      May 5, 2013               27      Worcester, MA          December 12, 2002     250
Jackson, TN        December 12, 2009        NR                              December 12, 2003     244
Kalamazoo, MI      July 7, 2011              99                             December 12, 2004     305



                                                  43
                      Date of GBP                Guns                                         Date of GBP          Guns
City                                                            City
                      Initiative                 Bought                                       Initiative          Bought
Lansing, MI           August 8, 2012               99           Worcester, MA                 December 12, 2005    206
                      February 2, 2013            100                                         December 12, 2006    271
Lowell, MA            November 11, 2013            36                                         December 12, 2007    217
Lynchburg, VA         July 7, 2009                 12                                         December 12, 2008    127
Memphis, TN           September 9, 2012           497                                         December 12, 2009    241
Memphis, TN           September 9, 2013           588                                         December 12, 2010    195
Milwaukee, WI         July 7, 2005                200                                         December 12, 2011    113
                      May 5, 2014                 353                                         December 12, 2012    142
Murfreesboro, TN      April 4, 2014                 6                                         December 12, 2013     85
Nashville, TN         November 11, 2012            91                                         December 12, 2014    149
                      June 6, 2013                 62                                         December 12, 2015    271
        Notes: NR identifies GBPs were the number of guns bought was not publicly reported.




                                                              44
           Table 3: Poisson Estimates of the Effect of a GBP on Gun-Related Crimes
                                           (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)                                   (6)

Months Following GBP:                                              Panel I: Gun-Related Crime
0 to 2 Months                                     0.076*       0.068* 0.069* 0.076** 0.074** 0.070**
                                                  (0.030)      (0.029) (0.028) (0.025) (0.024) (0.024)
3 to 5 Months                                     -0.009       -0.015    -0.013   0.001    -0.010 -0.007
                                                  (0.024)      (0.028) (0.027) (0.026) (0.037) (0.030)
6 to 11 Months                                     0.037        0.029     0.031  0.043*     0.029  0.034
                                                  (0.024)      (0.026) (0.026) (0.021) (0.033) (0.026)
 12 Months                                         0.003        0.004     0.005   0.002    -0.015  0.001
                                                  (0.013)      (0.010) (0.010) (0.010) (0.033) (0.027)

                                                                Panel II: Non-Gun Related Crime
0 to 2 Months                                      0.009        0.008     0.009   0.008    -0.003               -0.007
                                                  (0.017)      (0.017) (0.017) (0.016) (0.016)                  (0.014)
3 to 5 Months                                      0.004        0.002     0.003   0.005    -0.008               -0.006
                                                  (0.020)      (0.021) (0.021) (0.021) (0.024)                  (0.021)
6 to 11 Months                                     0.030        0.029     0.030   0.032     0.018                0.020
                                                  (0.020)      (0.021) (0.021) (0.021) (0.022)                  (0.020)
 12 Months                                         0.007        0.010     0.010   0.012     0.015                0.022
                                                  (0.008)      (0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.015)                  (0.015)

Observations                                      36,516       36,516       36,516     36,516       36,516      36,516
Demographic Controls?                                -          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Socioeconomic Controls?                              -            -          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Crime Control Policy?                                -            -            -        Yes          Yes         Yes
Agency-Specific Linear Time Trends?                  -            -            -          -          Yes         Yes
Region-Specific Year Effects?                        -            -            -          -            -         Yes
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are
estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are shown
in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime Control Policy
controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                         45
         Table 4: "Triple Difference" Poisson Estimates of the Effect of GBPs on
                              Gun versus Non-Gun Crimes
                                               (1)                (2)                                      (3)
 Months Following GBP:

 0 to 2 Months                                              0.009                    0.008               -0.006
                                                           (0.017)                  (0.016)              (0.013)
 0 to 2 Months * Gun Crime                                 0.067*                   0.068**              0.066*
                                                           (0.026)                  (0.026)              (0.029)
 3 to 5 Months                                              0.004                    0.005               -0.006
                                                           (0.020)                  (0.021)              (0.021)
 3 to 5 Months * Gun Crime                                 -0.013                    -0.012              -0.016
                                                           (0.018)                  (0.018)              (0.019)
 6 to 11 Months                                             0.030                    0.032                0.021
                                                           (0.020)                  (0.021)              (0.020)
 6 to 11 Months * Gun Crime                                 0.007                    0.008                0.002
                                                           (0.017)                  (0.016)              (0.017)
 12 Months                                                  0.007                    0.012                0.021
                                                           (0.008)                  (0.008)              (0.014)
 12 Months * Gun Crime                                     -0.005                    -0.003              -0.013
                                                           (0.016)                  (0.015)              (0.015)

Observations                                               73,032                   73,032               73,032
Controls                                                      -                      Yes                  Yes
Agency Specific Time Trends                                   -                        -                  Yes
Region Specific Year Effects                                  -                        -                  Yes
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are
estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are shown
in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy
controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                         46
                         Table 5: Sensitivity Tests of Estimated Effects of GBPs on Gun Crimes
                                        Sample:                                                    Agency-       Census
                                          Only          Strongly                                   Specific     Division
                          Baseline       Treated     Balanced Panel Dropping Obs Weighted by      Quadratic     Specific
                        Specification     Cities       2005-2015     with ± 2 S.D.  Population   Time Trends   Year Effects
                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)

Months Following GBP:                             Panel I: Difference-in-Differences Estimates
0 to 2 Months             0.070**     0.069***      0.081***         0.049*        0.076***       0.081***       0.070**
                          (0.024)      (0.019)       (0.024)         (0.020)        (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.025)
3 to 5 Months              -0.007      -0.011         0.038           -0.008         0.013          0.001         -0.003
                          (0.030)      (0.029)       (0.026)         (0.026)        (0.023)        (0.027)       (0.029)
6 to 11 Months              0.034       0.022       0.078***           0.033         0.045          0.047          0.035
                          (0.026)      (0.028)       (0.022)         (0.026)        (0.026)        (0.025)       (0.024)
 12 Months                  0.001       0.002         0.058           -0.003         0.004          0.035          0.002
                          (0.027)      (0.035)       (0.030)         (0.024)        (0.029)        (0.029)       (0.027)

Observations              36,516        7,424         18,612         34,925         36,516         36,516        36,516

                                            Panel II: Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences Estimates
0 to 2 Months * Gun       0.066*       0.062**          0.050*           0.041        0.057*        0.067*       0.065*
                          (0.029)      (0.023)          (0.025)         (0.029)       (0.024)      (0.028)       (0.028)
3 to 5 Months * Gun       -0.016        -0.023          -0.016          -0.022        -0.021        -0.018       -0.017
                          (0.019)      (0.017)          (0.018)         (0.018)       (0.013)      (0.019)       (0.019)
6 to 11 Months * Gun       0.002        -0.012           0.006           0.005        -0.007        -0.001        0.002
                          (0.017)      (0.018)          (0.013)         (0.016)       (0.015)      (0.016)       (0.016)
 12 Months * Gun          -0.013        -0.031          -0.028          -0.012        -0.033        -0.014       -0.011
                          (0.015)      (0.032)          (0.019)         (0.014)       (0.020)      (0.016)       (0.015)

Observations              73,032       14,848         37,224         69,850         73,032         73,032        73,032


                                                          47
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). All regressions include
agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered
at the city-level are shown in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed
in Table 1.




                                                                                48
                        Table 6: Examination of Spillover Effects of GBPs
                                                     (1)            (2)                      (3)
       0 to 2 Months
              City GBP                                    0.070**         0.071**         0.070**
                                                          (0.024)         (0.024)         (0.026)
                GBP in County                                              0.048           0.045
                                                                          (0.042)         (0.042)
                Border County GBP                                                          0.001
                                                                                          (0.027)
       3 to 5 Months
              City GBP                                    -0.007          -0.005           -0.005
                                                          (0.030)         (0.031)          (0.031)
                GBP in County                                              -0.015           -0.015
                                                                          (0.044)          (0.043)
                Border County GBP                                                           0.005
                                                                                           (0.030)
       6 to 11 Months
               City GBP                                    0.034           0.036            0.036
                                                          (0.026)         (0.026)          (0.027)
                GBP in County                                              0.026            0.024
                                                                          (0.046)          (0.045)
                Border County GBP                                                          -0.003
                                                                                           (0.029)
       12 Months
            City GBP                                       0.001           0.004           -0.002
                                                          (0.027)         (0.028)          (0.028)
                GBP in County                                              0.033            0.027
                                                                          (0.046)          (0.045)
                Border County GBP                                                          -0.028
                                                                                           (0.026)
       Observations                                       36,516          36,516           36,516
       Controls?                                           Yes             Yes               Yes
       Region-Specific Year Effects?                       Yes             Yes               Yes
       Agency-Specific Linear Time Trends?                 Yes             Yes               Yes
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level
Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are
estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are
shown in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime
control policy controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                     49
                                  Table 7. Poisson Estimates of GBPs on Gun Crime

                                                          Panel I: Violent Gun Crime
                                                                   Aggravated      Murder/                         Rape/Sexual
                               All                Robbery
                                                                     Assault      Manslaughter                       Assault
0 to 2 Months                0.056*                0.070*             0.030          0.005                           0.069*
                             (0.026)              (0.033)            (0.023)        (0.055)                          (0.032)
3 to 5 Months                -0.022                -0.039             0.003          0.002                           -0.039
                             (0.022)              (0.022)            (0.031)        (0.040)                          (0.022)
6 to 11 Months                0.028                 0.028             0.044          0.022                            0.025
                             (0.019)              (0.018)            (0.025)        (0.029)                          (0.017)
 12 Months                    0.007                 0.008             0.014          0.001                            0.008
                             (0.014)              (0.016)            (0.018)        (0.022)                          (0.015)

Observations                 36,516                 36,504                  36,516              35,546                 36,504
Mean DV:                      18.48                  9.587                   8.281               0.493                  0.214

                                                   Panel II: Non-Violent Gun Crime
                                                                    Destruction/
                                       Weapon Law Drug/Narcotic                    Kidnapping/                           Simple
                                                                      Vand. of
                            All         Violations   Violations                    Abduction                             Assault
                                                                      Property
0 to 2 Months           0.112***         0.166**        0.049           -0.053      0.080*                               -0.030
                         (0.025)         (0.057)      (0.043)          (0.081)      (0.038)                              (0.091)
3 to 5 Months             0.040            0.098       -0.029           -0.002       0.009                                0.005
                         (0.043)         (0.074)      (0.050)          (0.077)      (0.044)                              (0.067)
6 to 11 Months            0.045            0.094       -0.014           -0.042       0.012                               -0.086
                         (0.034)         (0.065)      (0.036)          (0.093)      (0.049)                              (0.108)
 12 Months               -0.035           -0.035       -0.029            0.002      0.054*                                0.008
                         (0.026)         (0.029)      (0.018)          (0.041)      (0.023)                              (0.039)

Observations              36,470           36,458              35,970                35,177            35,177             34,819
Mean DV:                   7.399            8.421               1.835                 0.967             0.405              0.318
        *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

        Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
        System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are
        estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are shown
        in parentheses. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are included and listed in Table 1.
        Buybacks are coded using partial months (e.g. a buyback on September 15th for 0 to 2 Months Following will take
        the value .5 in September, 1 in October, and .5 in November).




                                                                 50
                          Table 8: Heterogeneity in Effect of GBPs on Gun Crime by Characteristics of Arrestees
                         Full                         Age Group                               Gender                                                      Race
                       Sample         <18         18-23         24-35      >35          Males       Females                                      White            Black
                          (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)                                        (8)               (9)
0 to 2 Months          0.070**       -0.003      0.062*         0.043    0.095**      0.062**        0.074*                                      0.046           0.069**
                       (0.024)      (0.030)      (0.030)       (0.026)   (0.034)       (0.023)       (0.032)                                    (0.046)          (0.023)
3 to 5 Months           -0.007       -0.005       0.011        -0.009     -0.004       -0.015         0.000                                     -0.065            -0.005
                       (0.030)      (0.033)      (0.033)       (0.029)   (0.021)       (0.027)       (0.027)                                    (0.038)          (0.029)
6 to 11 Months          0.034        0.040        0.035         0.051     0.031         0.035         0.064                                      0.053            0.027
                       (0.026)      (0.044)      (0.029)       (0.026)   (0.037)       (0.025)       (0.034)                                    (0.041)          (0.027)
>12 Months              0.001        0.030        0.000         0.021     -0.030       -0.008        -0.005                                      0.003            -0.010
                       (0.027)      (0.031)      (0.029)       (0.021)   (0.016)       (0.024)       (0.025)                                    (0.019)          (0.027)

Observations            36,516          36,516          36,516           36,516          36,516             36,516           36,516             36,516           36,516
Mean DV                  25.88           2.64            9.05             6.08            3.81               20.92            2.02               5.13             16.25
 *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

 Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). All regressions include
 agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered
 at the city-level are shown in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed
 in Table 1.




                                                                                 51
           Table 9: Heterogeneity in Effect of GBPs on Gun Crime by Size of Gun Buyback
                               Median                   75th Percentile           90th Percentile
     Size of GBP
                       Per Capita Nominal         Per Capita      Nominal    Per Capita Nominal
                           (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)
0 to 2 Months for
               Larger 0.090***      0.093***       0.108***       0.100***   0.108*** 0.106***
                        (0.024)      (0.025)        (0.022)        (0.024)    (0.023)       (0.023)
              Smaller     0.045      -0.002          0.143         -0.003       0.039         0.070
                        (0.058)      (0.087)        (0.077)        (0.078)    (0.110)       (0.055)
            Unknown      -0.010      -0.012          -0.077         0.009       0.020        -0.020
                        (0.049)      (0.065)        (0.078)        (0.075)    (0.106)       (0.047)
3 to 5 Months for
               Larger     0.053       0.040          0.068          0.059       0.064         0.062
                        (0.040)      (0.036)        (0.038)        (0.038)    (0.038)       (0.038)
              Smaller    -0.004      -0.120          0.118         -0.128       0.117        -0.049
                        (0.070)      (0.081)        (0.106)        (0.083)    (0.163)       (0.054)
            Unknown      -0.058      -0.032          -0.135        -0.001      -0.138        -0.004
                        (0.060)      (0.060)        (0.101)        (0.073)    (0.160)       (0.050)
6 to 11 Months for
                 Larger        0.076         0.078*                0.091*        0.096*             0.087*          0.087*
                              (0.040)        (0.038)               (0.037)       (0.039)            (0.037)         (0.037)
                Smaller        0.073         -0.013                0.223*        -0.018              0.211           0.005
                              (0.068)        (0.072)               (0.102)       (0.058)            (0.126)         (0.058)
             Unknown          -0.063         -0.035                -0.175        -0.017             -0.175          -0.002
                              (0.063)        (0.049)               (0.097)       (0.046)            (0.126)         (0.049)
 12 Months for
            Larger             0.068          0.059                 0.086         0.085              0.073           0.078
                              (0.061)        (0.060)               (0.057)       (0.058)            (0.060)         (0.062)
                Smaller       -0.030         -0.103                 0.156         0.007              0.177           0.001
                              (0.078)        (0.098)               (0.104)       (0.075)            (0.128)         (0.075)
             Unknown          -0.048         -0.035                -0.149        -0.042             -0.171          -0.027
                              (0.069)        (0.067)               (0.095)       (0.067)            (0.123)         (0.073)

Observations                  36,516          36,516               36,516        36,516             36,516          36,516
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level
Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting System
(NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via
poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are shown in parentheses.
Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed in
Table 1.




                                                              52
                Table 10: Synthetic Control Estimates, by GBP City and Post-Treatment Period
                                                           Years Since Initial GBP
City                                 0               1           2           3          4         5+
            1,3
Akron, OH                       5.00***          8.05**      7.30**      7.21**    17.17***    12.6***
                                 [0.000]        [0.024]     [0.024]     [0.024]     [0.000]    [0.000]
Battle Creek, MI                   0.13            0.26
                                 [0.745]        [0.824]
Cambridge, MA                     -0.41
                                 [0.785]
Cedar Rapids, IA                   1.82         -0.39
                                 [0.320]        [0.840]
Chesapeake, VA                   8.81**            1.75        3.01       -0.37      -2.75      -3.56
                                 [0.030]        [0.485]     [0.227]     [0.833]     [0.258]    [0.227]
Cincinnati, OH1                 -6.49**           -5.71       -3.19       -3.58
                                 [0.034]        [0.069]     [0.241]     [0.284]
Cleveland, OH                  13.32***            -1.8     10.66**     11.42**    17.79***    14.36**
                                  [0.00]        [0.459]     [0.031]     [0.010]     [0.000]    [0.020]
Columbia, SC5                   13.03**           -3.07       -1.81        1.57       5.72      12.18
                                 [0.029]        [0.257]     [0.571]     [0.571]     [0.286]    [0.114]
Columbus, OH                    -9.78**           -3.63       -3.39
                                 [0.008]        [0.151]     [0.303]
Davenport, IA                     -1.69         3.14***        2.58       5.64*       2.72       0.26
                                  [0.37]        [0.000]     [0.176]     [0.059]     [0.176]    [0.824]
Denver, CO                        -1.65           -3.99       -3.91       -1.74       0.12      -1.23
                                 [0.369]        [0.131]     [0.107]     [0.429]     [0.988]    [0.704]
Fall River, MA                  5.57***            1.87        1.07        2.99       1.45       2.54
                                 [0.000]        [0.320]     [0.600]     [0.320]     [0.720]    [0.360]
Greenwich, CT                     -1.50           -0.72       -0.84
                                 [0.383]        [0.652]     [0.757]
Haverhill, MA                      0.83            0.61        0.73
                                 [0.571]        [0.750]     [0.750]
Jackson, TN                        3.00           -3.42        5.82    22.44***    22.56***    13.24*
                                 [0.227]        [0.216]     [0.125]     [0.000]     [0.000]    [0.023]
Kalamazoo, MI                     -1.32           -1.42        5.48      16.74*     18.60**
                                 [0.453]        [0.443]     [0.085]     [0.019]     [0.009]
Lansing, MI1                      8.12*           9.38*      12.33*      12.46*
                                 [0.026]        [0.026]     [0.017]     [0.043]
Lowell, MA                        -0.80            4.47       -1.82
                                 [0.636]        [0.103]     [0.486]
Lynchburg, VA                    -3.43*           -0.48     -8.12**   -12.03***      -4.61      -1.06
                                 [0.097]        [0.790]     [0.048]     [0.000]     [0.161]    [0.613]
Memphis, TN1                       0.84          8.95**    25.60***    24.76***
                                [0.638]         [0.026]     [0.000]     [0.000]
Murfreesboro, TN                   1.55            2.11
                                [0.400]         [0.275]
Nashville, TN1                    -3.79           -0.69


                                                   53
                                                                       Years Since Initial GBP
City                                      0                  1            2            3                      4                5+
                                     [0.096]             [0.670]
New Bedford, MA2                       -4.66              -3.88          -0.57            0.78             -3.35              -6.16
                                       [0.163]           [0.188]        [0.825]         [0.738]           [0.238]            [0.100]
New Haven, CT1,5                       5.54*             -15.66*        -13.05*          -3.10             -5.85
                                       [0.047]           [0.016]        [0.016]         [0.279]           [0.171]
North Charleston, SC1,3,4              -0.63             -16.86*        -17.04*         -10.25*           -14.96*             -0.62
                                      [0.704]            [0.012]        [0.012]         [0.037]           [0.012]            [0.815]
Norwalk, CT1                            -3.37             -2.63          -2.83
                                       [0.087]           [0.184]        [0.282]
Pawtucket, RI                          -2.74              -3.93          -1.78
                                       [0.179]           [0.128]        [0.479]
Pocatello, ID                          -2.05               0.35          -1.41           -5.23             -3.52              -3.21
                                      [0.250]            [1.000]         0.500           0.500             0.000              0.250
Providence, RI3                        -0.34               3.97           0.82            1.35             -2.57              1.26
                                     [0.843]             [0.093]        [0.657]         [0.519]           [0.324]            [0.611]
Pueblo, CO                          14.20***            15.05***          3.42           6.63*
                                     [0.000]             [0.000]        [0.189]         [0.054]
Sommerville, MA                        -0.25              -1.64
                                     [0.844]             [0.356]
Springfield, MA                         4.60               4.03           -1.15
                                      [0.061]            [0.122]         [0.687]
Stamford, CT3,5                         0.32              -0.64           0.59           -0.37              1.51              -3.98
                                     [0.865]             [0.712]         [0.692]        [0.904]           [0.558]            [0.202]
Waltham, MA                             1.37               -0.3
                                     [0.329]             [0.871]
Warwick, RI                            -1.05              -0.26          -0.55
                                     [0.564]             [0.897]        [0.821]
Waterloo, IA1                        2.89***              -0.69           1.10            0.16             -0.83              -0.97
                                     [0.000]             [0.600]        [0.400]         [0.867]           [0.600]            [0.400]
Wilmington, DE2                        -2.98               1.15        16.75***        25.97***          37.65***
                                       [0.187]           [0.505]        [0.000]         [0.000]           [0.000]
Worcester, IA1,2,3,4,5                  1.78               4.42           4.75            3.60              5.06               2.37
                                       [0.263]           [0.105]        [0.105]         [0.158]           [0.053]            [0.316]
        *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

        n
          An additional GBP occurred n year(s) after initial GBP
        Notes: Measuring gun crime rate per 10,000 population. Up to 6 years of pretreatment data was used to match
        treated cities to the donor pool using annual gun crime rate per 100,000. Pseudo p-values are reported in brackets
        using the proportion of placebo agencies with a post treatment root mean squared error (RMSE) greater than the
        treated city for each given year.




                                                                 54
                Table 11: Estimated Effect of GBPs on Gun Related Deaths
                                   Total Deaths         Suicide          Homicide
                                        (1)                (2)               (3)
  12 Months Before                     0.001              0.001            -0.019
                                     (0.016)             (0.018)          (0.016)
 6 to 11 Months Before                -0.018              0.008          -0.041**
                                     (0.012)             (0.022)           -0.015
 3 to 5 Months Before                 -0.026             -0.010           -0.036*
                                     (0.017)             (0.025)          (0.017)
 1 to 2 Months Before                    -                  -                 -

 0 to 2 Months After                              0.007                      0.032                  -0.016
                                                 (0.012)                    (0.024)                (0.018)
 3 to 5 Months After                             -0.029                     -0.015                -0.044**
                                                 (0.017)                    (0.026)                (0.015)
 6 to 11 Months After                            -0.031                     -0.009                 -0.050*
                                                 (0.016)                    (0.021)                (0.021)
  12 Months After                                -0.014                      0.002                 -0.041*
                                                 (0.017)                    (0.021)                (0.018)

 Observations                                    272,386                   272,386                 272,386
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS). All regressions include county fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via
poisson with exposure proxy: County population. Standard errors clustered at the county-level are shown in
parentheses. Linear time trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy
controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                         55
 Table 12: Heterogeneity in Effect of GBPs on Total Firearm Related Deaths by Size of Gun Buyback
                                Median                   75th Percentile           90th Percentile
      Size of GBP
                         Nominal Per Capita         Nominal       Per Capita   Nominal Per Capita
                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)
0 to 2 Months for
                 Larger    0.035         0.034        0.057*         0.012       0.018        -0.024
                          (0.022)      (0.046)       (0.027)        (0.070)    (0.034)       (0.114)
                Smaller   -0.039         0.015        -0.027         0.018       0.013         0.016
                          (0.039)      (0.033)       (0.031)        (0.025)    (0.021)       (0.019)
              Unknown 0.042**          0.044**       0.041**       0.048***    0.047**      0.048***
                          (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.015)        (0.014)    (0.016)       (0.014)
3 to 5 Months for
                 Larger    0.007        -0.034         0.025         0.015       0.026         0.004
                          (0.026)      (0.030)       (0.026)        (0.042)    (0.027)       (0.096)
                Smaller   -0.038         0.021        -0.033        -0.009      -0.021        -0.008
                          (0.033)      (0.040)       (0.027)        (0.033)    (0.026)       (0.027)
              Unknown     -0.017        -0.025        -0.015         0.015      -0.015        -0.014
                          (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.042)    (0.022)       (0.021)
6 to 11 Months for
                   Larger       -0.036         -0.023              -0.019          -0.053            -0.060           0.004
                                (0.031)        (0.042)             (0.039)         (0.049)           (0.063)         (0.096)
                  Smaller       -0.023         -0.006              -0.037          -0.009            -0.019          -0.008
                                (0.029)        (0.030)             (0.022)         (0.020)           (0.020)         (0.027)
                Unknown          0.001         -0.007              -0.000          -0.004             0.001          -0.002
                                (0.015)        (0.016)             (0.015)         (0.015)           (0.016)         (0.014)
 12 Months for
                   Larger        0.004          0.035               0.029          -0.016             0.017          -0.061
                                (0.032)        (0.034)             (0.026)         (0.035)           (0.033)         (0.069)
                  Smaller       -0.064*        -0.045              -0.058*         -0.017            -0.039          -0.019
                                (0.029)        (0.038)             (0.030)         (0.029)           (0.025)         (0.028)
                Unknown          0.023          0.038               0.025           0.033             0.026           0.031
                                (0.024)        (0.023)             (0.023)         (0.024)           (0.024)         (0.024)

Observations                    272,386        272,386             272,386        272,386            272,386        272,386
 *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level
 Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Vital Statistics System (NVSS).
 All regressions include 12 or more months lead, 6 to 11 month lead, and 3 to 5 month lead for each size of the gun
 buyback, as well as county fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via poisson with
 exposure proxy: County population. Standard errors clustered at the county-level are shown in parentheses. Linear time
 trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                              56
Appendix Figure 1: Two-Way Fixed Effects Event-Study Analysis of Effect of GBP on
           Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Crime, Controlling for Population

                                   (a) Gun Crime




                                 (b) Non-Gun Crime




                                       57
Appendix Figure 2: Gun Crime Rate Gaps in Treatment and Placebo Gaps in Donor Cities (I)

          (a) Akron, OH                                      (b) Battle Creek, MI




         (c) Cambridge, MA                                    (d) Cedar Rapids, IA




         (e) Chesapeake, VA                                    (f) Cincinnati, OH




         (g) Columbia, SC                                     (h) Columbus, OH




                                          58
                    Appendix Figure 2, Continued
(i) Davenport, IA                                  (j) Fall River, MA




(k) Greenwich, CT                                  (l) Haverhill, MA




 (m) Jackson, TN                                   (n) Kalamazoo, MI




(o) Lansing, MI                                     (p) Lowell, MA




                                59
                           Appendix Figure 2, Continued

(q) Lynchburg, VA                                         (r) Memphis, TN




(s) Murfreesboro, TN                                      (t) Nashville, TN




(u) New Bedford, MA                                       (v) New Haven, CT




(w) North Charleston, SC                                  (x) Norwalk, CT




                                       60
                       Appendix Figure 2, Continued

(y) Pawtucket, RI                                      (z) Providence, RI




(aa) Pocatello, ID                                    (bb) Sommerville, MA




(cc) Springfield, OR                                   (dd) Stamford, CT




(ee) Waltham, MA                                       (ff) Warwick, RI




                                   61
                     Appendix Figure 2, Continued


(gg) Waterloo, IA                                   (hh) Wilmington, DE




(ii) Worcester, MA




                                 62
 Appendix Figure 3: Event-Study Analysis of Gun-Related Deaths vs Non-Gun Deaths (NVSS)




Appendix Figure 4: Event-Study Analysis of Gun-Related Suicides vs Non-Gun Suicides (NVSS)




        Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
        Vital Statistics System (NVSS). All regressions include all socioeconomic, demographic,
        and policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time
        trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered
        at the county-level.




                                                   63
Appendix Figure 5: Event-Study Analysis of Gun-Related Homicides vs Non-Gun Homicides
                                        (NVSS)




      Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National
      Vital Statistics System (NVSS). All regressions include all socioeconomic, demographic,
      and policy controls as well as region-specific time effects and agency-specific linear time
      trends. The gray area represents 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered at
      the county-level.




                                                  64
        Appendix Table 1: Means of Counts of Gun Crimes, by Violent and Non-Violent Gun Crime, Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and Age
Crime that Involved Firearm                 Full   Hispanic White Black Male Female Age  17 Age 18 to 23 Age 25 to 34 Age > 35
Violent
Robbery                                    9.587    0.108 1.201 6.937 8.201 0.486          1.037     3.479       2.478      0.662
Aggravated Assault                         8.281    0.213 1.761 4.739 6.223 0.781          0.738     2.172       2.245      1.352
Murder/Non-Negligent Manslaughter          0.493    0.016 0.076 0.281 0.350 0.031          0.039     0.152       0.132      0.068
Forcible Rape                              0.149    0.002 0.028 0.105 0.139 0.003          0.008     0.034       0.056      0.029
Forcible Sodomy                            0.029    0.000 0.005 0.021 0.027 0.001          0.002     0.007       0.012      0.006
Forcible Fondling                          0.026    0.001 0.006 0.016 0.023 0.001          0.003     0.007       0.007      0.005
Sexual Assault with An Object              0.009    0.000 0.003 0.004 0.008 0.001          0.001     0.002       0.003      0.002
Nonviolent
Weapon Law Violations                      8.421    0.430 2.237 4.896 6.869 0.800          0.968     2.774       2.686      1.420
Drug/Narcotic Violations                   1.835    0.148 0.571 1.308 1.768 0.339          0.170     0.836       0.891      0.373
Destruction/Damage/Vandalism of Property   0.967    0.024 0.167 0.391 0.548 0.068          0.088     0.233       0.189      0.074
Kidnapping/Abduction                       0.405    0.013 0.091 0.277 0.368 0.034          0.025     0.127       0.156      0.066
Simple Assault                             0.318    0.020 0.106 0.202 0.296 0.059          0.039     0.115       0.133      0.080
Stolen Property Offenses                   0.181    0.018 0.056 0.126 0.176 0.025          0.033     0.086       0.072      0.027
Intimidation                               0.146    0.007 0.053 0.086 0.131 0.019          0.018     0.047       0.049      0.038
Drug Equipment Violations                  0.475    0.047 0.243 0.245 0.451 0.130          0.033     0.187       0.247      0.138
Burglary/Breaking and Entering             0.391    0.013 0.080 0.271 0.350 0.032          0.042     0.148       0.129      0.042
All other Larceny                          0.096    0.006 0.032 0.056 0.085 0.014          0.014     0.034       0.034      0.016
Justifiable Homicide                       0.027    0.000 0.015 0.012 0.026 0.002          0.000     0.004       0.013      0.011
Motor Vehicle Theft                        0.081    0.003 0.018 0.054 0.071 0.008          0.013     0.033       0.025      0.008
Shoplifting                                0.030    0.002 0.013 0.016 0.027 0.007          0.006     0.011       0.011      0.006
False Pretenses/Swindle/Confidence Game    0.030    0.001 0.007 0.024 0.029 0.005          0.005     0.014       0.012      0.006
Counterfeiting/Forgery                     0.025    0.004 0.010 0.015 0.024 0.004          0.002     0.011       0.012      0.006
Theft From Motor Vehicle                   0.034    0.002 0.013 0.017 0.029 0.003          0.005     0.013       0.011      0.004
Impersonation                              0.025    0.003 0.010 0.015 0.024 0.004          0.004     0.009       0.011      0.005
Theft From Building                        0.022    0.001 0.008 0.012 0.019 0.003          0.004     0.006       0.008      0.004
Extortion/Blackmailing                     0.010    0.000 0.002 0.005 0.007 0.001          0.001     0.003       0.003      0.002
All Gun Crime:                             25.88     0.71    5.13   16.25 20.92    2.02     2.64      8.23        7.33       3.42
        Notes: Hispanic is not mutually exclusive, includes white Hispanic, black Hispanic, and other Hispanic. Note: Not all nonviolent crimes are shown, only the 20
        most common for the full sample



                                                                                      65
   Appendix Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of a GBP on Gun-Related Crime, Using
                       Annual Data, OLS and Poisson Models
                            Poisson             OLS            OLS             OLS
                          Count of Gun     Count of Gun    Gun Crime     Log Gun Crime
                             Crime             Crime     rate per 10,000 rate per 10,000
 Years Following GBP:          (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
 0 to 1 Years                0.038*           -76.501         -0.544          0.013
                            (0.019)          (47.658)        (0.965)         (0.032)
 2 to 3 Years                 0.018          -108.876         -0.523          -0.012
                            (0.020)          (80.869)        (1.191)         (0.025)
 4 to 5 Years                -0.034          -125.990         -0.513          -0.005
                            (0.030)          (89.849)        (1.182)         (0.038)
 > 5 Years                   -0.007            -8.430          0.148          0.022
                            (0.024)          (39.768)        (0.633)         (0.028)
 Observations                 2,968             2,968          2,968          2,962
 Mean DV:                    313.55            313.55          17.94           -0.05
*** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

Notes: Agency-by-Year data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and year fixed effects. Poisson regressions are
estimated via poisson with exposure proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are
shown in parentheses. Linear time trends are at the annual level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control
policy controls are listed in Table 1.




                                                         66
        Appendix Table 3: Poisson Estimates of the Effect of GBP, Splitting Violent and Non-
                                          Violent Crime
                                  Violent                                  Non-Violent
                                            Aggravated                  Weapon Law Drug/Narcotic
                     All        Robbery                          All
                                               Assault                   Violations     Violations
                     (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)
0 to 2 Months      0.065*        0.065*        0.056*         0.091**     0.158**          0.040
                   (0.025)      (0.030)        (0.022)        (0.030)     (0.057)        (0.036)
3 to 5 Months      -0.009        -0.039         0.034           0.011      0.081          -0.025
                   (0.027)      (0.035)        (0.028)        (0.049)     (0.069)        (0.053)
6 to 11 Months      0.044         0.028       0.079**           0.020      0.087          -0.013
                   (0.025)      (0.029)        (0.025)        (0.042)     (0.066)        (0.049)
 12 Months          0.025         0.011        0.062*          -0.057      -0.016         -0.004
                   (0.031)      (0.035)        (0.030)        (0.032)     (0.044)        (0.040)
    *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level

    Notes: Agency-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Incident-Based Reporting
    System (NIBRS). All regressions include agency fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. All columns include
    socioeconomic controls, demographic controls, and gun policy and crime controls listed in Table 1, as well as
    region-specific year effects and agency-specific time trends. Regressions are estimated via poisson with exposure
    proxy: Agency population. Standard errors clustered at the city-level are shown in parentheses.




                                                             67
          Appendix Table 4: Donor Cities that Received Positive Weights
City                         Weight       City                          Weight
               Akron, OH                               Battle Creek, MI
Lawrence, KS                 0.499        Tyler, TX                     0.436
Southfield, MI               0.181        Clarksville, TN                0.35
Peabody, MA                  0.115        North Little Rock, AR         0.129
Hamden, CT                   0.101        Saginaw, MI                    0.06
Saginaw, MI                  0.082        Youngstown, OH                0.024
            Cambridge, MA                             Cedar Rapids, IA
Lawrence, KS                 0.499        Missoula, MT                  0.338
Southfield, MI               0.181        Dubuque, IA                   0.245
Peabody, MA                  0.115        Medford, OR                    0.08
Hamden, CT                   0.101        Brookline, MA                 0.066
Saginaw, MI                  0.082        Owensboro, KY                  0.04
            Chesapeake, VA                             Cincinnati, OH
Johnson City, TN             0.391        Chattanooga, TN                0.77
Amarillo, TX                 0.314        Rockford, IL                   0.23
Layton, UT                   0.207
Chattanooga, TN              0.064
Greenville, SC               0.024
             Columbia, SC                               Columbus, OH
Greenville, SC               0.856        Brockton, MA                  0.413
Dayton, OH                   0.144        Rockford, IL                  0.251
                                          Lynn, MA                      0.224
                                          Saginaw, MI                   0.111
             Davenport, IA                             Fall River, MA
Des Moines, IA               0.485        Sterling Heights, MI          0.336
Nampa, ID                    0.449        Youngstown, OH                 0.08
Council Bluffs, IA           0.043        Greeley, CO                   0.056
Provo, UT                    0.023        Redford Township, MI          0.038
                                          Conroe, TX                    0.021
             Greenwich, CT                              Haverhill, MA
Fairfield, CT                0.868        Wyoming, MI                   0.225
Novi, MI                     0.132        Royal Oak, MI                 0.128
                                          Denton, TX                    0.115
                                          Fairfield, CT                 0.115
                                          Cranston, RI                  0.102
              Jackson, TN                              Kalamazoo, MI
Knoxville, TN                0.411        Knoxville, TN                 0.365
Norfolk, VA                  0.373        Brockton, MA                  0.268
Saginaw, MI                  0.215        Amarillo, TX                  0.211
                                          Mount Pleasant, SC            0.117
                                          Dearborn, MI                  0.039




                                      68
              Lansing, MI                                 Lowell, MA
Brockton, MA                    0.707        Bend, OR                      0.344
Tyler, TX                       0.152        Owensboro, KY                  0.25
Rockford, IL                     0.1         Novi, MI                      0.197
Rapid City, SD                  0.041        Hoover, AL                    0.125
,                                            Rockford, IL                  0.084
            Lynchburg, VA                                  Memphis, TN
Dearborn Heights, MI            0.259        Saginaw, MI                   0.479
Greenville, SC                  0.22         Richmond, VA                  0.331
Knoxville, TN                   0.17         North Little Rock, AR         0.189I
Grand Rapids, MI                0.145
Rock Hill, SC                   0.104
           Murfreesboro, TN                                Nashville, TN
Ogden, UT                       0.322        Richmond, VA                  0.413
Hamden, CTI                      0.1         Charleston, WV                0.269
Waterford Township, MI          0.085        Saginaw, MI                    0.11
Little Rock, AR                 0.068        Suffolk, VA                   0.097
North Little Rock, AR           0.047        Norfolk, VA                    0.09
           New Bedford, MA                                New Haven, CT
Ames, IA                        0.37         Saginaw, MI                   0.882
Flower Mound, TX                0.244        Little Rock, AR               0.118
Missoula, MT                    0.186
Grand Forks, ND                 0.084
St. George, UT                  0.06
         North Charleston, SC                              Norwalk, CT
Saginaw, MI                     0.56         Sterling Heights, MI          0.578
Greenville, SC                  0.173        Lynn, MA                      0.209
Norfolk, VA                     0.134        Livonia, MI                   0.141
Richmond, VA                    0.126        Brockton, MA                   0.07
,                                            Taylor, MI                    0.003
             Pawtucket, RI                                Providence, RI
Livonia, MI                     0.344        Tyler, TX                     0.934
Redford Township, MI            0.317        Chattanooga, TN               0.056
Rapid City, SD                  0.305        North Little Rock, AR          0.01
Rockford, IL                    0.034                                         ,
              Pocatello, ID                              Sommerville, MA
Provo, UT                       0.409        Corvallis, OR                 0.391
Des Moines, IN                  0.116        Brookline, MA                 0.235
West Jordan, UT                 0.069        Victoria, TX                  0.152
Boise, ID                       0.065        West Hartford, CT             0.074
Sioux City, IA                  0.061        Flower Mound, TX               0.05
            Springfield, OR                                Stamford, CT
Medford, OR                     0.451        Sioux Falls, SD               0.711
Chattanooga, TN                 0.321        Bismarck, ND                  0.171
Rockford, IL                    0.118        Redford Township, MI          0.104
Richmond, VA                    0.11         Saginaw, MI                   0.015


                                        69
             Waltham, MA                              Warwick, RI
Fairfield, CT                0.316        Ames, IA                      0.37
Plymouth, MA                 0.259        Flower Mound, TX             0.244
Brookline, MA                0.252        Missoula, MT                 0.186
Shelby Township, MI          0.133        Grand Forks, ND              0.084
Novi, MI                     0.038        St. George, UT                0.06
              Waterloo, IA                            Wilmington, DE
Fargo, ND                    0.434        Chattanooga, TN              0.517
Greenville, SC               0.222        Saginaw, MI                  0.483
Charleston, SC               0.159
Saint George, UT             0.125
Plymouth, MA                 0.057
            Worcester, MA
Des Moines, IA               0.447
Sandy, UT                    0.298
Council Bluffs, IA           0.122
Nampa, ID                    0.077
Sioux City, IA               0.056




                                     70
       Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneity in Effect of GBPs on Firearm Related Suicide by Size of
                                            Gun Buyback
                                Median                   75th Percentile           90th Percentile
      Size of GBP
                         Nominal Per Capita          Nominal      Per Capita  Nominal Per Capita
                            (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)
0 to 2 Months for
                 Larger    0.048       0.054          0.058          0.040      -0.031         0.182
                         (0.027)     (0.047)         (0.030)        (0.064)    (0.027)       (0.137)
                Smaller   -0.035       0.004          -0.014         0.013       0.034         0.012
                         (0.039)     (0.037)         (0.037)        (0.029)    (0.034)       (0.028)
              Unknown      0.055       0.056          0.053         0.057*      0.058*       0.059*
                         (0.030)     (0.029)         (0.029)        (0.027)    (0.026)       (0.027)
3 to 5 Months for
                 Larger    0.047      -0.017          0.042          0.019       0.048         0.052
                         (0.033)     (0.040)         (0.035)        (0.056)    (0.029)       (0.143)
                Smaller   -0.002       0.055          0.017          0.027       0.016         0.026
                         (0.043)     (0.044)         (0.042)        (0.039)    (0.035)       (0.036)
              Unknown    -0.046*      -0.052         -0.046*        -0.042     -0.047*        -0.043
                         (0.023)     (0.027)         (0.023)        (0.022)    (0.022)       (0.022)
6 to 11 Months for
                   Larger        0.037          0.027               0.049           0.016            -0.021           0.047
                                (0.026)        (0.038)             (0.032)         (0.052)           (0.030)         (0.129)
                  Smaller       -0.013          0.022              -0.004           0.023             0.024           0.018
                                (0.025)        (0.029)             (0.023)         (0.023)           (0.023)         (0.022)
                Unknown         -0.020         -0.018              -0.019          -0.017            -0.015          -0.016
                                (0.025)        (0.024)             (0.025)         (0.024)           (0.025)         (0.024)
 12 Months for
                   Larger       0.054*          0.054               0.043           0.021            0.040*           0.061
                                (0.025)        (0.029)             (0.023)         (0.034)           (0.019)         (0.093)
                  Smaller       -0.032          0.003              -0.001           0.020             0.008           0.015
                                (0.024)        (0.024)             (0.021)         (0.021)           (0.020)         (0.020)
                Unknown         -0.006          0.004              -0.002           0.001            -0.002           0.002
                                (0.025)        (0.021)             (0.023)         (0.021)           (0.021)         (0.021)

Observations                    272,386        272,386             272,386        272,386            272,386        272,386
 *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level
 Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Vital Statistics System (NVSS).
 All regressions include 12 or more months lead, 6 to 11 month lead, and 3 to 5 month lead for each size of the gun
 buyback as well as county fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via poisson with
 exposure proxy: County population. Standard errors clustered at the county-level are shown in parentheses. Linear time
 trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed in Table 1.



                                                              71
       Appendix Table 6: Heterogeneity in Effect of GBPs on Firearm Related Homicide by Size
                                           of Gun Buyback
                                Median                   75th Percentile          90th Percentile
      Size of GBP
                         Nominal Per Capita          Nominal      Per Capita  Nominal Per Capita
                            (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)       (5)           (6)
0 to 2 Months for
                 Larger    0.008       0.005          0.032         -0.020      0.012        -0.126
                         (0.028)     (0.065)         (0.039)        (0.098)   (0.046)       (0.118)
                Smaller   -0.050       0.017          -0.043         0.013     -0.010         0.006
                         (0.053)     (0.034)         (0.041)        (0.027)   (0.028)       (0.019)
              Unknown      0.022       0.022          0.022          0.030      0.029         0.028
                         (0.026)     (0.027)         (0.026)        (0.027)   (0.027)       (0.027)
3 to 5 Months for
                 Larger   -0.032      -0.047          -0.009         0.018     -0.021        -0.001
                         (0.027)     (0.046)         (0.031)        (0.049)   (0.037)       (0.112)
                Smaller   -0.072      -0.009         -0.076*        -0.042     -0.051        -0.043
                         (0.041)     (0.043)         (0.031)        (0.030)   (0.030)       (0.024)
              Unknown      0.001      -0.010          0.004          0.001      0.004         0.003
                         (0.043)     (0.037)         (0.042)        (0.040)   (0.042)       (0.039)
6 to 11 Months for
                   Larger       -0.097*        -0.060              -0.085          -0.091            -0.111          0.032
                                (0.044)        (0.058)             (0.051)         (0.058)           (0.086)        (0.084)
                  Smaller        -0.031        -0.026              -0.064          -0.034            -0.056         -0.072*
                                (0.051)        (0.033)             (0.035)         (0.025)           (0.030)        (0.036)
                Unknown           0.015        -0.003               0.012           0.002             0.010          0.006
                                (0.024)        (0.023)             (0.022)         (0.023)           (0.024)        (0.021)
 12 Months for
                   Larger        -0.044          0.014              -0.003         -0.033             -0.027         -0.081
                                (0.034)        (0.043)              (0.026)        (0.043)           (0.035)        (0.080)
                  Smaller       -0.119*        -0.102*             -0.128**        -0.068            -0.091*        -0.071*
                                (0.053)        (0.050)              (0.046)        (0.037)           (0.040)        (0.034)
                Unknown           0.042         0.064*               0.044         0.060*              0.044          0.053
                                (0.027)        (0.030)              (0.027)        (0.029)           (0.029)        (0.029)

Observations                    272,386        272,386             272,386        272,386            272,386        272,386
 *** Significant at 0.1% level **Significant at 1% level * Significant at 5% level
 Notes: County-by-Month data for regressions are drawn from the 1991 to 2015 National Vital Statistics System (NVSS).
 All regressions include 12 or more months lead, 6 to 11 month lead, and 3 to 5 month lead for each size of the gun
 buyback as well as county fixed effects and month-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are estimated via poisson with
 exposure proxy: county population. Standard errors clustered at the county-level are shown in parentheses. Linear time
 trends are at the monthly level. Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Crime control policy controls are listed in Table 1.



                                                              72
