                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A CONGESTION THEORY OF UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS

                                        Yusuf Mercan
                                      Benjamin Schoefer
                                        Petr Sedlácek

                                     Working Paper 28771
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28771


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We thank Chris Edmond, Michael Elsby, Domenico Ferraro, Shigeru Fujita, Gabriel Chodorow-
Reich, Bart Hobijn, Philip Jung, Fatih Karahan, Guido Menzio, Simon Mongey, Emi Nakamura,
Ayegül ahin, Moritz Schularick, Robert Shimer, and Jón Steinsson for useful comments. We
also thank seminar audiences at Aarhus University, Arizona State University, Boston University,
CopenhagenMacro, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Harvard University, New York University, UC Berkeley, the University of Melbourne, the
University of Adelaide and Waseda University. Sedlácek gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the European Research Council of the European Commission [grant number
802145]. Earlier stages of this project were also financially supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) in 2016-2017 [grant number: SE 2554/1-1]. Nicholas Sander provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Yusuf Mercan, Benjamin Schoefer, and Petr Sedlácek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Congestion Theory of Unemployment Fluctuations
Yusuf Mercan, Benjamin Schoefer, and Petr Sedlácek
NBER Working Paper No. 28771
May 2021
JEL No. D24,E24,E32,J21,J23,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

In recessions, unemployment increases despite the--perhaps counterintuitive--fact that the
number of unemployed workers finding jobs expands. We propose a theory of unemployment
fluctuations resting on this countercyclicality of gross flows from unemployment into
employment. In recessions, the abundance of new hires "congests" the jobs the unemployed fill--
diminishing their marginal product and discouraging further job creation. Countercyclical
congestion explains 30-40% of US unemployment fluctuations. Additionally, it explains the
excess procyclicality of new hires' wages, the cyclical labor wedge, the large earnings losses from
job displacement and from graduating during recessions, and the insensitivity of unemployment
to policies such as unemployment insurance.

Yusuf Mercan                                     Petr Sedlácek
Department of Economics                          University of Oxford
The University of Melbourne                      Manor Road
Australia                                        OX1 3UQ, Oxford
yusuf.mercan@unimelb.edu.au                      United Kingdom
                                                 petr.sedlacek@economics.ox.ac.uk
Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
schoefer@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Recessions are times when labor demand plummets and unemployment increases. Rationalizing
why firms are so unwilling to hire away the sudden increase in unemployment remains an actively
debated challenge in macroeconomics.                 We propose a theory of unemployment fluctuations
which puts to use a robust, yet somewhat overlooked, empirical fact: in recessions, the number
of unemployed who find jobs increases. On net, unemployment rises only because an even larger
number of workers lose their jobs. Therefore, recessions are times when newly hired workers from
unemployment are abundant in the workforce. In our framework, their abundance in the workforce
"congests" the jobs the unemployed fill, diminishing their marginal product and discouraging
further job creation. Countercyclical congestion paints a new picture of recessions: rather than
asking why firms hire so little, our theory posits that firms have already absorbed so many of the
unemployed that the jobs they would fill are already crowded.
    We show that countercyclical congestion alone accounts for around 30­40% of US unemploy-
ment fluctuations and much of its persistence. In addition, our theory provides a unified explana-
tion for a range of other business cycle patterns linked to unemployment: the excess procyclicality
of wages of newly hired workers compared to average wages, the countercyclical labor wedge,
countercyclical earnings losses from displacement and from labor market entry, and the relative
insensitivity of labor markets to policies such as unemployment insurance.
    We start our analysis by highlighting that in fact more unemployed find jobs in recessions,
despite a drop in the individual probability of finding a job. For instance, during the trough of
the Great Recession in 2009, the average number of unemployed workers finding jobs was 20%
higher compared to the boom year of 2005. We show analytically that the key to understanding
these countercyclical unemployment-to-employment (UE) flows is the presence of countercyclical
job separations--i.e. the fact that even more people lose their jobs during downturns. Yet, while
countercyclical unemployment to employment flows are a robust empirical fact in the US and other
OECD countries (see, e.g., Blanchard and Diamond, 1990; Burda and Wyplosz, 1994; Fujita and
Ramey, 2009; Elsby, Hobn, and ahin, 2013), existing business cycle research has not linked them
with firms' hiring decisions. In fact, frequently used standard search models that assume constant
separation rates imply counterfactually procyclical UE flows.
    Next, we document that the economy has a limited capacity to absorb new hires--it exhibits
congestion in hiring. In particular, we provide new time series evidence showing that firms do
not create new jobs in response to increases in unemployment that leave other fundamentals (e.g.,
productivity) unaffected. Specifically, in response to separation shocks that by construction do
not affect average labor productivity on impact, labor market tightness (the ratio of vacancies and
unemployment) falls persistently and significantly. This time series fact is robust to accounting for
    See, e.g., Shimer (2005); Hall (2005b); Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008); Gertler and Trigari (2009); Pissarides (2009);
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016); Hall (2017); Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Trabandt (2020).




                                                           1
other contemporaneous business cycle shocks. This finding in the aggregate time series is also
in line with cross-sectional evidence at the firm level (see, e.g., Doran, Gelber, and Isen, 2020) and
local-labor market level (see, e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2014; Gathmann, Helm, and Schönberg, 2018;
Mercan and Schoefer, 2020). The negative effect of separations on labor market tightness and
job finding stands in sharp contrast to the standard search models, which exhibit no congestion,
making firms quickly hire away such an increase in job losers.
    Our congestion theory of unemployment integrates both facts into an otherwise standard
Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) search and matching model of the labor market. First,
shocks to separations generate countercyclical UE flows. Second, we introduce congestion in
hiring through an aggregate production function featuring diminishing returns in the size of a
given cohort of new hires. The resulting countercyclical congestion rationalizes why in a recession
firms do not hire away the additional job losers. We also empirically support our modelling choices
with a range of labor market predictions which have not been studied simultaneously.
    There are likely multiple sources that generate the observed degree of congestion in hiring, such
as internal labor markets, in which entry level-jobs ("ports of entry") are imperfect substitutes to
higher-tier positions (see, e.g., Doeringer and Piore, 1985; Lazear and Oyer, 2004), or human capital
accumulation while on the job and skill loss in unemployment (see, e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent,
1998; Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo, 2013; Kehoe, Lopez, Midrigan, and Pastorino, 2019). We
model congestion through a tractable single mechanism, which permits us to estimate the overall
impact of countercyclical congestion on unemployment fluctuations.
    Specifically, we formalize diminishing returns in hiring by introducing a constant-returns
production function in which different cohorts of hires are imperfect substitutes for one another.
For example, different hiring cohorts may be on different rungs of the career ladder, have different
skills, and hence perform different tasks. The key parameter guiding the degree of congestion,
and hence the quantitative performance of our model, is the elasticity of substitution between
cohorts. We discipline this congestion parameter by having our model match the empirical impulse
response of labor market tightness to a separation rate shock.                       With perfect substitution, our
framework exactly nests the standard search model (see, e.g., Shimer, 2005) in which this response
is counterfactually flat (vacancies scale one to one with unemployment). Therefore, the impulse
response provides a clear target pinning down congestion.
    An alternative calibration strategy directly disciplining our specific productivity-based con-
gestion mechanism could utilize the excess wage fluctuations of new hires relative to incumbent
workers. In the US, new-hire wages are between two and three times as procyclical as average
wages (Pissarides, 2009). Reassuringly, our model predictions fall squarely into this range.
    Quantitatively, our model implies that a 10% increase in hires out of unemployment leads to a
   Specifically, we study shocks to utilization-adjusted total factor productivity (Fernald, 2014), credit spreads (Gilchrist
and Zakrajsek, 2012), discount factors (Hall, 2017), uncertainty (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015), and monetary policy
(Romer and Romer, 2004; Wieland and Yang, 2020).
   Here, our calibration strategy echoes the important work by Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi (2018) (Table 4), who
propose a DMP model relaxing the free-entry condition.



                                                             2
7.6% decline in that cohort's productivity, corresponding to an elasticity of substitution between
worker cohorts of about 1.3. Over the US business cycles, we find that new hires' productivity
fluctuations remain tightly within an amplitude of plus and minus 10%, while average labor
productivity remains as smooth as in the data.
   Countercyclical congestion alone accounts for 30­40% of US unemployment fluctuations, and
increases its persistence. Our model, which features standard total factor productivity and sepa-
ration shocks, replicates essentially all the business cycle patterns of labor market variables, unlike
the standard DMP model (Shimer, 2005). For example, the standard deviation of labor market
tightness is 90% of that in the data, and the correlation between unemployment and vacancies, i.e.
the Beveridge curve, is -0.716 in our model compared to -0.934 in the data.
   The quantitative success of our model rests on two key features. First, the productivity of new
hires is considerably (roughly five times) more volatile than average labor productivity. This is
because when productivity is low, UE flows are typically high, lowering the marginal product of
new hires even further. Second, cohort effects make aggregate conditions at the time of hiring have
long-lasting effects on new hires' productivity.
   Conversely, the quantitative performance of our model does not rest on wage rigidity (see,
e.g., Shimer, 2004; Hall, 2005b; Michaillat, 2012; Schoefer, 2015) or a small fundamental surplus
(Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017). To emphasize this point, we
parameterize our model closely following Shimer (2005), which, absent countercyclical congestion,
would destine the model time series of labor market quantities to be counterfactually smooth.
   Importantly, even structurally different congestion mechanisms generate the same amplification
as our baseline model as long as they are calibrated to match the empirical degree of congestion
(the decline in labor market tightness in response to separation shocks). We illustrate robustness
to these "iso-congestion" models using the example of convex adjustment costs (Fujita and Ramey,
2007; Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi, 2018; Mercan and Schoefer, 2020), and by allowing only a
subset of new hires to generate congestion reminiscent of models of turbulence without congestion
(e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998, 2004; den Haan, Haefke, and Ramey, 2005).
   Finally, by offering a new perspective on unemployment fluctuations, our framework offers
solutions to three related long-standing macroeconomic issues. These results provide further
external validity for our productivity-based modeling of congestion.
   First, countercyclical congestion provides a quantitative explanation for the countercyclical
labor wedge, i.e., the gap between the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) between consumption
and leisure, and the marginal product of labor (MPL) that is implied by viewing the data through
the lens of a standard Real Business Cycle model (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007; Shimer,
2009; Karabarbounis, 2014; Bils, Klenow, and Malin, 2018). In fact, the amplification of new hires'
productivity fluctuations in our model is a procyclical multiplier on the standard MPL measure
manifesting itself precisely as a countercyclical labor wedge.
   Second, our model features large, countercyclical, and persistent earnings losses from job
displacement (Davis and von Wachter, 2011) and from labor market entry such as from university


                                                   3
graduation (Kahn, 2014; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz, 2012; Schwandt and von Wachter,
2019)--consistent with the cohort-specific productivity channel.
      Third, our model obtains amplification through more volatile allocative productivity, rather
than raising the elasticity to productivity. Hence, we overcome the critique raised by Costain and
Reiter (2008), that standard DMP models cannot simultaneously exhibit realistic, productivity-
driven, business cycles and a low sensitivity to unemployment insurance (UI) generosity.
      Our paper relates to recent work on the gradual reduction in unemployment during recoveries
Dupraz, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2019); Hall and Kudlyak (2020b,a). Our congestion model
curbs UE flows and generates persistence in unemployment. A notion of congestion is also present
in important prior work by Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi (2018), who relax the free-entry
condition in a standard DMP model and highlight the role of separation shocks in labor market
fluctuations. Hall (2005a) and Engbom (2020) provide models in which the unemployed send
applications less selectively in recessions, such that recruitment becomes more costly, a process
that can be interpreted to reflect congestion. Michaillat (2012) presents a model with wage rigidity
and diminishing returns in total employment. That model does not exhibit congestion in hiring
(i.e., it would predict essentially no effect of separation rate shocks on labor market tightness),
although it rationalizes a rat-race effect in net employment (Landais, Michaillat, and Saez, 2018).
Our model also speaks to the effects of reallocation shocks and churn more generally (see, e.g.,
Lilien, 1982; Abraham and Katz, 1986; Chodorow-Reich and Wieland, 2020). Eyigungor (2010)
studies a DMP model with vintage effects in capital and embodied technology, thereby separating
productivity in new jobs from that in old matches. Golosov and Menzio (2020) present a model that
rationalizes countercyclical separations as an outcome of firms' coordination of layoffs, generating
unemployment fluctuations even with unchanged fundamentals.
      In Section 2, we present evidence for the countercyclicality of UE flows and the resulting con-
gestion in hiring. Section 3 discusses potential concrete channels and symptoms of congestion.
Section 4 presents our model featuring countercyclical congestion. We parameterize and inves-
tigate the model's business cycle performance in Section 5. Section 6 studies three further key
macroeconomic implications. Section 7 concludes.


2     Empirical Evidence for Countercyclical Congestion
Countercyclical congestion in new jobs arises from the combination of the countercyclical employ-
ment share of workers with recent unemployment, and firms' limited capacity to absorb these UE
hires. We now provide empirical evidence for both ingredients.

2.1     Countercyclical Unemployment-to-Employment Flows
The Countercyclical Shift of Employment to the Recently Unemployed. Figure 1 Panel (a)
presents our main fact and the first ingredient for countercyclical congestion: during recessions
and in their aftermath, the ranks of the employed shift toward workers recently hired out of


                                                   4
                         Figure 1: Countercyclicality of the Employment Share with Unemployment Past Year
                  (a) Employment Shares of Workers with Unemployment Last Year by Total Weeks, and Unemployment Rate
         20




                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                  Employed workers with > 0 weeks
                                                                          > 4 weeks                                > 26 weeks            Unemp. rate (right axis)
                                  of unemployment last year




                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                     log deviation from trend
 Employment share, %




                                                                                                                                                                       Unemployment rate,
                                                                                                                                                                                    20
        10




                                                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                                                                                    -40      0
         0




                                   1980                     1990                   2000                                              2010                     2020


                             (b) Cyclicality: Log Deviations from Trend                                                           (c) Okun's Law
                       40




                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                    Employment share with > 0 weeks
                                                                                       of unemployment last year,
                                                                                        log deviation from trend
 log deviation from trend




                                                                                                           10
                      20
   Employment share,




                                                                                                    0
             0




                                                                                           -10
   -20




                                                                                   -20




                                                                                                                       -40         -20           0       20           40
                       -40




                                                                                                                          Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                1980       1990      2000          2010    2020                                         Regression coefficient = .493


Notes: Panel (a) plots the share of employed workers who have undergone unemployment in the preceding calendar
year for different amount of weeks (total). Panel (b) plots their log deviations from trend. Panel (c) reports the scatter
plot of the detrended time series. The time series are HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 100. Shaded regions
denote NBER-dated recessions. Source: CPS March Supplement (ASEC).



unemployment. We construct this measure using the 1976­2019 Current Population Survey (CPS)
March Supplement (ASEC), which contains information on the number of weeks the respondent
spent unemployed (or, reported separately, nonemployed) during the previous calendar year. We
lead this annual time series by a year to align its reference period with the unemployment rate one,
also ensuring consistency with the worker flow analysis we conduct subsequently. The panel also
includes the log deviation of unemployment rate from its trend to indicate the state of the business
cycle.
             Panel (b) illustrates this countercyclicality by plotting the log deviation in our employment
share measure from its trend (using an HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 100). Both Panels



                                                                               5
(a) and (b) further show that this fact is not driven by short unemployment experiences, but is
robust to only counting unemployment longer than four weeks, and long-term unemployment
totaling at least 26 weeks (after which recalls are essentially zero, Katz and Meyer, 1990; Fujita and
Moscarini, 2017). Finally, in Panel (c), we quantify the countercyclicality as an Okun's law: the
elasticity of the new-hire share in employment with respect to the unemployment rate is 0.493.

Origins: Worker Flows. To understand the countercyclical employment share of workers with
recent unemployment documented in Figure 1, we turn to the flow approach to the labor market
(see, e.g., Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger, 2006).
    We start by documenting that monthly unemployment-to-employment (UE) worker flows are
countercyclical in Figure 2 Panel (a). Here, we draw on monthly CPS data covering 1976m1­
2019m12. We track individuals switching their labor force status from one month to the next using
the rotating-panel structure of the CPS. We construct quarterly averages of the monthly transition
rates and only for visual clarity smooth the time series by taking four-quarter centered moving
averages (but we use the underlying quarterly data for any statistic we report). Our approach
follows Fujita and Ramey (2006) and we, therefore, relegate further details about data construction
to Appendix A.1 and the consistency of our time series to those reported in Shimer (2012) to
Appendix A.2.
    UE worker flows expand dramatically during all US recessions since 1976, moving tightly with
the unemployment rate. Panel (b) of Figure 2 quantifies this relationship in the form of a scatter
plot along with a fitted linear regression line. Expressed as an Okun's law, the elasticity of UE
flows with respect to the unemployment rate is 0.345. That is, UE flows increase by around 3.5%
when unemployment increases by 10% (i.e., around 0.63 ppt from an baseline unemployment rate
of 6.3%, the US average during 1976­2019). Appendix Figure A3 Panel (a) reports this elasticity for
UE hires as a share of employment, which implies an elasticity of 0.432, consistent with the result
depicted in Figure 1 Panel (c). Appendix B shows that countercyclical UE are a feature across the
OECD. The countercyclicality of UE flows has been documented as a stylized fact (but not studied
as a source of amplification) by, e.g., Blanchard and Diamond (1990); Burda and Wyplosz (1994);
Fujita and Ramey (2009); Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2013).

The Role of Countercyclical Separations. Next, to shed light on the proximate causes behind
the countercyclical employment share of UE hires, we decompose UE flows into contributions
from two worker transition rates in a two-state labor market model featuring employment and
unemployment, abstracting from labor force participation. Each period, a fraction  ("separation
rate") of employed workers separate into unemployment, and a fraction f ("job finding rate") of
unemployed job searchers find, and accept, a job.                 This bathtub model of "ins" and "outs" of
    In the data, and later on in the model, we specify discrete-time transition probabilities while using the conventional
term "rates" interchangeably.




                                                            6
                                Figure 2: The Countercyclicality of Unemployment-to-Employment (UE) Flows
                                                  (a) UE Flows                                                                        (b) Unemployment vs. UE Flows




                                                                                         UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                                                                                                         20
                                       UE flows           Unemployment rate
                           25
  log deviation from trend




                                                                                                               10
               5      15




                                                                                                      0
        -5




                                                                                          -10
 -15




                                                                                                                                -20       -10         0     10       20        30
              -25




                                                                                                                                 Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                1980         1990         2000      2010          2020                                        Regression coefficient = .345


Notes: Panel (a) plots log deviations in UE flows and log deviations in the unemployment rate from their respective
trends. Both series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data and for visual clarity are smoothed by taking centered
four-quarter moving averages. Panel (b) plots log deviations in UE flows against log deviations in the unemployment
rate. Detrended series are HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1,600. Shaded regions denote NBER-dated
recessions. Source: CPS monthly files.



unemployment implies a steady-state unemployment rate given by

                                                                                     
                                                                              u          .                                                                                     (1)
                                                                                     + f

UE flows per period are given by the number of job seekers U times the individual job finding rate
f,

                                                                              UE         f · U.                                                                                (2)

Hence, the percent change in UE flows, by totally differentiating Equation (2), is equal to

                                                                           dUE       df   dU
                                                                                        +    .                                                                                 (3)
                                                                           UE         f   U

Equation (3) shows that for UE flows to increase together with unemployment, unemployment
must increase disproportionately more than the job finding rate falls in a recession.
                 Using the expressions above and normalizing the (constant) labor force to 1 (such that u                                                                      U ),
we can recover the elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate depicted in Figure
2 Panel (b) as follows:

                                                        dUE /UE       df/f                                                        1
                                                                             +1                                                                 + 1,                           (4)
                                                         du /u        du / u                                                             d /
                                                                                         (1 - u ) -1 +                                   df/f



                                                                                     7
                                                    df       d
where we use the fact that       du
                                 u     (1 - u ) -    f   +       implied by Equation (1). Equation (4) reveals that
the sign of the UE elasticity is a priori ambiguous. If separations were constant--as is a common
assumption in search models (see a discussion in e.g., Shimer, 2005)--then UE flows are procyclical,
              dUE /UE     -u
namely         du /u      1-u . However, if separations are            time varying and sufficiently countercyclical
            d /
(i.e., if   df/f
                 < - 1-
                      u
                        u ), UE flows turn countercyclical.
     In the US, separations are indeed sufficiently countercyclical to generate countercyclical UE
flows. In Figure 3 Panel (a), we plot the detrended time series of both the job finding f and job
separation  rates, where we measure f and  as the share of unemployed and employed workers
in month t - 1 who are observed to be employed and unemployed in month t , respectively.
Their correlation is strongly negative at -0.717. Both time series are also relatively volatile, with
                                                                                                 d /
standard deviations of 0.070 and 0.068, respectively. These values imply that                    df/f
                                                                                                         -0.698, which
is considerably below the threshold -u /(1 - u )  -0.067.
     We illustrate the importance of separations in generating countercyclical UE flows in Panel
(b) of Figure 3. We obtain a counterfactual UE flow time series based on the law of motion for
unemployment, using the observed job finding rate yet holding the separation rate at its sample
average  .        In the absence of separation rate movements, UE flows indeed become procyclical
(their correlation with unemployment is -0.389 rather than 0.802 as in the data). Intuitively, the
reason why separations drive UE dynamics can be seen from combining Equation (3) with the total
                                                                 df
derivative of Equation (1), which yields          dUE
                                                  UE         u    f   + (1 - u ) d . Here, in percent terms, movements
in the separation rate  contribute to UE flows by more than                       1-u
                                                                                   u     15 times the amount the job
finding rate f does.

Time Aggregation Adjustment. For consistency with the discrete time model that we present
below, the empirical transition rates are not adjusted for time aggregation. In other words, initially
employed workers may separate into unemployment and transition back into employment within
the period--as in the CPS ASEC definition of asking the end-of-period employed about potential
unemployment spells during the period. In Appendix A.2, we find very similar results for the
cyclical behavior of these UE flows adjusted for such time aggregation.

UE vs. Total Hires (Including Job-to-Job Transitions). While UE flows are countercyclical, job-
to-job transitions (and quits) drop dramatically in recessions (see, e.g., Mercan and Schoefer, 2020).
Total (rather than those only out of unemployment) hires are not countercyclical. We view hires
from unemployment as filling jobs which are fundamentally different from those filled by job-to-
job movers. Therefore, we focus on countercyclical congestion in jobs filled by workers hired out
of unemployment, their share in employment, and (their effect on) flows between unemployment
and employment.
    Appendix A.2 replicates our empirical analysis for alternative treatments of these transition rates.
    Specifically, we iterate on the law of motion for unemployment given by U t +1 (1 - f t )U t + (L t - U t ) to construct
the counterfactual unemployment time series U t over our sample, where f t and L t denote the observed job finding rate
and labor force in month t . Then our counterfactual time series for UE flows is UE t   f t -1 U t -1 .


                                                                 8
                                           Figure 3: Transition Rates and Counterfactual Worker Flows
                                (a) Cyclicality of Transition Rates                                                                    (b) Counterfactual UE Flows

                                 Job finding rate (f)          Separation rate ()                                                      Actual          Constant separations
           20




                                                                                           UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                                                                                                           10
 log deviation from trend
            0       10




                                                                                                          0
  -10      -20




                                                                                        -10
                              1980       1990           2000        2010        2020                                            1980            1990     2000        2010     2020


Notes: Panel (a) plots log deviations of quarterly-averaged monthly UE and EU rates from their trends. Panel (b) plots
the log deviations in quarterly-averaged monthly UE flows and the counterfactual flows implied by a constant EU rate
set to its sample mean. All time series are HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1,600 and smoothed by taking
centered four-quarter moving averages for visual clarity. Shaded regions denote NBER-dated recessions. Source: CPS
monthly files.



Unemployment vs. Nonemployment. In Appendix Figures A1 to A4, we replicate Figure 1 by
considering the nonemployment (comprising unemployment and out of the labor force) rather
than the unemployment history of the employed, and find qualitatively similar cyclical patterns.
While the countercyclicality of NE-hire share in employment exhibits a weaker Okun's law, our
model results would remain unaffected, since the model parameterization would simply require
us to estimate a stronger degree of congestion in order to match our empirical calibration targets.
In a model extension, we also consider flows in and out of the labor force.

Alternative Detrending. In our main specification, we use the conventional smoothing parameter
for quarterly data of 1,600 when studying worker flows and transition probabilities (see, e.g.,
Fujita and Ramey, 2009). Shimer (2005, 2012) instead chooses a smoothing parameter of 105 and
accordingly attributes more of the time series variation to cyclical fluctuations. In Appendix C, we
show that our results are robust to this alternative smoothing parameter. Most importantly, the
elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate stays unchanged (0.348 vs 0.345) as
does the employment share of new hires out of unemployment (0.433 vs 0.432).

2.2                         Evidence for Congestion Effects in Hiring
We now provide evidence for congestion effects, i.e., the limited capacity of the economy to absorb
new hires compared to a no-congestion benchmark. We begin by defining congestion in hiring,
showing the dramatic differences in labor market dynamics with and without congestion. Next,


                                                                                    9
we review quasi-experimental evidence for congestion in hiring at the firm- and local-labor market
level. We end this section providing novel time-series evidence for congestion at the aggregate
level.

Defining Congestion. We define our congestion concept as the economy's limited capacity to
absorb--by means of UE flows--"pure disturbances" in the unemployment pool (i.e., that leave
fundamentals such as productivity and the discount factor constant). The standard DMP model
features no congestion in that sense whatsoever. To fix ideas, we now juxtapose the dynamics
in this standard, no-congestion model with an extreme, full-congestion benchmark. In the full-
congestion benchmark, the economy cannot respond at all to short-run spikes in unemployment,
and UE flows remain fixed.
    In both models, labor market tightness                           v /u , the ratio of vacancies v to the unemployed
u , determines the job finding rate f (  ). Having in mind a constant-returns-to-scale matching
function, we assume that f (  ) > 0 and f ( ) < 0.                          Finally, in both economies unemployment
evolves according to the following law of motion:

                                             u t +1    1 - f ( t ) u t +  t +1 (1 - u t ).                                      (5)

Standard Labor Market Adjustment Without Congestion. In the labor market without conges-
tion, of which the standard DMP economy is an example, hiring (vacancy posting) is determined by
a labor demand condition in which equilibrium vacancies respond only to changes in the benefits
or costs of hiring. In response to pure shifts in unemployment, equilibrium vacancies simply scale
one to one, such that their ratio with unemployment (labor market tightness  ) remains fixed. This
property, in turn, implies that also the job finding rate f (  ) remains fixed, enabling the economy
to quickly absorb the (pure) spike in unemployment through a spike in hiring. The adjustment
paths for this economy can be conveniently summarized analytically. Assuming all variables are
in steady state in period t           -1, and a perfectly transitory, positive separation shock hits in t                        0,
i.e.,  0     ss + d  0 and  t         ss t > 0, we can write:

                                    t        ss ,     vt     ss · u t ,   UE t      u t · f ( ss )
                                                                                                                                (6)
                                        ut       (1 - f ( ss ))u t -1 +  t (1 - u t -1 ).

We illustrate these no-congestion labor market dynamics in the red dashed lines in Figure 4,
plotting the theoretical impulse responses to an increase in the unemployment pool brought about
by a one-time, perfectly transitory increase in the separation rate d  0                              0 -  ss . Upon impact,
    Foreshadowing our quantitative exercises, we adopt the standard Cobb-Douglas matching function, M (u , v )
mu 1-µ v µ (for which f ( )     µ 1-µ , where m denotes matching efficiency and µ is the matching elasticity). We set
m 0.57 and µ 0.72 based on our preferred model calibration.
                   nc , i.e., the time it takes to arrive at u t0.5 -u ss
    The half life t0                                                      0.5, in the no-congestion model is u t - u ss
                     .5                                       u 0 - u ss
                 t                  u t - u ss                   t             nc
1 - ( f ss +  ss ) · (u 0 - u ss )  u 0 - u ss
                                               1 - ( f ss +  ss ) , and hence t0 .5
                                                                                    log(0.5)/log 1 - ( f ss +  ss ) . Since US labor
markets are fluid, with quarterly f ss  0.570 and  ss  0.042, this half life is short, around 0.731 quarters.



                                                                     10
       Figure 4: Congestion in Hiring: Impulse Responses to a Transitory Separation Shock
                   (a) Unemployment                                            (b) Vacancies




               (c) Labor Market Tightness                                      (d) UE Flows




Notes: The figure plots the impulse responses of unemployment, vacancies, labor market tightness and UE flows to a
1%, perfectly transitory job separation shock in economies that feature no- and full congestion in hiring.



unemployment incipiently increases by d  0 · u ss , the inflow from the extra job losers. Immediately,
however, vacancies exhibit a tantamount upward spike--so vacancies and unemployment move
into the same direction. The vacancy surge keeps labor market tightness  and the job finding rate
f ( ) constant. Higher unemployment combined with a constant job finding rate, in turn, leads UE
flows to spike, which is exactly the mechanism that achieves nearly immediate convergence back
to steady state--absent congestion in UE hiring.

Congested Labor Market Adjustment. A counterexample to the no-congestion model is one in
which the economy cannot easily absorb increases in unemployment, including those following
a separation shock. In the extreme case of full congestion, UE flows remain constant. We can
again analytically solve for the transition path of unemployment in this model. These paths make
immediately clear that, in the presence of congestion, labor market tightness and the job finding




                                                       11
rate must fall when unemployment inflows increase:

                        UE t        f ( t ) u t   UE ss ,    t        f -1 (UE ss /u t ) ,   vt    t · u t
                                                                                                                                  (7)
                                           ut     (1 - f ( t -1 ))u t -1 +  t (1 - u t -1 ).

Figure 4 plots, with the dotted yellow lines, the transition paths of this full congestion case. While
upon impact, unemployment increases by the same amount as in the no-congestion benchmark,
the transition dynamics differ dramatically. UE flows are constant, rather than increasing sharply.
To achieve constant gross hiring (UE flows) in the face of an abundance of unemployed, the job
finding rate and hence labor market tightness must fall. This drop can only be brought about by a
drop in vacancies. Consequently, unemployment recovers extremely slowly.

Review of Cross-Sectional, Quasi-Experimental Evidence. Before we present our aggregate time
series evidence for congestion, we argue that there exists a considerable amount of compelling
firm-level and local-labor market evidence for congestion in hiring.
    First, at the firm level, Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2020) draw on quasi-experimental variation in
recent hires arising from US visa lotteries. They find that one exogenously assigned new hire (more
than) fully crowds out any additional subsequent hiring into that job type--which would imply
full congestion at the firm level. Since the hiring response is concentrated in specific (new) job
types, this evidence is consistent with a target employment count in a narrowly defined category of
entry level jobs, rather than a total employment target. Such hiring targets are also consistent with
qualitative evidence on the organization of work that renders entry-level jobs imperfect substitutes
for higher-tier jobs (see, e.g., the "ports of entry" and internal labor markets described in Doeringer
and Piore, 1985). The congestion mechanism adopted in our theoretical framework reflects such
features.
    Second, cross-sectional evidence from local labor market adjustment is consistent with con-
gestion in hiring. Studying the degree to which vacancy posting complies with free entry in the
context of vacancy chains, Mercan and Schoefer (2020) review 15 studies of local labor market ad-
justment in response to firm- or industry-specific shocks to local employment. Their meta-analysis
documents very limited short-run employment spillovers from firms directly affected by labor
demand shifters in a local labor market onto peer firms not directly impacted by those shifters. For
example, employment subsidies targeting some eligible firms have no or strikingly limited effects
on hiring by ineligible employers in the same local labor market (Cahuc, Carcillo, and Le Barban-
chon, 2018; Giupponi and Landais, 2020). Similarly, sharp labor demand reductions and mass
layoffs by particular plants or sectors, which closely approximate a separation shock that leaves
peer firms' job values constant, do not lead other employers to expand even in the same industry
or in other tradable industries in the short run (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2014; Gathmann, Helm, and
    Following similar steps as in the no-congestion case, we derive the half life of the unemployment recovery in
                               fc                                                           u t -u ss                           fc
the full-congestion model, t0.5 , as follows: u t - u ss      (1 -  ss )t · ( u 0 - u ss )  u 0 - u ss
                                                                                                       (1 -  ss )t , and hence t0.5
log(0.5)/log (1 -  ss ). Calibrated to the US average         0.042, this half life is around 16 quarters.



                                                                 12
Schönberg, 2018). Therefore, these studies also point to the presence of congestion in hiring with
local labor markets having a limited capacity to absorb spikes in unemployment.

Aggregate Time Series Evidence. Our main quantitative evidence for congestion in hiring im-
plements the thought experiment presented in Figure 4 in US time series data. Using a vector
autoregression (VAR) model, we study the response of labor market tightness to a separation-
shock induced expansion in unemployment. Specifically, we study the behavior of two sets of
endogenous variables given by the vector:

                                              yt        [ln ALPt , ln  t , ln x t ] ,

where ALP is average labor productivity (measured as output per worker in the non-farm business
sector),  is the separation rate (EU flows divided by beginning-of-period employment), and x
denotes either labor market tightness (vacancies from Barnichon, 2010, divided by unemployment)
or the unemployment rate. To be consistent with our subsequent quantitative analysis and due to
data limitations (ALP is measured on a quarterly frequency), we convert the monthly job separation
rate to a quarterly measure.
    We then estimate the following VAR model for each endogenous variable vector yt :

                                                   yt     c + A(L )yt-1 +  t ,                                            (8)

where c is a constant term, A(L ) is a lag polynomial, and  t  (0 , ) is a vector of error terms
with variance-covariance matrix . We include four lags of the endogenous variables in our
specification and identify productivity and separation shocks using a recursive identification
scheme (or, equivalently, using a Cholesky decomposition of ). Our timing assumptions are that
ALP has a contemporaneous effect on both  and x . In contrast,  only has a contemporaneous
effect on x and x affects the endogenous variables only with a lag. We then study impulse responses
to an orthogonalized shock to  , to isolate the effect of movements in job separations from that of
productivity fluctuations.
    Figure 5 plots the empirical impulse response functions of labor market tightness (Panel (a)) and
unemployment (Panel (b)) to a separation shock. We also report the two counterfactual benchmark
responses from an economy with no congestion (red dashed line), and full congestion in hiring
    Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi (2018) also study the response of the labor market to separation shocks. We
argue that their modification of the free-entry condition also constitutes a congestion mechanism, and resembles our
alternative specification of congestion via convex (UE) hiring costs which, however, misses some of our key results
pertaining to wage fluctuations and earnings losses from displacement.
    This orthogonality with productivity holds exactly in the first period. In Appendix Figure A11, we present the
IRFs of ALP to the  shock. Importantly, if anything, the empirical process indicates (insignificantly) positive ALP
responses to a positive separation rate shock in the transition periods. Hence, the comovement of productivity with
the separation shock would lead to an increase rather than decrease of labor market tightness (and a decrease in
unemployment). Moreover, evidence suggests that the composition of the unemployment pool improves and that firms
find it profitable to increase their hiring standards in recessions (see, e.g., Mueller, 2017; Modestino, Shoag, and Ballance,
2016). Congestion arises in our model as long as the pool of the unemployed differ from the employed.



                                                                 13
              Figure 5: Congestion: Empirical Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock
                (a) Labor Market Tightness                                     (b) Unemployment




Notes: Panel (a) plots the impulse response of labor market tightness to a unit standard deviation job separation shock
using a three-variable VAR, identified off a Cholesky decomposition. Panel (b) plots the impulse response of the
unemployment rate to a separation shock. The dashed lines are one standard deviation confidence bands. The figure
also includes two extreme benchmarks, no- and full-congestion impulse responses to the same shocks.



(yellow dotted line).
    The data clearly reject the insensitivity of labor market tightness predicted by the no-congestion
benchmark. The empirical response is significantly negative and persistent (Panel (a)). That is,
vacancies do not quickly and sufficiently expand to absorb the newly unemployed workers. The
resulting drop in the job finding rate, paired with the increase in separations, triggers a large
and persistent increase in unemployment (Panel (b)). These empirical patterns are absent in the
standard DMP, no-congestion model.
    Of course, quantitatively, the empirical responses still lie in between the no-congestion and
full-congestion extremes. Therefore, in our quantitative model, we pin down the precise degree
of congestion by having our model match the empirical market tightness response to a separation
shock depicted in Figure 5 Panel (a).

Discussion of VAR Identification. More so than in cross-sectional studies, shocks other than
labor productivity may be correlated with separation rate shifts in the aggregate time series (see
Uhlig, 2005, for standard concerns with the VAR approach). After all, ALP is smooth and not very
cyclical (see, e.g., Shimer, 2005; Mitman and Rabinovich, 2020; Galí and Van Rens, forthcoming).
In fact, in canonical models of endogenous separations (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994), the same
surplus shock that drives hiring fluctuations, drives separations. At the same time, however,
separation and job finding rates exhibit considerable independent variation (see, e..g., Shimer,
2012), and there exist theories of separation rate fluctuations without any connection to job surplus
fluctuations (e.g., Golosov and Menzio, 2020). Similarly, reallocation shocks (Lilien, 1982) may
    The counterfactual responses of no- and full-congestion mimic those in Figure 4 but use the estimated separation
shock process.


                                                          14
shift new and old jobs' values in a directly affected sector, with the absorption of the freed-up labor
to be done in a sector in which, e.g., TFP has not changed.
    To address these concerns, Appendix D assesses the role of omitted shocks in our estimated
separation rate process. In particular, we study the leading drivers of business cycles in the macro
literature: shocks to utilization-adjusted total factor productivity (Fernald, 2014), credit spreads,
(Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012), discount factors (Hall, 2017), uncertainty (Jurado, Ludvigson, and
Ng, 2015), and monetary policy (Romer and Romer, 2004; Wieland and Yang, 2020). We find
that these shocks have essentially no predictive power for the separation shocks identified by
our VAR. Moreover, controlling for these shocks leaves the specific time-path of our separation
shocks essentially unchanged.           We conclude that the leading candidates of observable shocks are
unlikely to confound our estimation of the congestion dynamics.


3    Potential Concrete Channels of Congestion in Hiring
Our labor market model, developed in Section 4, introduces a single, tractable and stylized channel
of congestion in hiring while nesting the standard DMP model as a special case. In particular,
cohorts of new hires enter the aggregate production function as imperfect substitutes to incumbent
workers (older cohorts of hires). The key advantage of our tractable approach is that it allows
us to estimate the overall impact of countercyclical congestion on unemployment fluctuations,
independent of its potential additional specific sources--some of which we now discuss.

Human Capital. A widely studied source of differences between new hires and incumbent work-
ers is general or firm-specific human capital accumulation on the job. Workers may partially lose
such skills during unemployment, consistent with evidence for large earnings losses upon job
displacement Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993), that unemployment spells lower applicants'
attractiveness for employers (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo, 2013), and with turbulence models
of unemployment (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998, 2004; den Haan et al., 2005; Kehoe et al., 2019).

Internal Labor Markets. A long literature in personnel economics offers another reason--internal
labor markets (ILMs)--for why new hires and incumbent workers may be imperfect substitutes.
ILMs feature careers: a progression from limited entry-level jobs ("ports of entry") to higher-
tier jobs which are, however, predominantly filled by incumbents (see, e.g., Doeringer and Piore,
1985; Lazear and Oyer, 2004). An important feature of ILMs is that their structure is rigid, with
the employment distribution across job levels and career progressions remaining stable within a
firm even in the face of substantial employment growth (see, e.g., Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom,
1994a)--thereby curbing a quick expansion of hiring into entry-level jobs.
     An alternative route would be to include those shocks in the empirical VAR. Since our theoretical model will not
feature those shocks, we do not pursue this route. We suspect that our results will be similar, since the VAR, intuitively,
captures the residual variation of labor market tightness with separation shocks.
     The canonical case study of a mid-sized US firm in Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994a) document some evidence
for ports of entry, with 99% such jobs being filled with outside hires, who then move up the internal career ladder, with


                                                            15
    In addition, the rigidity of ILMs and cohort-specific careers manifests itself in clear cohort-
specific (within-firm) wage paths of workers hired at different points of the business cycle. Baker,
Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994b) show that cohorts of new hires face cyclical entry wages, but that
subsequent wage profiles are parallel with other cohorts. Similar effects have been documented at
the aggregate level. Wages of new hires appear more procyclical (see, e.g., Pissarides, 2009) and
exhibit persistent cohort effects depending on aggregate conditions at the time of hiring (see e.g.
Beaudry and DiNardo, 1991; Davis and von Wachter, 2011; Kahn, 2014; Oreopoulos, von Wachter,
and Heisz, 2012). As we show in Section 6, our model generates such cohort-specific wage profiles.

Employer Composition. Rather than firm-level processes, the imperfect substitution of new hires
with incumbent workers may be a manifestation of changes in the quality of hiring firms. Workers
hired in recessions appear to switch--specifically downgrade--occupations (see, e.g., Altonji,
Kahn, and Speer, 2016; Huckfeldt, 2016), with firms upgrading skill requirements for new hires
(see, e.g., Modestino, Shoag, and Ballance, 2016; Carrillo-Tudella, Gartner, and Kaas, 2021). In
recessions, low-productivity and low-wage employers expand hiring relatively more strongly and,
therefore, absorb larger shares of new hires (see e.g. Schmieder, von Wachter, and Heining, 2019;
Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz, 2012). A complementary literature studies the reallocation
of hires by various margins across heterogeneous firms (see, e.g., Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2012;
Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn, and McEntarfer, 2018).

Convex Hiring Costs. Congestion in hiring may alternatively operate through a convex costs
in (UE) hiring. For instance, firms may need to create new jobs and reorganize production (see,
e.g., Fujita and Ramey, 2007; Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi, 2018; Mercan and Schoefer, 2020),
screen applicants (see, e.g., Hall, 2005a; Engbom, 2020), and then train the new hires (see, e.g.,
Silva and Toledo, 2009). To the degree that these adjustments disrupt production by, e.g., moving
incumbent workers to training purposes (as in, e.g., Faccini and Yashiv, 2020), the deep sources of a
convex hiring cost may still reflect production function features. While we show robustness of our
results to modelling of congestion using convex hiring costs, there exists an important difference
between the two modelling choices. In particular, congestion through convex hiring costs cannot
explain observed cohort-specific wage profile differences discussed above.


4    A Search Model with Countercyclical Congestion
We now integrate countercyclical congestion into an otherwise standard DMP model. In Section
5, we calibrate the model and study its quantitative performance for core labor market variables,
while Section 6 shows that our framework provides a unified explanation for a range of other labor
75% of higher-level jobs filled through internal career moves. Moreover, they document that "almost everyone who
enters the firm at the lower levels goes through the same number of promotions before reaching higher levels" (p. 915)
and that this structure is rigid since "the firm added no new levels over time as employment tripled. Major titles in 1969
were major titles in 1988, with little change in the distribution of employment across titles" (p. 916).



                                                           16
market phenomena.
      To model congestion in hiring from unemployment, we add two ingredients into the canonical
DMP framework. First, we generate countercyclical UE flows, by adding countercyclical sepa-
rations. Second, to obtain congestion dynamics, our model features an aggregate production
function with diminishing returns in new hires--arising from imperfect substitution between hir-
ing cohorts. When UE flows rise, as they do in recessions, new hires become relatively abundant.
The marginal product of new hires falls, rationalizing why firms do not absorb laid off workers as
quickly as predicted by no-congestion models.

4.1        Worker Heterogeneity: Cohort-Specific Types and Congestion
We begin by describing the key extension of our model: worker heterogeneity that depends on time
since hiring, and their imperfect substitutability in production. This feature generates diminishing
returns in new hires, which acts as the source of congestion in our model.

Worker Types. Workers are heterogeneous in their type k  K                   {1 , . . . , K }, with maximum type
K  1. Index k stands for various economic mechanisms whereby workers with different labor
market histories become different from the point of view of employers.
      Figure 6 summarizes how worker types evolve in our setting during employment and unem-
ployment spells. Each period a worker is employed, she moves up one level, i.e., k t +1                      k t + 1,
where t indexes time. While unemployed, workers downgrade by k u ( k ) steps, i.e k t +1              k t - k u ( k t ),
where k u ( k )  {0, 1 , . . . , k - 1} determines the size of the downgrade as a function of current type k .
This setup nests various possibilities ranging from no downgrading k t +1               k t , achieved by setting
k u (k )    0, to full downgrading to k t +1   1 for all types k , achieved by setting k u ( k )   k - 1.
      This tractable and agnostic type evolution has two key advantages over modeling multiple
concrete mechanisms--discussed in Section 3--that could underlie it. First, it allows for a direct
comparison to the standard DMP model, which our framework nests. Second, it allows us to esti-
mate the overall impact of countercyclical congestion on unemployment fluctuations, independent
of its sources.

Congestion: Production with Diminishing Returns to Worker Types. Worker heterogeneity
matters through the aggregate production function. Workers of different types produce interme-
diate goods using a linear technology converting one unit of labor to a unit of intermediate goods
differentiated by worker types. We denote the stock of type-k workers (and hence intermediate
                  K
inputs) by { n k }k 1
                      . Intermediate inputs are sold to a final good producer in a competitive market at
              K
prices { p k }k 1
                  . The final good producer combines these inputs into a final consumption good (the
numeraire). Final good production is subject to fluctuations in aggregate total factor productivity




                                                       17
                                      Figure 6: Worker Type Evolution




(TFP) z . The aggregate production function is given by

                                                          K            1/ 
                                                                   
                                             Y     z            k nk         ,                                    (9)
                                                         k 1

where  k is a type-specific productivity shifter associated with type k , and  governs the elasticity
of substitution between inputs. This functional form exhibits overall constant returns to scale and
                                                                         1
a constant elasticity of substitution across worker types,              1- .       The standard DMP model is nested
as a special case when worker types are perfect substitutes for one another (and no differences in
productivity weights  k ), permitting us to isolate the congestion mechanism.
     The competitive price for each intermediate input k reflects the marginal product of labor-type
k engaged in that good's production:

                                        -1         Y                -1             1          Y
                               pk    k nk                        k sk                           ,               (10)
                                                 K
                                                 l 1    l n l                    K
                                                                                 l 1    l s l N

                K
where N         l 1   n l denotes aggregate employment, Y /N is average labor productivity (ALP), and
sl    n l / N denotes the employment share of type- l workers. Equation (10) makes clear that the
productivity of a given worker type features diminishing returns in its employment share.

Specific Case: Full Downgrading to k              1 Upon Job Loss. Consider the specific case that upon
job loss, workers fully downgrade to k           1, i.e., k u ( k )    k - 1 for all k . In this case, all unemployed
workers become the same type. Hence, all UE hires are also the same type, and will climb the
worker-type ladder as one cohort. This case permits an easy representation of new hires' marginal
product of labor, namely p k 1 .
     Figure 7 traces out the relationship between the marginal product of new hires p 1 against their
    In Appendix E, we present a generalization that allows for perfect substitution between subsets of worker types,
thereby permitting one to generalize the skill accumulation and decumulation processes further.


                                                            18
employment share under the assumption of full type downgrading. We plot this relationship
for two levels of the congestion parameter   {0.241 , 1}. To isolate the influence of worker
heterogeneity on congestion from mechanical composition effects (e.g., Mueller, 2017; Ferraro, 2018;
Hagedorn, Manovskii, and Stetsenko, 2016), we set  k such that steady-state marginal products
are normalized to one for all worker types, i.e., p k                  1 for all k , and for each  level.
    The flat yellow dotted line captures the case of                      1, for which workers are perfect substitutes,
and each type's marginal product simply equals the average labor productivity, Y / N . Shifts in the
share of new hires have no effect on productivity. This specification renders the model isomorphic
to the standard model with homogeneous workers and no congestion in hiring.
    If  < 1, the economy exhibits diminishing returns in each type k . We set                          0.241, foreshad-
owing our estimate for congestion in Section 5. The blue solid line is the productivity of new hires,
which falls sharply when new hires become abundant. Specifically, a 10% increase in the share
of new hires (that is, 0.4ppt off the baseline of 4%) lowers productivity by around 7.6% (the local
slope of 1 - 0.241        0.759). As another way to judge  , the implied elasticity of substitution of
worker types (cohorts) is around 1/(1 -  )  1.3.
    Importantly, these movements in new-hire productivity have no visible effect on the naive
ALP concept Y / N (red dashed line), which is essentially flat, even for large changes in hiring.
This property is due to the CRS-CES production function. Therefore, the large fluctuations in
productivity of new hires that our model implies can be masked by--and hence be consistent
with--the smooth ALP in the data.

Implications for Productivity Fluctuations. In the data, this mechanism provides large fluctua-
tions in new-hire compared to average productivity. Figure 7 Panel (b) plots the time series (log
deviations from trend) of productivity of new hires p 1 , along with the average labor productivity
Y /N . We construct new-hire productivity p 1 by feeding in the observed share of UE hires, s 1, t , at
                                            -1
each quarter, which gives p 1, t         1 s1 ,t
                                                 ALPt     K
                                                                1
                                                                          ,   where ALPt is the observed average labor
                                                          k 1    k s k ,t
productivity.      At SD ( p1 )     0.052, the volatility of new-hire productivity is essentially five times
as high as that of the standard average labor productivity (SD (ALP)                         0.010) used in the existing
literature as a driving force (e.g., Shimer, 2005; Hall, 2005b; Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008; Pis-
sarides, 2009). Yet, over the US business cycles, the maximum amplitudes of new-hire productivity
remain tightly within an interval of plus and minus 10%.

Discussion: Alternative Type Processes. When specifying the full model below, we present
the general case regarding type downgrading, and then calibrate our model under the specific
assumption of full type downgrading. We also show robustness to alternative type-downgrading
specifications; once recalibrated to match the same congestion targets, these variants turn out to
     For this exercise (but not in subsequent analyses), we ignore fluctuations in the third term arising from the history
of the law of motion of worker types, which are small but would otherwise force us to drop the first 160 quarters in our
sample if we followed our eventual specification of K 160. We therefore consider at each point the deviations from
steady state in only the new-hire share while ensuring that the shares of the other types k > 1 drop accordingly.



                                                           19
                     Figure 7: Flow Productivity and The Size of the Hiring Cohort
           (a) Productivity vs. New-Hire Share                            (b) Productivity Fluctuations




Notes: Panel (a) plots the marginal product of new hires and average labor productivity as a function of the employment
share of new hires for different values of congestion parameter . Steady-state average labor productivity and each
type's marginal product are normalized to one for both calibrations of  . Panel (b) plots the empirical US time series
for average productivity and new-hire productivity. Both time series are in logs and detrended using an HP-filter with
a smoothing parameter of 1,600.



be isomorphic.

Discussion: Segmentation of Cohorts. The assumption that hiring cohorts remain segmented
throughout their tenures, even, e.g., 20 years into the job, may appear unappealing. However, high
turnover rates in the US economy wash out cohort effects. For instance, fewer than 5% of workers
remain in the same job for 20 years. Moreover, if in reality congestion occurred only early in the job
(i.e., a lowering of K ), the calibrated model would simply require a larger degree of diminishing
returns, i.e., a lower parameter  , to match the empirical congestion response in hiring. Finally, the
new-hire productivity time series exhibits persistence, which compresses productivity differentials
between adjacent cohorts.

4.2   Environment and Timing
Except for worker heterogeneity and the associated aggregate production function described above,
the remainder of the model follows the standard DMP model as in, e.g., Shimer (2005).

Environment. There is a continuum of workers comprising the labor force of mass L . They are
infinitely lived and ex-ante identical. Preferences are risk-neutral, with discount factor   (0, 1).
Individuals own the two types of producers: intermediate-input producers ("firms"), which use
labor to produce output they sell in a perfectly competitive market to a final good produce. The
latter "retailer" bundles the intermediate goods into a final consumption good using the technology
in Equation (9) with total factor productivity (TFP) z . The retailer pins down intermediate input
prices, which stand for the marginal products of worker types.


                                                          20
Matching. The labor market is subject to search frictions. Jobs take the form of single worker-
firm matches and produce intermediate goods using a linear technology. Meetings between
unemployed workers and vacancies (firms with unfilled jobs) are random, and follow a constant-
returns-to-scale matching function M ( u , v ) < min{ u , v }, where u is the mass of unemployed
searching for jobs and v is the mass of open vacancies. Labor market tightness is the ratio of
vacancies v to unemployment u ,                v /u . The job finding rate for an unemployed worker is
f ()     M
         u    M (1, ); the vacancy filling rate for a firm is q ( )         M
                                                                            v     M (1/ , 1).

Separations. Each period, active matches separate with exogenous but time-varying rate  . These
separations are an ad-hoc event rather than arising from endogenous decisions between the worker
and firm in response to shocks to surplus. We take this route, as we conjecture that modeling
endogenous separations should leave our key results intact provided such an extended model
matches the impulse response of labor market tightness to separation shocks unrelated to produc-
tivity movements (as documented in Figure 5).

No Job-to-Job Transitions. We primarily refer to the k -types as denoting skills gained on the job.
Some of this upgrading may also reflect the progress of a worker through the original employer's
job ladder. In the broadest sense, one could think of the job ladder as incorporating even job
ladders involving employer switches, but we do not explicitly model such employer-to-employer
transitions for simplicity and because our ultimate interest is in hiring out of unemployment.
Informally, we think of job-to-job transitions as leaving workers on track in terms of their type
evolution. The crucial feature our model requires is that the (skill) type evolution when employed
is different from that in unemployment as in models of turbulence (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998,
2004). Hence, our focus and notion of a job echoes the concept of "employment cycles" uninter-
rupted by unemployment spells and potentially including job-to-job transitions as in Hagedorn
and Manovskii (2013).

Aggregate State Variables. The economy is subject to aggregate shocks, namely to the job sep-
aration rate  and to TFP in final good production z . Additional state variables are the worker
distributions across k types in unemployment (due to random search) and over employment (due
to the CES production function). Below, we index value functions and variables by time subscript
t , which, besides time, implicitly captures all the relevant aggregate state variables.

Timing. At the beginning of each period, aggregate productivity z and separation rate  are
realized. Worker-firm matches (both those active last period and those formed last period) are
destroyed at rate  , in which case the worker becomes unemployed. The surviving matches produce
     An interesting question beyond the scope of our model with exogenous separations is whether endogenous sepa-
rations become harder to justify if skill loss is involved (see den Haan, Haefke, and Ramey, 2005, for a discussion).
     If the mechanism worked through the job ladder only, then workers would have an incentive to search harder for
the more-productive jobs in recessions. However, even in such a setting, the model would need to be consistent with
the observed drop in labor market tightness following separation shocks.


                                                         21
the intermediate inputs differentiated by the type of the worker k , which the retailer bundles into
the final consumption good. Workers consume their wage or unemployment benefits, depending
on their employment status and k -type. Employed workers upgrade by one type, and unemployed
workers downgrade by k u ( k ) types. The period closes by the search stage. Firms post vacancies
and unemployed workers search for jobs, which determine market tightness. New matches are
formed.

Evolution of Type Distributions. The worker distributions over types evolve according to the
following laws of motion:

                          u k -k u (k ), t          1 - f ( t -1 ) u k , t -1 +  t e k -k u (k ), t for all k
                                                                                                                                      (11)
                              e k -k u (k ), t     (1 -  t -1 ) e k -k u (k )-1, t -1 + f ( t -1 ) u k , t -1 for all k ,

with e k , t denoting the beginning of period employment mass of type- k workers. The labor input
that enters production is equal to n k , t                    (1 -  t ) e k , t , as separations occur at the beginning of a period.
Type-specific unemployment u k , t is written after the separation stage (but before type changes,
                                                                                                                            K
which occur at the end of the period). Aggregate unemployment is given by u t                                               k 1   u k ,t
                K
L - (1 -  t )   k 1 ek ,t .


4.3     Worker and Firm Problems, and Equilibrium
We now describe the worker and firm problems, wage determination, the match surplus, and the
labor market clearing condition.

Worker and Firm Problems. We cast the worker and firm value functions recursively. The value
functions are written as of the consumption/production stage within the period.
      The value of an employed worker of type k is

                                 Wk , t          w k , t + Et (1 -  t +1 )Wk +1, t +1 +  t +1 U k +1, t +1 ,                          (12)

where w k , t is the bargained real wage (to be described below), which the worker consumes. Next
period, the worker keeps her job at rate 1 -  t +1 (realized at the beginning of the period) and
otherwise becomes unemployed.
      The value of an unemployed worker of type k is

            Uk ,t    b + Et f ( t )(1 -  t +1 )Wk -k u (k ), t +1 + 1 - f ( t )(1 -  t +1 ) U k -k u (k ), t +1 ,                     (13)

where b is the flow value of unemployment.                              If the worker contacts a firm and does not separate at
the beginning of the next period, she becomes employed. Otherwise the worker stays unemployed.
    We will interpret b , interchangeably, as unemployment insurance since extending the model with a government
levying lump-sum taxes to finance such a policy leaves the rest of the model unchanged.



                                                                           22
Upon spending the current period in unemployment, the worker's type downgrades to k - k u ( k ),
whether she finds a job or not.
   Firm problems mirror that of the workers. The value of a vacancy is

                                                               u k ,t
          Vt   - +  Et q ( t )(1 -  t +1 )                            Jk -k u (k ), t +1 + 1 - q ( t )(1 -  t +1 ) Vt +1 ,              (14)
                                                                ut
                                                           k

                                                                                               u k ,t
where the firm pays flow cost  to maintain the vacancy and                                   k u t Jk -k u ( k ) , t +1   is the average job
value from randomly meeting unemployed workers of different types k at time t .
   A firm that employs a worker of type k has value

                           Jk , t     p k , t - w k , t +  Et (1 -  t +1 ) Jk +1, t +1 +  t +1 Vt +1 ,                                  (15)

where p k , t is the price of the type-specific good produced by the match, taken as given by the
firm. The firm pays the worker a bargained wage w k , t . The match continues until the exogenous
separation shock dissolves it.

Surplus, Wage Determination, and Free Entry. Total surplus from a match is the sum of worker
and firm surpluses, and is given by

                                               Sk ,t      Wk , t - U k , t + Jk , t - Vt .                                              (16)

The individual value functions in Equations (12)­(15) and the definition of surplus in Equation
(16) yield the following surplus value:

                Sk ,t     p k , t - b +  Et (1 -  t +1 )S k +1, t +1 - f ( t )(1 -  t +1 )  S k -k u (k ), t +1
                                                                                                                                        (17)
                          + U k +1, t +1 - U k -k u (k ), t +1 ,

and the value of unemployment can be expressed in terms of match surplus as follows:

                        Uk ,t       b + Et f ( t )(1 -  t +1 )  S k -k u (k ), t +1 + U k -k u (k ), t +1 .                             (18)

The wage for worker type k is determined period-by-period by generalized Nash bargaining:

                                     w k ,t    arg max(Wk , t - U k , t ) ( Jk , t - Vt )1- ,                                           (19)

where   (0, 1) is the bargaining power of the worker. Due to linear utility and transferable utility,
this bargaining problem implies linear surplus sharing rules given by

                                Wk , t - U k , t       Sk ,t    and      Jk , t - Vt     (1 -  )S k , t .                               (20)




                                                                   23
In words, the worker captures a constant share  of the total match surplus, and the firm captures
the rest.
      Free entry of firms pins down Vt       0 for all t . Equation (14) therefore implies

                                                                    u k ,t
                                       (1 -  )Et (1 -  t +1 )              S k -k u (k ), t +1 .                  (21)
                            q ( t )                                  ut
                                                                k


Stochastic Equilibrium of the Congestion Model. The stochastic equilibrium of the model is a
                                                K                                K
set of value functions for match surplus { S k }k     1
                                                          and unemployment {U k }k 1
                                                                                     , intermediate input
              K                                                     K                                       K
prices { p k }k 1
                  , beginning-of-period masses of unemployed { u k }k               1
                                                                                        and employed { e k }k 1
                                                                                                                , end-
                                                  K
of-period quantities of intermediate goods { n k }k 1
                                                      , and labor market market tightness  , such
that:

      · match surplus S k solves the Bellman equation in Equation (17) for all k ,

      · unemployment value U k solves the Bellman equation in Equation (18) for all k ,

      · intermediate goods prices p k satisfy Equation (10) for all k ,

      · masses of (un)employed, u k and e k , follow the laws of motion in Equation (11) for all k ,

      · end-of-period intermediate goods are given by n k            (1 -  )e k for all k ,

      · market tightness  solves the free-entry condition in Equation (21),

      · exogenous state variables z and  follow stochastic processes specified in Section 5.


5      Quantitative Analysis: Labor Market Fluctuations with Countercyli-
       cal Congestion
We now study the model quantitatively. We first discuss our calibration strategy, and then analyze
the business cycle properties of the calibrated model. Section 6 then shows how our model
simultaneously provides an explanation for a range of other macroeconomic patterns connected
to unemployment fluctuations that have been difficult to rationalize within a single framework.

5.1     Model Parameterization
Table 1 summarizes the model parameters and the targets we use to discipline them. Appendix F
provides technical details for how we solve and simulate the model. Absent congestion, the model
mirrors the standard DMP model, which we calibrate as in Shimer (2005). With congestion, we
additionally discipline the aggregate production function--the congestion parameter  , and the
relative weights of different types in production,  k .
      We calibrate the model to match moments of the US economy, in the period covering 1976Q2­
2019Q4 (except for vacancies and labor market tightness, for which the time series end in 2016,

                                                      24
Barnichon, 2010). The model period is one quarter. We, therefore, convert our monthly transition
rates to quarterly values and use the HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600 to extract the
cyclical component of simulated time series.
    We set the discount factor to             0.99, which yields an annual real interest rate of about 4%.
The matching function takes on the Cobb-Douglas form, M ( u , v )                     mu µ v 1-µ , where we follow
Shimer (2005) and set µ           0.72. Matching efficiency m is set such that the model matches the
average US empirical quarterly job finding rate of 0.57. We impose the Hosios condition and set
the bargaining power of workers equal to the elasticity of the matching function,                        µ.    Finally,
the vacancy posting cost,  , is set such that labor market tightness is normalized to                     1 in steady
state.
    The flow value of unemployment b is set such that the replacement rate (relative to the average
wage) is 40%, as in Shimer (2005), which gives b               0.39. Hence, our parameterization is not based
on a low (fundamental) surplus, which determines the amplification of productivity shocks in the
standard model (see e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017). Instead, amplification from countercyclical
congestion works through more volatile allocative productivity of new hires.
    In addition, we ensure that steady-state surpluses are identical across all model variants (e.g.,
when considering different values of  ) by setting the type-specific productivity weights  k such
that p k   1 for all k in steady state. We report details on this procedure in Appendix G.

Worker Type Evolution: Full Downgrading to k                     1 (W.L.O. Quantitative G). We set a maxi-
mum of K        160 steps, i.e., 40 years, after which employed workers remain in the highest rung of
the type ladder. Of course, hardly any worker attains this tenure level given the separation rate.
    In our baseline specification--without loss of quantitative generality--we assume full type
downgrading in unemployment, i.e., k u ( k )          k - 1. This process is consistent with the interpretation
of worker heterogeneity as reflecting the accumulation and decumulation of skills as in turbulence
models (see e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998, 2004; den Haan, Haefke, and Ramey, 2005, who also
permit gradual skill decline, although in these models all worker skill types are perfect substitutes
in production).
    In Section 5.2, we show robustness to an alternative downgrading specification, in which a
certain fraction of workers does not incur any downgrading at all. We show analytically that
this model variant, once recalibrated to match the same targets, is isomorphic to our baseline
specification.
    To be consistent with our discrete time model, transition rates are not adjusted for time aggregation bias. Appendix
A.2 reports how our measured flows compare to adjusted flows and that our data are essentially the same as that used
by Shimer (2012).
    The Hosios condition holds exactly when  1; with congestion (  < 1), surplus may also depend on labor market
tightness through marginal products out of steady state. For a special case of the generalized Hosios condition see
Mangin and Julien (2020).




                                                          25
                                                                  Table 1: Parameter Values

                      Parameter                                                Value                 Target/Source                Data     Model
                                                                     Congestion No congestion
                      Discount factor                                           0.99                 Annual interest rate         0.04  0.04
               µ      Matching elasticity                                       0.72                 Shimer (2005)                0.72  0.72
               m      Matching efficiency                                       0.57                 Job finding probability      0.57  0.57
                      Bargaining power                                          0.72                 Hosios condition             0.72  0.72
               b      Unemployment flow value                                   0.39                 Avg. replacement rate        0.40  0.40
                      Vacancy posting cost                                      0.21                 Normalization  1                -  1.00
               z      Productivity shock, mean                                   1                   Normalization                   -  1.00
                      Productivity shock, st. dev.                                                   St. dev. of ALP




26
               z                                                               0.008                                            0.010  0.010
               z      Productivity shock, persistence                          0.956                 Persistence of ALP           0.74  0.69
                      Separation shock, mean                                   0.037                 Unemployment rate          0.063  0.063
                      Separation shock, st. dev.                       0.107         0.080           St. dev. of UE/E           0.067  0.067
                      Separation shock, persistence                    0.709         0.670           Persistence of UE/E          0.84  0.74
                , z   Correlation of shocks to z and                  -0.505         -0.560          corr(ALP, )                -0.41  -0.41
                      Elasticity of substitution b/w workers           0.241           1             Impulse response of  to  , see Figure 9
               k      Relative productivities of worker types            see Appendix G              p k 1 for all k in steady state
     Note: Parameter values for both the baseline "congestion" model (  0.241) and for the standard "no-congestion" model (  1). Model-implied targets are the
     same across the two parameterizations, with the exception of the IRF of  to , which is not targeted in the no-congestion model.
Aggregate Shocks. Aggregate productivity z and job separation rate  follow AR(1) processes
in logs,
                                  ln( z t +1 )   (1 -  z ) ln( z ) +  z ln( z t ) + z  t
                                                                                       z
                                                                                         +1                          (22)
                                                                                   
                                 ln(  t +1 )     (1 -   ) ln(  ) +   ln(  t ) + z  t +1 ,                            (23)

where z and  are the means,  z ,    (0, 1) are the persistence parameters,  z ,    N (0 , 1) are
standard-normal innovations to the productivity and separation processes, and z ,  > 0 are
their respective standard deviations. While average productivity is normalized to one, the average
separation rate  is set such that the model matches an average unemployment rate of 6.3% for
our sample period of 1976­2019. In order to pin down the persistence and volatility parameters,
we target the observed autocorrelation and standard deviation of average labor productivity (real
output per worker in the non-farm business sector) and, in our baseline specification, the share of
UE flows in employment (because of their key role for our congestion channel). (In an alternative
specification, we target the empirical  (EU separation rate) process instead of the UE share, and
find similar results, as discussed below in Section 5.3 and detailed in Appendix J). Finally, we let
the correlation between  z and   be such that the model matches the correlation between average
labor productivity and the separation rate observed in the data. We parameterize the aggregate
shock processes jointly with the congestion parameter  , which we describe below, as the behavior
of UE flows is an equilibrium outcome.

Disciplining Congestion Parameter  : IRF of Labor Market Tightness to Separation Shocks.
Congestion is guided by the parameter that governs the elasticity of substitution between worker
types,  , which determines the degree of diminishing returns to specific worker types. We pa-
rameterize  (jointly with the two aggregate shock processes above) by having the model match
the impulse response of labor market tightness to a separation shock, estimated using the same
VAR as in Section 2.2 on simulated data from the model. To do so, we minimize the root mean
squared error (RMSE) between the empirical and model impulse responses. Figure 8 plots, as the
blue solid line, how this RMSE varies with the congestion parameter  . We obtain the best fit at
     0.241.    The figure also shows the amplification generated by the model, by means of plotting
unemployment volatility on a secondary axis, which we return to in the next subsection.
    Figure 9 Panel (a) plots the IRF of labor market tightness to a separation shock in the calibrated
model, with           0.241, along with the empirical IRF. The model matches the empirical pattern
well. Besides capturing the large negative impact response, the model also generates the observed
persistent, hump-shaped dynamics of labor market tightness. The figure further plots the IRF of
the standard model without congestion (                   1). That IRF is essentially flat at zero, quantitatively
confirming that the equilibrium DMP model exhibits patterns approximated well by the simple
    Negative values of  imply an elasticity of substitution 1/(1 - ) < 1, i.e., worker types (or equivalently intermediate
inputs) are gross complements in final good production. For estimates of long-run elasticities of substitution between
education and experiences groups in the labor market, see, e.g., Katz and Murphy (1992); Jeong, Kim, and Manovksii
(2015); Bils, Kaymak, and Wu (2020). These estimates do not provide a direct comparison to our value of  as the skill
types do not map into our notion of worker types and as they do not use short-run variation.


                                                             27
                               Figure 8: Calibrating Congestion Parameter 




Notes: For various values of congestion parameter , the figure plots the root mean squared error between the data
and model impulse responses of market tightness to a job separation shock (left axis) and the standard deviation of the
unemployment rate (right axis). We highlight our baseline calibration with the vertical line.


        Figure 9: Impulse Response Functions to a Separation Rate Shock: Data and Models
                (a) Labor Market Tightness                                   (b) Unemployment Rate




Notes: The figure plots the empirical response of labor market tightness to a separation shock (dashed lines are one
standard deviation confidence bands), together with model implied responses. "No-congestion (  1)" model refers
to the standard model with homogeneous workers. "Congestion (          0.241)" model refers to our model under the
preferred calibration.



no-congestion benchmark discussed in Section 2.2. Crucially, the inability of the no-congestion
model to match the IRF is not a matter of calibration. In Appendix H, we show analytically and by
presenting simulated moments that even an alternative calibration with a low surplus in the spirit
of Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) cannot do better; specifically, the model continues to produce
the counterfactually flat IRF to separation shocks.
    Additionally, Panel (b) of Figure 9 depicts the impulse response of unemployment to a sepa-


                                                          28
ration shock. Our congestion model exhibits a much stronger response of unemployment than
the standard model without congestion, exactly because labor market tightness falls (Panel (a)),
which pushes down the job finding rate, corroborating the intuitions conveyed by the extreme
benchmarks discussed earlier in Section 2.2.
    The reason why even the congestion model does not fully capture the persistence of the empir-
ical unemployment response in the data is a lower calibrated persistence of separation shocks in
our model. This is because our parameterization strategy puts front and center UE flows, which
are key to the congestion mechanism and because of flows into and out of the labor force, which
our two-state model sidesteps. As a result and as we discuss further below, EU separations are
more volatile (reflected in the higher initial response in unemployment in Panel (b) of Figure 9)
and less persistent compared to the data.
    In Appendix J, we present an alternative calibration which, instead, matches the cyclical patterns
of EU flows. This alternative calibration matches the unemployment response essentially perfectly
and by construction has a realistic EU separation process. We discuss the role of the separation
rate specification in Section 5.3 and overall unemployment properties in Section 5.5.

Validation and Alternative Calibration of  : The Excess Cyclicality of New-Hire Wages. An
alternative calibration strategy is to directly discipline the parameter guiding the congestion mech-
anism, and in turn the relative productivities of new hires compared to the average worker. One
possibility of doing so is by matching the relative wage cyclicalities of newly hired and average
workers.
    Figure 10 reiterates the structure of our main calibration Figure 8, but now plots, with the blue
solid line, the wage cyclicality of new hires relative to those of all workers for the same range of 
values. In particular, for each value of  , we simulate the model and construct the semi-elasticity
of log wages with respect to the unemployment rate, separately for new hires and for the average
worker. In the standard model without congestion, where                           1, all hiring cohorts are perfect
substitutes, and hence have homogeneous productivities and wages. The semi-elasticity ratio is
therefore one, depicted as the rightmost value of  .
    When  < 1, new hires' wages are relatively more procyclical because UE flows increase in
recessions, lowering relative productivity in new jobs. The bargained wages reflect this produc-
tivity differential. For our preferred value                0.241, the model exhibits an excess procyclicality
of new hires' wages of around two. Reassuringly, this value falls into the range of relative wage
cyclicalities observed in the US micro data, as reported by the canonical meta-analysis in Pissarides
(2009) (Table II therein).       Importantly, as the red dashed line and secondary y-axis reiterate, this
relative wage semi-elasticity is with respect to a realistic value of unemployment rate fluctuations.
    While these results are encouraging, we choose not to pursue this line of parameterization
    Recall that our model is calibrated such that all worker types have identical wages in steady state ( p k        1 and
hence w k    w for all k ), so our model-based wages are by construction not subject to composition effects, and hence
correspond to the estimates in Pissarides (2009), which are composition-adjusted for worker quality (see, e.g., Bils, 1985;
Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens, 2013).



                                                            29
         Figure 10: Relative Procyclicality of New-Hire Wages Compared to Average Wages




Notes: For various values of congestion parameter , the figure plots the relative wage cyclicalities of new hires and the
average worker (the ratio of the semi-elasticity of wages to the unemployment rate) on the left axis, and the standard
deviation of the unemployment rate on the right axis. We highlight our baseline calibration with the vertical line.



as our baseline strategy because we believe it faces several limitations. First, the degree to which
wages reveal idiosyncratic productivity depends on the bargaining power of workers, which we set
to a relatively high value following the macro literature (compared to micro-evidence on, e.g., rent
sharing elasticities, see, e.g., Jäger, Schoefer, Young, and Zweimüller, 2020). Similarly, in logs, the
wage cyclicality depends on the level of the surplus p - b , where we assume homogeneous, acyclical
outside options (for an empirical critique, see Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis, 2016). Second,
our model does not feature wage rigidity, and thereby loads all wage cyclicality into the channel of
differential productivities. Wage rigidity for incumbents only (e.g., Beaudry and DiNardo, 1991;
Shimer, 2004; Schoefer, 2015) would lead us to underestimate  (overestimate congestion); wage
rigidity for all workers Hall (2005b) would mean we overestimate  (underestimate congestion).
Third, while we here study flow entry wages (and assume period-by-period bargaining in our
model), it is the present value of new hires' wages, potentially spread out in various ways over time,
that is allocative for hiring and would robustly reflective productivity differentials Shimer (2004);
Kudlyak (2014), which we address in Section 6.2. Finally, to the extent that diminishing returns in
the aggregate production function manifest themselves in the expansion of low-productivity and
low-wage jobs or firms businesses in recessions, our mechanism may evade the ongoing debate
about the role of job and firm composition in new hires' wage fluctuations (Pissarides, 2009; Gertler,
Huckfeldt, and Trigari, 2020; Hazell and Taska, 2020; Grigsby, Hurst, and Yildirmaz, forthcoming).

5.2   Robustness to Alternative Congestion Mechanisms
Here we show that alternative model structures yield similar properties to our baseline model,
as long as the parameters guiding congestion are recalibrated to match the empirical IRF of labor



                                                           30
                   Figure 11: Robustness to Alternative Specifications of Skill Process




Notes: The figure plots recalibrated values of  for different shares of no-congestion hires, x , the "iso-congestion" curve
( x ). It also plots the RMSE between the empirical and model-implied IRF of labor market tightness to separation
shocks, and the standard deviation of unemployment for the recalibrated models to highlight that congestion and
amplification properties of the model stay the same as long as  is recalibrated to match the market-tightness impulse
response target.



market tightness to separation shocks.

A Model Featuring Both Congestion and Non-Congestion Hires. Our baseline model features
a parsimonious skill process: job loss resets worker types to k                          1. In reality, a fair share
of the unemployed may enter reemployment in their original type, e.g., not losing skill, being
hired directly into higher-level positions, or being recalled. Such departures may seem to reduce
amplification. However, for such model variants to still match the empirical degree of congestion,
our calibration strategy simply would estimate a lower  parameter, and ultimately exhibit the
same degree of congestion.
    To demonstrate robustness, we elaborate on an extreme alternative to the type evolution in
Appendix K. Fraction x of "no-congestion hires" replicate the skill structure prevailing at the
point of hiring; fraction 1 - x of "congestion hires" fully downgrade to k                      1. Isomorphically, the
no-congestion workers operate in a separate linear production function.
    Figure 11 shows two model properties for different values of x . x                       0 is exactly our baseline
model. Importantly, each x -model is reparameterized to match all the calibration targets, and all
x -models identically hit the RMSE target as for x                 0 (red dashed line). To achieve this fit, each
x -model simply requires a lower and lower  . We plot the resulting "iso-congestion"  ( x ) curve
     Here, the  k -skill weights are recalibrated to yield homogeneous productivities in steady state. In this second
interpretation, the final good is produced as a convex combination of the congestion (CRS-CES) and a no-congestion
(linear) production functions, Y z [(1 - x )( K      c ( n c ) )1/ + x ( K
                                                k 1 k k
                                                                             nc n k
                                                                         k 1 k
                                                                                  nc )], where subscripts c and nc stand for
the congestion and no-congestion sectors.



                                                            31
with the blue solid line. Appendix K derives this iso-congestion curve analytically.
      Importantly, the dotted red line shows that the standard deviation of unemployment is invariant
in x along the iso-congestion curve for  --so such alternative specifications of the worker-type
process are isomorphic to our baseline specification in which all workers fall to k                    1 upon job loss.

Congestion Through Convex Hiring Costs. In addition, in Appendix L we present a structurally
more divergent model, in which congestion operates through a convex cost in gross UE hires, rather
than through the production function. All workers are perfect substitutes and homogeneous.
Again, once this model variant is calibrated to exhibit realistic congestion in hiring, it too generates
similar cyclical patterns of key labor market variables. The intuition is that the countercyclical
employment share of UE hires increases the hiring cost during recessions. This property stands in
contrast to the procyclicality of recruitment costs in the standard no-congestion model, which lead
to dampening rather than amplification (as explained in, e.g., Shimer, 2010).                        However, unlike
our baseline framework with productivity-based congestion, the model with convex hiring costs
does not generate more cyclical wages of new hires compared to average wages, nor can it speak
to the additional applications we study in Section 6.

5.3     A Bird's Eye View of Business Cycle Statistics
We now study the quantitative implications of countercyclical congestion for labor market fluctua-
tions. The main results are summarized in Table 2, and the subsequent sections highlight specific
aspects of these cyclical properties. For compactness, the statistics only show standard deviations,
autocorrelations and correlations with the unemployment rate; we relegate the full correlation
matrices to Appendix I.

Empirical Benchmark. As the empirical benchmark, Table 2 Panel A provides an overview of
business cycle statistics for quarterly US data described in Section 2.

Theoretical Benchmark: No-Congestion Models. Panels B and C of Table 2 report on the cyclical
behavior of the no-congestion model, which is isomorphic to the standard DMP model calibrated
as in Shimer (2005).       Panel B reports on the standard DMP model without separation shocks. As
is well understood, this model does not provide enough amplification of labor market tightness
(just 7% of that in the data), such that the job finding rate and unemployment are counterfactu-
ally smooth. Incorporating separation shocks into the no-congestion model helps along several
dimensions, as Panel C shows. Most notably, the correlation of UE flows and unemployment
     There, we consider a simple analytical expression for the elasticity of the marginal product of an average new hire
p 1 as a function of cohort size n1 :  p , n1 ( - 1)(1 - n1 / N )(1 - x ). The iso-congestion curve for a desired degree of
                                      1
congestion  as a function of no-congestion worker share x is given by ( x , ) 1 + (1-x )(1-n1 /N )
                                                                                                   . This analytical curve
turns out to be essentially identical to the blue line.
    See, e.g., Fujita and Ramey (2007); Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi (2018); Broer, Druedahl, Harmenberg, and
Öberg (2020) for models that relax the free-entry condition along those lines.
    The exception is the HP-filter smoothing parameter, as we have discussed and which we detail in Appendix C.


                                                            32
                       Table 2: Business Cycle Properties: Data and Model Variants

                                ALP           f             u        v              UE/E       p1
                                                            Panel A: Data
    Standard deviation         0.010     0.053 0.067 0.103 0.126            0.229    0.067
    Autocorrelation            0.746     0.871 0.773 0.934 0.926            0.936    0.836
    Correlation with u         -0.112 -0.931 0.848          1     -0.934 -0.980 0.833
                                      Panel B: No-Congestion Model Without Separation Shocks
    Standard deviation         0.010     0.004      0     0.003 0.013       0.015    0.003   0.010
    Autocorrelation            0.704     0.704      0     0.843 0.592       0.704    0.306   0.704
    Correlation with u         -0.643 -0.643        0       1     -0.481 -0.643 -0.272 -0.643
                                        Panel C: No-Congestion Model With Separation Shocks
    Standard deviation         0.010     0.005 0.088 0.068 0.058            0.017    0.067   0.010
    Autocorrelation            0.688     0.647 0.499 0.736 0.751            0.647    0.740   0.688
    Correlation with u         -0.508 -0.665 0.916          1      0.974 -0.665 0.739 -0.508
                                       Panel D: Congestion Model--Baseline (Matching UE /E )
    Standard deviation         0.010     0.059 0.122 0.121 0.102            0.207    0.067   0.055
    Autocorrelation            0.688     0.897 0.530 0.836 0.857            0.897    0.742   0.771
    Correlation with u         -0.463 -0.924 0.743          1     -0.716 -0.940 0.865 -0.862
                               Panel E: Congestion Model--Robustness (Matching EU & Participation)
    Standard deviation         0.010     0.054 0.067 0.099 0.099            0.189    0.052   0.051
    Autocorrelation            0.701     0.901 0.544 0.850 0.889            0.902    0.767   0.781
    Correlation with u         -0.337 -0.941 0.693          1     -0.819 -0.954 0.890 -0.882
Notes: ALP, f ,  , u , , UE /E and p 1 indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation
rate, unemployment rate, labor market tightness, share of new hires in employment and the marginal product of labor
of new hires (which is identical to ALP in the no-congestion models). Panel A reports values from the data; Panels B and
C report these values for the no-congestion model without and with shocks to the separation rate. Panel D reports the
results for our baseline congestion model (which matches the employment share of UE hires). Panel E shows robustness
to a congestion model that instead matches the EU separation rate fluctuations (and includes a participation margin).
All variables have been logged and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600. Appendix I
reports the full correlation matrices.



becomes positive and close to that in the data (0.74). With separation rate shocks, the volatility of
unemployment increases, but insufficiently so, with the additional volatility largely driven by the
inflows.     Moreover, adding separation shocks into the no-congestion model comes at the cost of
a wrongly signed Beveridge curve (as discussed in the next section).

The Baseline Congestion Model. Panel D reports the moments of our congestion model. The
model closely replicates the business cycle properties of the key empirical variables, both with
regards to volatility and cyclicality. Specifically, we have a nearly perfect fit of the standard
deviation of unemployment, labor market tightness and, accordingly, the job finding rate. Hence,
countercyclical congestion can be viewed as a solution to the inability of the standard DMP model
to generate realistic labor market fluctuations (Shimer, 2005). We discuss the cyclical performance
    In Appendix H, we show analytically that the no-congestion model's elasticity of labor market tightness to the
separation rate is small in a broad class of model parameterizations.


                                                            33
of this main specification of the congestion model in the following sections in more detail.

Robustness: Matching EU Separations and Non-Participation Flows. The congestion model
does estimate higher volatility and lower auto-correlation of the separation shock  compared to
the data. This artifact emerges because we choose the convenient structure of a two-state labor
market model, ignoring flows into and out of non-participation (see, e.g., Elsby et al., 2015a).
Therefore, making our model match UE flows in the data (one of our baseline calibration targets)
results in separation shocks picking up the ignored variation in the participation margin. When we
instead account for such flows, the EU separation process turns fully realistic while--importantly--
leaving our amplification results intact.
      To show robustness to a calibration with a realistic EU separation rate process, Panel E reports an
alternative congestion model in which we target the empirical EU separation rate process directly
(rather than the UE/E share), as detailed in Appendix J. By construction, the EU separation rate
process matches the empirical one. For this model to generate realistic UE flows, we extend our two-
state model to include three states. Specifically, as described in the appendix, we add realistically
cyclical, exogenous flows between non-participation and unemployment. The amplification in
this extended model is somewhat weaker compared to our benchmark, because UE flows are not
as volatile as in the data. Nevertheless, this extension still generates unemployment fluctuations
that are 96% as volatile as in the data, and the Beveridge curve correlation of -0.819, indicating
that the success of the model is robust to alternative specification of worker flows. Below, our
preferred specification therefore remains the simple two-state model for convenience and its direct
comparability with canonical models in this active literature (see, e.g., Shimer, 2005; Pissarides,
2009; Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017).

Further Robustness: Small Surplus. Appendix H studies the no-congestion model under the
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) calibration, i.e., featuring a small match surplus in steady state
(high b relative to productivity), which permits productivity shocks to have a larger effect on hiring
and generate realistic labor market volatility (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017). We have additionally
experimented with a model featuring decreasing returns in aggregate employment, similar to
Michaillat (2012). Both of these two model variants, however, would predict essentially no effect
of separation rate shocks on labor market tightness--as in the standard DMP model--for lack of a
congestion in hiring, i.e. again a wrongly sloped Beveridge curve.

5.4     Beveridge Curves
We now study the Beveridge curve, the relationship between vacancies and unemployment, and a
crucial property of DMP models (see Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner, 2015b, for a review). In fact, the
Beveridge curve highlights the core difference between congestion and no-congestion models.
      Figure 12 plots the Beveridge curves of the congestion model (      0.241), the data, as well as the
standard, no-congestion (        1) model. In the data, the Beveridge curve is negatively sloped, with


                                                    34
a correlation of -0.934 and standard deviations of 0.126 and 0.103 for vacancies and unemployment
respectively, as reported in Table 2 Panel A.
      The no-congestion model with separation rate shocks features a counterfactually positive slope
(a 0.974 correlation): as unemployment increases, vacancies rise. In the model, fluctuations arise
from two shocks, namely shocks to TFP and the separation rate. TFP shocks on their own would
lead to a negative slope, but these hiring-induced fluctuations are small due to unsufficient am-
plification (Shimer, 2005). Instead, separations drive unemployment fluctuations here; but the
no-congestion model exhibits a counterfactually flat IRF of labor market tightness to a separation
rate shocks, as described in Sections 2.2 and 5.1. On net, separation shocks dominate in this model,
tilting the Beveridge curve into the wrong direction (see also Shimer, 2005).
      By contrast, the congestion model closely matches the empirical negatively sloped Beveridge
curve (a -0.716 correlation for the baseline congestion model, and -0.819 for the alternative
specification matching separation rate fluctuations). This success is at the heart of how congestion
affects the overall dynamics of the labor market: in our model, separation shocks lead to large
and persistent increases in unemployment. They do so by incipiently raising UE flows, i.e. gross
flows back into employment, exactly as in the no-congestion model. But in the congestion model,
exactly this process of expanding gross flows diminishes the returns to further hiring, permitting
the model to rationalize elevated unemployment.

5.5     The Volatility of Unemployment
Figure 8 visualizes how congestion leads to amplification, by additionally plotting, with a red
dashed line, the volatility of unemployment for different values of  (while recalibrating all other
parameters to match the remaining targets). Consider a recession. As separations increase,
unemployment rises. UE flows rise, which lowers their type-specific marginal product of labor,
as long as  < 1, so that their productivity is much more volatile and procyclical than average
labor productivity (last column of Table 2 Panel D). This productivity drop further reduces hiring
incentives, keeping unemployment elevated.
      Importantly, the amplification and propagation relative to the standard DMP framework is
exclusively due to countercyclical congestion, i.e., the degree to which shifts in the employment
share of new hires diminish their productivity. We surgically isolate the congestion channel as we
maintain the same, high fundamental match surplus for each model. We do so by recalibrating
the productivity weights  k to generate the common unit productivity in steady state for all types,
as described in Section 5.1.
     Coles and Moghaddasi Kelishomi (2018) too obtain a correctly sloped Beveridge curve despite time-varying sepa-
rations. Their mechanism works through the unemployed depleting the stock of vacancies due to inelastic free entry
(vacancy creation). See also Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner (2015b) for a discussion.




                                                        35
                                  Figure 12: Beveridge Curve: Data and Models




Notes: The figure is a scatter plot of quarterly time series of vacancies (normalized by the labor force), based on the
vacancy time series by (the Composite Help Wanted Index by Barnichon, 2010), against the unemployment rate in the
US data from 1976 to 2016, and the simulated time series from the no-congestion and congestion models. All variables
are logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




5.6   Sources of Amplification: Productivity and Cohort Dynamics
The key to understanding amplification is the behavior of the match surplus for new hires. Using
Equation (17) and imposing the assumption that k u (k )                   k - 1 (i.e., full type downgrade), we can
simplify the surplus expression for any worker type k as

          Sk ,t      p k ,t      - b + Et (1 -  t +1 )S k +1, t +1        -  Et (1 -  t +1 ) f ( t )  S1, t +1 .     (24)

                    Current
                  productivity              Continuation value at k + 1             Worker's outside option:
                                                                              finding new job next period at k   1


In comparison to the no-congestion model, amplification in surplus fluctuations stems from three
sources. First, the flow productivity channel works through more volatile and procyclical productivity
of new hires, compared to the standard measure of average labor productivity. Second, two
dynamic effects emerge through cohort effects: the present value channel through the continuation
value of employed workers, and the outside option channel. We rearrange the surplus expression in
Equation (24) to explicitly highlight these three amplification channels, now specifically focusing




                                                             36
on the surplus of new hires k                   1:

     S1 , t     z t - b + Et (1 -  t +1 )(1 - f ( ts ))S t
                                                         s
                                                           +1 +               S     s
                                                                               t - St

                                                                    (ii) Flow productivity channel
                        (i) No-congestion model surplus
                                                                                                                             (25)
              +  Et (1 -  t +1 )(1 - f (t )  ) S2, t +1 - S t +1       + Et (1 -  t +1 ) f ( t )  (S2, t +1 - S1, t +1 ) ,

                              (iii) Present value channel                            (iv) Outside option channel

        s
where S t            z t - b + Et (1 -  t +1 )(1 - f ( ts )  )S t
                                                                s
                                                                  +1
                                                                     is the surplus in the standard model with-
out congestion and homogeneous workers, and  s is the associated labor market tightness.
St       p 1, t - b +  Et (1 -  t +1 )(1 - f ( t ) )St +1
                                                          is the match surplus in which flow productivity is
(counterfactually) always equal to that of new hires, p 1, t . We now investigate the three new sources
of amplification (ii )-( iv ) in detail.

Flow Productivity Channel. As foreshadowed in Figure 7, Table 2 shows that countercyclical
congestion dramatically amplifies the productivity of new hires, which is around five times as
volatile as--and masked by the smoothness of--average productivity. It is also more procyclical,
with a correlation with unemployment of -0.862, compared to -0.463 for average productivity.
Intuitively, UE flows rise in recessions, so that new hires become abundant, which lowers their
marginal product.

Cohort Effects: Present Value Channel. New hires in recessions are not just congested in the
first period. Instead, persistent cohort effects arise, as new hires stick with their initial cohort size as
they move up the rungs of the type ladder together.
      Figure 13 visualizes these cohort effects by depicting the impulse response, to a perfectly
transitory separation shock, of employment and productivity of different worker types k . Each
line represents the deviation from steady state for a particular period. For instance, the solid line
shows the response for workers newly hired in the period, i.e., t + 1. Because of the inflow of new
hires, employment of the lowest type, k                      1, expands (Panel (a)). This abundance pushes down
their productivity (Panel (b)). These spikes persist throughout the affected cohort's tenure. For
example, the workers that survive from the abundant cohort of newly hired ( k                                      1) workers in
period t + 1 become the--still abundant--cohort of k                         2 type workers in period t + 2 and so on.
As a result of these persistent cohort effects, the expected present value of productivity of newly
                                          
hired workers (formally, Et               j 0    j (1 -  t +1+ j )p 1+ j, t +1+ j )--which is allocative for hiring--essentially
inherits the excess volatility of flow productivity, and is indeed almost five times as volatile as in
the standard model without congestion.
    That is, for this standard surplus term, we use the counterfactually smooth job finding rate generated by the standard
model to construct the standard surplus. All other terms use the same job finding rate generated by the congestion
model.
    The slight recovery in their productivity is solely due to the recovery in total employment, as separations slightly
shrink all other types upon impact, namely incumbents.


                                                                  37
               Figure 13: Impulse Responses by Type k : Employment and Productivity
                    (a) Employment, e k                                         (b) Marginal product, p k




Notes: The figure plots impulse responses across types of employment and marginal productivities by worker type (only
first 20 types are shown) to a perfectly transitory separation shock. Each line represents the cross-sectional response in
a particular point in time. All variables are expressed in percent deviations from their respective steady states.



Cohort Effects: The Outside Option Channel. Cohort effects generate a second dynamic impact
on surplus fluctuations, operating through workers' outside options in bargaining. A new hire,
entering step k        1 at t , has productivity p k       2 , t +1   at t + 1. A new hire at t + 1 has an initial
productivity of p k    1, t +1 .   At t + 1, the differential productivities of these two types depend on their
relative abundance at t + 1, and similarly for all future periods.
    When Nash bargaining, the worker's outside option is walking away and searching for another
job. In the no-congestion model, this outside option moves with the job finding rate, which actually
attenuates fluctuations in the surplus value, because f ( ) falls in recessions, lowering worker's
outside option, thereby expanding surplus.
    With congestion and the cohort effects it triggers, the outside option channel reflects additional
intertemporal, opportunity-cost considerations. For instance, when congestion is high today but
is expected to fall tomorrow, surplus in today's jobs falls by more than implied by comparing
productivity differences.

Quantifying the Sources of Amplification. We now quantify the contributions of the three
channels to amplification arising from countercyclical congestion. We do so by feeding in counter-
factual surpluses from subsets of the four channels in Equation (25) into the free-entry condition
in Equation (21). We report the resulting standard deviations of labor market tightness in Table 3.
    The specification with all four channels generates a standard deviation of 0.207, close to the data
(see Table 2). In the absence of the outside option channel, the standard deviation remains still high,
accounting for 85% of the baseline fluctuations. Therefore, the outside option channel explains
only 15% of the fluctuations in labor market tightness. The flow productivity channel, which takes
   This mechanism would not be present with wage setting protocols that insulate wages wage from outside options
(Hall and Milgrom, 2008; Jäger, Schoefer, Young, and Zweimüller, 2020).


                                                           38
              Table 3: Volatility of Labor Market Tightness and Sources of Amplification

                                                                               Standard       Contribution
                                                                               deviation        to total
             No-congestion model                        (i)                      0.019           0.049
             + Flow productivity channel                (i)+(ii)                 0.052           0.162
             + Present value channel                    (i)+(ii)+(iii)           0.178           0.851
             + Outside option channel                   (i)+(ii)+(iii)+(iv)      0.207              1
Notes: The table reports the standard deviation of (log) labor market tightness in variants of the congestion model.
The top row reports values for the standard no-congestion model, the second and third rows incrementally add the
productivity and present value channels and the bottom row shows the volatility implied by the baseline congestion
model, where all channels are active. The column "contribution to total" shows cov(base. , cf. )/var( base. ), where base.
is labor market tightness in our baseline model, while cf. is the respective counterfactual labor market tightness.



into account the higher volatility of allocative productivity (and that of the implied job finding
rate), explains 16% of the variation in labor market tightness. Finally, the no-congestion model
accounts for only about 5% of the baseline fluctuations in labor market tightness. Therefore, the
strongest effect is through the present value channel, accounting for over 2/3 (0.851 - 0.162                     0.689)
of the fluctuations in labor market tightness.

5.7    Historical Decomposition of Unemployment in the United States
We now study how countercyclical congestion has historically contributed to empirical unemploy-
ment fluctuations in the US since 1976. We do so by feeding into the model an estimated time path
of new hires' productivity that would arise only through congestion, i.e., movements in new hires'
productivity solely explained by fluctuations in the employment share of UE hires. By contrast,
we hold fixed TFP and separation rates. We then construct a counterfactual unemployment time
series due to this congestion channel alone.

Method. Formally, we use the following equations for counterfactual unemployment, surplus,
and labor market tightness that are purely driven by congestion:

                c
               ut +1    (1 - f ( tc ))u t
                                        c
                                          +  (1 - u t
                                                    c
                                                      )
                        q ( tc ) Et (1 -  )S1
                                            c
                                              ,t                                                                     (26)
                                   z
                 c
                Sk ,t   p k ,t   ·    - b + Et (1 -  )S k
                                                        c
                                                          +1, t +1 -  Et (1 -  ) f ( t )  S1, t +1 for all k .
                                                                                     c     c
                                   zt

The counterfactual surplus values are based on the congestion model's estimated marginal prod-
ucts p k , t , but netting out (i.e., dividing by) aggregate productivity shocks z t . Hence, the produc-
tivity fluctuations that affect surplus are solely due to type-specific congestion, i.e., fluctuations in
the employment share of the recently unemployed. Second, we fix the job separation rate at its
steady-state value,  . Therefore, u t
                                    c
                                      --"congestion unemployment"--surgically reflects variation



                                                               39
          Figure 14: Historical Decomposition of Unemployment: Actual and Congestion




Notes: The figure plots actual and congestion unemployment ( u c ) estimated using data on the cyclical components of
average labor productivity and new hires as a share of employment. The counterfactual unemployment time series for
u c is constructed based on the set of Equations (26).



due to congestion alone, which we permit to affect the unemployment rate through hiring and the
job finding rate.
    To obtain historical time series from our congestion benchmark, we use the Kalman filter to
estimate the time path of all our model variables (including the marginal products of all worker
types p k , t ) on US time series data for average labor productivity and the share of new hires in
employment (logged and HP-filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1,600). Appendix Figure
A18 presents both the estimated and empirical time series, Appendix F contains further details
on the estimation procedure. Appendix M provides additional details on the decomposition, and
additionally applies the method to TFP-only and separation-only counterfactuals.

The Time Series of Congestion-Driven Unemployment. Figure 14 shows the time path of con-
gestion unemployment in the US, and compares it to overall unemployment (which essentially
perfectly tracks the empirical time series, as shown in Appendix Figure A18). First, the autocorre-
lation coefficient of congestion unemployment is 0.950 relative to 0.905 for overall unemployment,
helping generate persistence (Dupraz, Nakamura, and Steinsson, 2019; Hall and Kudlyak, 2020b,a).


    Second, congestion is a powerful driver of unemployment fluctuations. The standard devia-
tion of congestion-only unemployment is 0.05, about 40% the level of of overall unemployment.
Computing the contribution of congestion-only unemployment, we find cov( u , u c )/var( u )                   0.297
(with a correlation of 0.723). Therefore, countercyclical congestion explains 30 to 40% of observed
unemployment fluctuations.



                                                         40
6     Additional Implications of Countercyclical Congestion
Besides providing a new perspective on unemployment fluctuations, countercyclical congestion
rationalizes three additional, widely studied, macro patterns: the business-cycle-accounting labor
wedge, the countercyclical and persistent earnings losses from job displacement and from gradu-
ating in a recession, and the limited sensitivity of labor market variables to labor market policies.
To our knowledge, these issues have not been studied before simultaneously, and, therefore, the
quantitative success of our model in explaining them provides additional external validation.

6.1     Business Cycle Accounting: The Labor Wedge
The Standard Labor Wedge. In a perfectly competitive spot labor market with representative
agents, as in real business cycle (RBC) models, the household's marginal rate of substitution (MRS)
between consumption and labor always equals the marginal product of labor (MPL). In the data, the
MRS and the MPL exhibit a strongly cyclical gap, described as a time-varying tax-like labor wedge
1 -  (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007; Shimer, 2009), obtained as a residual--by specifying a
utility function and an aggregate production function, and feeding in the empirical time series on
consumption C , output Y , and employment E --from the following equation:

                                                                   -UE (C, E )
                                   (1 -  ) · MPL       MRS                      .                                (27)
                                                                   U C ( C, E )

This agnostic labor wedge stands for cyclical frictions, mismeasurement or model misspecification.
Business cycle accounting (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007) identifies as promising research av-
enues those refinements that (can be written to) manifest themselves as and replicate the empirical
behavior of the labor wedge (and other wedges).
      Figure 15 plots the labor wedge time series (red dashed line) calculated using the standard
average labor productivity time series (as in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007; Shimer, 2009).
As is well known, the US data exhibit a volatile and procyclical labor wedge, such that recessions
are times when the gap between the MRS and the MPL widens: standard productivity measures
fall only slightly, while the MRS falls substantially.

Congestion and the Labor Wedge. To show that the more procyclical marginal product of labor
implied by our congestion model offers an explanation for the labor wedge, we first extend our
aggregate production function to include capital, K , using a Cobb Douglas specification, with
capital share a , and with the labor aggregator mirroring our baseline labor-based CES production
     Our calculation assumes Cobb Douglas production (as in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007; Shimer, 2009) to
construct the MPL as productivity per worker, as our model features only the extensive employment margin. For
the household's utility function, we posit separable balanced growth preferences with log consumption utility and a
constant Frisch elasticity  of extensive-margin labor supply U (C, E ) ln C - E1+1/ /(1 + 1/ ). We set this elasticity
to 0.34, as suggested by Chetty, Guren, Manoli, and Weber (2012).




                                                         41
function:
                                                                             1   1- a
                                                               K             

                                            Y      zKa ·             l n l              .                        (28)
                                                             l 1


Second, to retain comparability to the spot labor market, we consider the productivity of new
hires p 1 only. We then reformulate the marginal product of new hires as the standard marginal
labor product times a diminishing-returns of new hires term, making clear that this term shows
up exactly like the labor wedge in Equation (27):

                                                                   MPL p1

                                                                                 -1
                                                            Y                1 s1
                                    MRS          (1 - a )     ×                                                  (29)
                                                            N                K
                                                                             l 1    l s l
                                                Standard MPL
                                                                   New-hire adjustment term


Figure 15 additionally plots this adjustment term for new hires' productivity (blue solid line).
It strikingly closely tracks the standard labor wedge time series (correlation of 0.884).                        The
remaining variation of the labor wedge after subtracting the new-hire term is essentially unrelated
to the business cycle: the elasticity of this residual labor wedge variation with respect to the
detrended unemployment rate falls to just 0.081 (R 2                     0.111), compared to -0.328 (R 2    0.872) for
the raw labor wedge. That is, the economy with congestion essentially provides a full explanation
of the labor wedge.

6.2     Countercyclical Earnings Losses From Job Displacement
Our model generates realistically countercyclical earnings losses from job displacement and labor
market entry. By additionally highlighting the cohort effects present in our model, this analysis
complements that of new hires' flow wages in Section 5.1.

The Cyclicality of Displacement Costs in the Congestion Model. Many studies have docu-
mented large and persistent earnings losses following job displacement events, of around 30%
drop in earnings upon separation, with effects persisting even after twenty years (see, e.g., Davis
and von Wachter, 2011). The leading explanations build on workers falling off the job ladder and
the associated loss in job stability following a layoff (Jarosch, 2015; Jung and Kuhn, 2018). Impor-
tantly, these displacement costs are much larger in recessions than in booms, as documented in
Davis and von Wachter (2011), a feature that is not yet well understood (see, e.g., Jung and Kuhn,
2018).
      Countercyclical congestion can account for the countercyclicality of earnings losses from dis-
placement. To highlight this result, we replicate the analysis in Davis and von Wachter (2011) in
      We construct the term as the new-hire productivity in Figure 7 Panel (b), described in Footnote 16.


                                                               42
                Figure 15: Standard Labor Wedge, and the Productivity of New Hires




Notes: The figure plots the labor wedge implied by the standard productivity measure and the wedge-like productivity
adjustment term for new hires in Equation (29). All series are in logs and HP filtered using a smoothing parameter of
1,600.



our model. Specifically, we compute the earnings trajectory of a cohort of separated workers, tak-
ing into account their subsequent labor market transitions (out of and back into unemployment).
We conduct this exercise under two scenarios: "booms" and "recessions." Both are generated
by separation shocks leading to an average 3.5 percentage point unemployment rate difference
between troughs and peaks, the magnitude observed in the period 1980-2005 used in Davis and
von Wachter (2011). We express the earnings of this cohort of "displaced workers" relative to a
control group of "surviving" incumbents (i.e., those incumbent workers who did not get displaced
at the time, but may fall into unemployment in the future). We also apply the model analogue of
the sample restriction in Davis and von Wachter (2011), of at least three years of job tenure.
     Figure 16 Panel (a) shows the difference in earnings effects from a job separation in recessions
compared to booms for the model (blue solid line).             Workers displaced in a recession lose almost
15 percentage points more in earnings than workers displaced in booms. This difference fades only
very gradually; even ten years after displacement, it remains at 5 percentage points. These model
trajectories are close to the empirical ones estimated by Davis and von Wachter (2011), which we
plot as the black dotted line.       Since our model assumes flexible wages (Nash bargaining with a
high bargaining power of workers), wages are relatively sensitive to match-specific productivity,
which may explain the misalignment in the middle years of the response.
    Since our model is calibrated such that all worker types have identical wages in steady state ( p k 1 and hence
wk    w for all k ), it cannot speak to the level of displacement costs.
    The empirical estimates of earnings losses from displacement in booms and recessions are presented in Figure 4
Panel (c), in Davis and von Wachter (2011). We plot the difference between the boom and recession estimates in our
Figure 16 Panel (a).




                                                         43
                              Figure 16: Path Dependence of Earnings Losses
         (a) Earnings Losses Upon Job Separation               (b) "Graduation" Unemployment Effects on Earnings




Notes: Panel (a) plots the percentage point difference in earnings losses of displaced workers in recessions relative to
booms in the data (Davis and von Wachter, 2011, Figure 4 Panel C), and in the congestion model. Panel (b) plots the
effect of the business cycle (unemployment rate) at point of graduation on earnings over time in the data (Schwandt and
von Wachter, 2019, Figure 2) and in the model. The model results are based on estimating the regression specification
in Equation (30) using simulations from our baseline model.



Costs of Graduating in a Recession. Business cycles also have strong effects on life-time income
of new graduates entering the labor market (see, e.g., Kahn, 2014; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and
Heisz, 2012; Schwandt and von Wachter, 2019). While our model does not contain a life-cycle
dimension, we can proxy for it in our model by following newly hired workers entering the labor
market with type k        1. We estimate the following regression on model-simulated earnings paths
of cohorts of newly hired workers, which mimics Equation (2) estimated on data in Schwandt and
von Wachter (2019):
                                        y g ,t    +  e u g +  g + t +       g ,t ,                                 (30)

where y g , t is average earnings of a cohort in period t hired out of unemployment ("graduated") in
period g , u g is the unemployment rate in period g (at the time of "graduation"),  g are graduation
fixed effects, and t are time fixed effects. The coefficients of interest are given by vector  e , which
captures the effect of the unemployment rate at the time of labor market entry on subsequent
earnings, where e        t - g captures time since graduation.
    Figure 16 Panel (b) plots the  e coefficients estimated on simulated data together with the
empirical estimates from Schwandt and von Wachter (2019).                   The model closely matches the data,
with a one percentage point increase in unemployment resulting in about a 3.5% drop in earnings
on impact. These negative effects of entering the labor market during periods of heightened
unemployment persist even ten years following labor market entry.

Mechanisms. Empirically, most of the proximate sources of these two types of countercyclical
earnings losses are accounted for by declines in wage profiles (see, e.g., von Wachter, forthcoming),
    See Figure 2 in Schwandt and von Wachter (2019) for the empirical estimates in our Figure 16 Panel (b).


                                                          44
supporting the persistent cohort effects on productivity in our model. In addition, studies have
found observed earnings losses to be associated with flows to lower wage firms (Schmieder,
von Wachter, and Heining, 2019; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz, 2012) and occupational
switches or downgrading (Altonji, Kahn, and Speer, 2016; Huckfeldt, 2016). These patterns could
be viewed as consistent with congestion manifesting itself as low-quality relative to high-quality
firms absorbing the increase in UE hires.

6.3     Policy Insensitivity Despite Productivity-Driven Business Cycles
We close by revisiting the dilemma formulated by Costain and Reiter (2008): a DMP model
cannot simultaneously match the cyclicality of labor market variables in response to productivity
shocks and the sensitivity of these variables with respect to policies that affect job surplus, such
as unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. In a cross-country analysis, Costain and Reiter (2008)
estimate the semi-elasticity of the unemployment rate with respect to the replacement rate,                            u , b /w
 ln u /( b /w ), to lie between 2 and 3.5. While the standard DMP model can replicate this semi-
elasticity, it fails to generate sufficient volatility in labor market variables. By contrast, the solution
by Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) to calibrate steady state b to feature a small fundamental
surplus (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017), generates sufficient volatility in labor market variables, but
overstates the sensitivity to UI.
      Returning to our model and starting from our baseline calibration, we increase the UI benefit
level b by 1%, i.e., b new    1.01 b base , and recompute the steady state values for all the model variables.
Following Costain and Reiter (2008), we then calculate the semi-elasticity of unemployment with
                                                                 ln u ne w -ln u base
respect to the replacement rate as           u , b /w   ( b ne w /w ne w )-( b base / w base )
                                                                                                  2.6, a value well within the
bounds reported by Costain and Reiter (2008). Hence, our framework simultaneously matches the
high volatility of labor market variables and the lower sensitivity of these variables with respect
to policy instruments. This is because our model generates labor market volatility through larger
fluctuations in allocative productivity and surplus, so it can afford small elasticities.


7     Conclusion
Recessions and their aftermath are times when more jobs are filled by recently unemployed workers.
With limits on the economy's capacity to absorb these new hires, countercyclical UE flows can
generate a mechanism we call countercyclical congestion. Due to diminishing returns in the types
of jobs the unemployed fill, the labor productivity of new hires falls by much more than average
labor productivity, lowering further hiring incentives, and raising unemployment.
     A complementary literature studies the destruction and creation of jobs by firm quality (Moscarini and Postel-Vinay,
2012; Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn, and McEntarfer, 2018), and the countercyclicality of skill requirements (Modestino,
Shoag, and Ballance, 2016).
     For empirical research on short-run effects of UI across US local labor markets, see Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii,
and Mitman (2019); Chodorow-Reich, Coglianese, and Karabarbounis (2019); Boone, Dube, Goodman, and Kaplan
(forthcoming).



                                                            45
   The model with countercyclical congestion is consistent with a range of macroeconomic regu-
larities. In particular it performs well in explaining the volatility of labor market quantities while
generating an empirically consistent strongly downward sloping Beveridge curve. The model does
so while featuring a high fundamental surplus and not relying on wage rigidity. Our framework
also rationalizes more cyclical wages of newly hired workers relative to the average wage, the
countercyclical labor wedge, the countercylical earnings losses upon job displacement and labor
market entry.
   We close with questions our study leaves open. First, we have presented aggregate time series
evidence consistent with congestion and reviewed cross sectional quasi-experimental studies--but
we have not definitively quantified the degree of congestion in hiring. Second, while our collage
of wage-based evidence has supported our productivity-based congestion mechanism, we have
shown that congestion may emerge also from hiring costs or perhaps other factors. Finally, our
study suggests that factors and policies attenuating shifts in separations, such as firing taxes or
furlough schemes, may also attenuate shifts in the job finding rate.




                                                 46
References
A            , K.         L. K            (1986): "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?"
  Journal of Political Economy, 94, 507­522.
A        , J. G., L. B. K              ,       J. D. S          (2016): "Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Conditions,
  Field of Study, and Career Success," Journal of Labor Economics, 34, S361­S401.
B     , G., M. G               ,          B. H                   (1994a): "The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evidence from
  Personnel Data," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 881­919.
------ (1994b): "The Wage Policy of a Firm," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 921­955.
B              , R. (2010): "Building a Composite Help Wanted Index," Economics Letters, 109, 175­178.
B         , P.        J. D N                (1991): "The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over the
  Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy, 99, 665­88.
B , M. (1985): "Real wages over the business cycle: evidence from panel data," Journal of Political Economy,
  93, 666­689.
B , M., B. K                 ,         K.-J. W (2020): "Labor Substitutability among Schooling Groups," Mimeo.
B , M., P. J. K                   ,         B. A. M             (2018): "Resurrecting the Role of the Product Market Wedge in
  Recessions," American Economic Review, 108, 1118­46.
B               , O.         P. D                (1990): "The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of US Workers," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 1990, 85­155.
B      , C., A. D , L. G                          ,        E. K          (forthcoming): "Unemployment insurance generosity and
  aggregate employment," American Economic Journal: Policy.
B     , T., J. D                     , K. H                   ,        E. Ö       (2020): "Labor-Market Hysteresis and Persistent
  Paradox-of-Thrift Recessions," Working Paper.
B      , M.          C. W                 (1994): "Gross Worker and Job Flows in Europe," European Economic Review, 38,
  1287­1315.
C       , P., S. C                 ,        T. L B                     (2018): "The Effectiveness of Hiring Credits," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 86, 593­626.
C     , I., S. F        ,            C. M              -J          (2020): "The Cyclicality of Labor Force Participation Flows: The
  Role of Labor Supply Elasticities and Wage Rigidity," Working Paper.
C           -T           , C., H. G                 ,       L. K      (2021): "Recruitment Policies, Job-Filling Rates and Matching
  Efficiency," Mimeo.
C     , V., P. K           ,           E. M G                (2007): "Business Cycle Accounting," Econometrica, 75, 781­836.
C       , R., A. G               , D. M              ,        A. W         (2012): "Does Indivisible Labor Explain the Difference
  between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities," NBER Macro
  Annual 2012.
C              -R      , G., J. C                       ,        L. K                 (2019): "The Macro Effects of Unemployment
  Benefit Extensions: a Measurement Error Approach," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 227­279.
C              -R      , G.              L. K                        (2016): "The Cyclicality of the Opportunity Cost of Employ-
  ment," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1563­1618.
C              -R      , G.              J. W              (2020): "Secular Labor Reallocation and Business Cycles," Journal of
  Political Economy, 128, 2245­2287.
C              , L., M. E                      ,          M. T            (2016): "Unemployment and Business Cycles," Economet-
  rica, 84, 1523­1569.
------ (2020): "Why is Unemployment so Countercyclical?" Working Paper.



                                                               47
C     , M.              A. M                      K            (2018): "Do Job Destruction Shocks Matter in the Theory of
  Unemployment?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10, 118­36.
C         , J.            M. R             (2008): "Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the Calibration of
  Matching Models," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32.
D    , S., J. F               ,         J. H                (2006): "The Flow Approach to Labor Markets: New Data Sources
  and Micro-Macro Links," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 3­26.
D    , S.            T.       W               (2011): "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 1­72, autumn.
    H          , W., C. H           ,         G. R        (2005): "Turbulence and Unemployment in a Job Matching Model,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 1360­1385.
D               , P. B.        M. J. P           (1985): Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis, ME Sharpe.
D       , K., A. G              ,            A. I      (2020): "The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration Policy on Firms:
  Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries," Working Paper.
D         , S., E. N                 ,         J. S           (2019): "A Plucking Model of Business Cycles," Working Paper.
E    , M., B. H             ,       A.             (2015a): "On the Importance of the Participation Margin for Labor Market
  Fluctuations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 72, 64­82.
E    , M., R. M                   ,           D. R         (2015b): "The Beveridge Curve: A Survey," Journal of Economic
  Literature, 53, 571­630.
E    , M. W. L., B. H                  ,         A.         (2013): "Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD," The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 95, 530­548.
E          , N. (2020): "Recruiting Talent During a Recession," Working Paper.
E               , B. (2010): "Specific Capital and Vintage Effects on the Dynamics of Unemployment and Vacan-
  cies," American Economic Review, 100, 1214­37.
F        , R.           E. Y           (2020): "The Importance of Hiring Frictions in Business Cycles," IZA Discussion
  Paper, N. 12889.
F           , J. (2014): "A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity," Working Paper.
F           , D. (2018): "The Asymmetric Cyclical Behavior of the US Labor Market," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 30, 145­162.
F     , S.           G. M                  (2017): "Recall and Unemployment," American Economic Review, 107, 3875­3916.
F     , S.           G. R          (2006): "The Cyclicality of Job Loss and Hiring," Working Paper.
------ (2007): "Job Matching and Propagation," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31, 3671 ­ 3698.
------ (2009): "The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding Rates," International Economic Review, 50,
  415­430.
G , J.             T. V R           (forthcoming): "The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor Productivity," The Economic
  Journal.
G                , C., I. H     ,           U. S             (2018): "Spillover Effects of Mass Layoffs," Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 18, 427­468.
G          , M., C. H                    ,        A. T          (2020): "Unemployment Fluctuations, Match Quality and the
  Wage Cyclicality of New Hires," The Review of Economic Studies.
G          , M.            P. K              (2015): "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7.
G          , M.           A. T              (2009): "Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 117, 38­86.
G             , S.        E. Z                (2012): "Credit Spreads and Busienss Cycle Fluctuations," American Economic



                                                              48
  Review, 102.
G            , G.          C. L                  (2020): "Subsidizing Labor Hoarding in Recessions: The Employment and
  Welfare Effects of Short Time Work," Working Paper.
G           , M.          G. M               (2020): "Agency Business Cycles," Theoretical Economics, 15, 123­158.
G                       , Y.            M. W             (2016): "Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the Stock Market,"
  American Economic Review, 106, 165­99.
G         , J., E. H           ,            A. Y                 (forthcoming): "Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments: New
  Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data," Working Paper.
G       , V., A. M                 ,          D. P        (1999): "Missing Observations in ARIMA Models: Skipping Approach
  versus Additive Outlier Approach," Journal of Econometrics, 88, 341 ­ 363.
G                , R. S., B. S          ,         E. S            (2005): "The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates to Economic
  News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models," American Economic Review, 95, 425­436.
H        , C., M. S                   ,           T.       R        (2013): "Wage Rigidity and Job Creation," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 60, 887 ­ 899.
H              , M., F. K                  , I. M              ,        K. M        (2019): "Unemployment Benefits and Unemploy-
  ment in the Great Recession: the Role of Macro Effects," NBER Working Paper.
H              , M.          I. M                    (2008): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacan-
  cies," American Economic Review, 95, 25­49.
------ (2013): "Job Selection and Wages over the Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 103, 771­803.
H              , M., I. M                      ,         S. S              (2016): "Taxation and Unemployment in Models with
  Heterogeneous Workers," Review of Economic Dynamics, 19, 161­189.
H , R. (2005a): "The Amplification of Unemployment Fluctuations through Self-Selection," NBER Working
  Paper.
------ (2005b): "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness," American Economic Review,
  95, 50­65.
------ (2017): "High Discounts and High Unemployment," American Economic Review, 107, 305­30.
H , R.              M. K                  (2020a): "The Inexorable Recoveries of US Unemployment," NBER Working Paper.
------ (2020b): "Why Has the US Economy Recovered So Consistently from Every Recession in the Past 70
  Years?" NBER Working Paper.
H , R.              P. M               (2008): "The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain," American
  Economic Review, 98, 1653­74.
H                  , J. C., H. R. H               , L. B. K        ,      E. M E           (2018): "Cyclical Job Ladders by Firm Size
  and Firm Wage," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10, 52­85.
H        , J.         B. T           (2020): "Downward Rigidity in the Wage for New Hires," Working Paper.
H              , C. (2016): "Understanding the Scarring Effect of Recessions," Working Paper.
J            , L., R. L L               ,         D. S               (1993): "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers," The American
  Economic Review, 685­709.
J    , S., B. S                 , S. Y            ,       J. Z               (2020): "Wages and the Value of Nonemployment," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 1905­1963.
J          , G. (2015): "Search for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss," Working Paper.
J     , H., Y. K ,                I. M                  (2015): "Price of Experience," American Economic Review, 105, 784­815.
J   , P.           M. K           (2018): "Earnings Losses and Job Mobility over the Lifecycle," Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 17, 678 ­ 724.
J        , K., S. L                  ,           S. N (2015): "Measuring Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 105.



                                                                49
K     , L. (2014): "The Longterm Labor Market Consequences of Graduating College in a Bad Economy,"
  Labour Economics, 17, 206­223.
K                     , L. (2014): "The Labor Wedge: MRS vs MRN," Review of Economic Dynamics, 17, 303­316.
K , L.             B. M           (1990): "Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations, and Unemployment Out-
  comes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 973­1002.
K , L.              K. M              (1992): "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and Demand Factors,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35­78.
K       , P., P. L        , V. M            ,       E. P          (2019): "Asset Prices and Unemployment Fluctuations,"
  NBER Working Paper.
K     , K., F. L            ,        M. N                 (2013): "Duration Dependence and Labor Market Conditions:
  Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128.
K         , P., T. M               , R. R           ,     A.        (2017): "Gross Worker Flows Over the Business Cycle,"
  American Economic Review, 107, 3447­76.
K          , M. (2014): "The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor," Journal of Monetary Economics, 68, 53­67.
L         , C., P. M                  ,       E. S     (2018): "A Macroeconomic Approach to Optimal Unemployment
  Insurance: Theory," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10, 152­81.
L        , E.         P. O       (2004): "Internal and External Labor Markets: A Personnel Economics Approach,"
  Labour Economics, 11.
L      , D. (1982): "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 90, 777­793.
L             , L.         T. S           (1998): "The European Unemployment Dilemma," Journal of Political Economy,
  106, 514­550.
------ (2004): "European Unemployment and Turbulence Revisited in a Matching Model," Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2, 456­468.
------ (2017): "The Fundamental Surplus," American Economic Review, 107.
M         , S.           B. J           (2020): "Efficiency in Search and Matching Models: A Generalized Hosios
  Condition," Working Paper.
M         , Y.          B. S             (2020): "Jobs and Matches: Quits, Replacement Hiring, and Vacancy Chains,"
  American Economic Review: Insights, 2, 101­24.
M , A.               A. S        (2014): "What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?" Econometrica, 82,
  2197­2223.
M              , P. (2012): "Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times," American
  Economic Review, 102, 1721­50.
M         , K.           S. R               (2020): "Do Unemployment Benefit Extensions Explain the Emergence of
  Jobless Recoveries?" Working Paper.
M              , A. S., D. S         ,      J. B          (2016): "Downskilling: Changes in Employer Skill Requirements
  over the Business Cycle," Labour Economics, 41, 333­347.
M              , D.         C. P             (1994): "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397­415.
M             , G.         F. P         -V       (2012): "The Contribution of Large and Small Employers to Job Creation
  in Times of High and Low Unemployment," American Economic Review, 102, 2509­39.
M          , A. (2017): "Separations, Sorting, and Cyclical Unemployment," American Economic Review, 107,
  2081­2107.
O                , P., T.       W           ,       A. H     (2012): "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Gradu-
  ating in a Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 1­29.



                                                           50
P            , C. A. (2009): "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the Answer?" Economet-
  rica, 77, 1339­1369.
R       , C. D.         D. H. R       (2004): "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,"
  American Economic Review, 94, 1055­1084.
S             , J., T.      W         ,      J. H       (2019): "The Costs of Job Displacement over the Business
  Cycle and its Sources: Evidence from Germany," Working Paper.
S           , B. (2015): "The Financial Channel of Wage Rigidity," Working Paper.
S            , H.        T.     W          (2019): "Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating the Long-Term Effects of Entering
  the Labor Market in a Recession in Large Cross-Sectional Data Sets," Journal of Labor Economics, 37,
  S161­S198.
S        , R. (2004): "The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models," Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2, 469­479.
------ (2005): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies," American Economic
  Review, 95, 25­49.
------ (2009): "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 1, 280­97.
------ (2010): Labor Markets and Business Cycles, Princeton University Press.
------ (2012): "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," Review of Economic Dynamics, 15, 127 ­
  148.
S    , J.        M. T          (2013): "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: The Role of Matching Costs Revis-
  ited," Economic Inquiry, 51, 836­843.
S    , J. I.          M. T         (2009): "Labor Turnover Costs and the Cyclical Behavior of Vacancies and
  Unemployment," Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13, 76­96.
U      , H. (2005): "What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results from an Agnostic Identifi-
  cation Procedure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 381­419.
    W             , T. (forthcoming): "The Persistent Effects of Initial Labor Market Conditions for Young Adults
  and their Sources," Journal of Economic Perspectives.
W          , J. F.         M.-J. Y      (2020): "Financial Dampening," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 52,
  79­113.




                                                       51
                                  Online Appendix of:
            A Congestion Theory of Unemployment Fluctuations
                   Yusuf Mercan, Benjamin Schoefer and Petr Sedlácek



Contents

A Construction of Worker Flows and Transition Probabilities                              54

B Evidence from OECD Countries                                                           64

C Alternative HP Smoothing Parameter                                                     66

D Robustness of Identification of Separation Shocks                                      68

E A Generalization of the Baseline Model: Types vs. Inputs                               71

F Solution Method                                                                        72

G Details of the Baseline Parameterization: Homogeneous Steady State Marginal Products
    Across Types                                                                         74

H Alternative Calibration: Small Surplus/"High b "                                       75

I   Business Cycle Statistics Including Full Correlation Matrices                        78

J   Alternative Calibration: Accounting for Labor Force Participation and Matching EU
    Flows                                                                                81

K Deriving the Iso-congestion Curve                                                      85

L Alternative Mechanism: Convex Hiring Costs                                             88

M Historical Decomposition: Additional Material                                          90




                                              52
List of Tables
  A1   Discrete vs. Time-Aggregation Adjusted Worker Transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
  A2   Business Cycle Properties: Alternative Smoothing Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
  A3   Separation Shocks and Other Disturbances: Adjusted R-squared . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
  A4   Business Cycle Properties: No-Congestion, Low-Surplus Model . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
  A5   Business Cycle Properties in the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
  A6   Business Cycle Properties in the No-Congestion Model without Separation Shocks . 78
  A7   Business Cycle Properties in the No-Congestion Model with Separation Shocks . . . 79
  A8   Business Cycle Properties in the Congestion Model--Baseline (Matching UE/E ) . . . 79
  A9   Business Cycle Properties in the Congestion Model--Robustness (Matching EU &
       Participation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
  A10 Business Cycle Properties: Convex Hiring Cost Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
  A11 Historical Decomposition of Unemployment: Model and Counterfactuals . . . . . . 92


List of Figures
  A1   Countercyclicality of the Employment Share with Nonemployment Past Year . . . . 56
  A2   The Countercyclicality of New Hire Share: CPS Worker Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
  A3   Cyclicality of Share of New Hires in Employment: CPS Worker Flows . . . . . . . . . 58
  A4   Cyclicality of New Hires: CPS Worker Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
  A5   Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted UE Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
  A6   Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted Flow Probabilities . . . . . . . 62
  A7   Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted UE Flows (Shimer 2012) . . . . 63
  A8   Cyclicality of UE Flows in the OECD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
  A9   The Countercyclicality of Unemployment-to-Employment Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
  A10 Separation Shocks: Baseline and Adjusted for Identified Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
  A11 Labor Productivity: Empirical Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock . . . . . . . 73
  A12 Relative Worker Productivities in the Congestion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
  A13 Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: No-Congestion, Low-Surplus Model . . . 76
  A14 Separation Rate: Measured and Implied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
  A15 Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: Baseline and Alternative Calibration of
       Separation Rate Process to Match EU Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
  A16 Iso-congestion Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
  A17 Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: Convex Hiring Cost Model . . . . . . . . . 89
  A18 Time Paths of Labor Market Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
  A19 Unemployment Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92




                                                  53
A     Construction of Worker Flows and Transition Probabilities

A.1     Baseline: Discrete Data
We use the Current Population Survey (CPS) to measure worker flows. The CPS has a rotating-
panel design, in which households are surveyed for four consecutive months, then they rotate out
for eight months and then are surveyed for another four months, after which they permanently
leave the sample. This structure allows us to match at most three-fourths of the sample in one
month to the next. In practice, the matching rate is below 75% due to the temporary absence of
individuals from their residence or a household moving out of their address. This phenomenon is
referred to as margin error.
    We start with the monthly micro data covering January 1976 to December 2019. We restrict our
sample to civilians age 15 and above. We categorize each individual in each month t into one of
three employment states: employed (E ), unemployed (U ) and out of the labor force (O ). We use
final person-level weights to calculate the stock of employed, unemployed and non-participants,
E( t ) , U (t ), O ( t ), for each month t .
    Using individual identifiers (using the CPS samples provided by IPUMS and its unique indi-
vidual ID, CPSIDP--which uses rotation groups, household identifiers, individual line numbers,
race, sex, and age to identify individuals--we calculate individual-level transition events between
consecutive months. We again use the current month person-level weights to calculate the total
count of worker flows. Let Z i j ( t ) denote worker flows: the mass of workers in employment state i
in month t - 1 that are observed in employment state j in month t for i , j  {E , U, O }.
    To correct for margin error, we make the common missing at random (MAR) assumption, which
omits missing observations and reweights the measured flows. We adjust our time series by
reweighting the measured flows Z i j (t ) for i , j  {E , U, O } as follows:

                                                       E(t ) + U (t ) + O (t )
                                          µ i j (t )                           Z i j ( t ).
                                                             i  j Z i j (t )


The numerator is the worker population implied by measured stocks and the denominator is the
population implied by total measured flows, including workers whose employment states do not
change. In practice, we construct µ i j ( t ) for males and females separately, and then sum them to
arrive at our aggregate measure of worker flows adjusted for margin error.
    For a number of months in the CPS, it is impossible to match individuals over time. The
raw flow series also exhibit several extreme jumps. To deal with missing values and outliers, we
follow the approach outlined in Fujita and Ramey (2006) and use the procedure called Time Series
Regression with ARIMA Noise, Missing Observations and Outliers (TRAMO, Gómez, Maravall,
and Peña, 1999). We let TRAMO detect additive and transitory outliers using a pre-determined
t-test critical level set to 4. Finally, we seasonally adjust the time series using the X-ARIMA-12
procedure developed by the US Census Bureau.



                                                                 54
   Finally, we calculate the discrete-time job finding and separation probabilities as

                                                   µUE (t )
                                             ft
                                                  U ( t - 1)
                                                                                                 (A1)
                                                  µEU ( t )
                                             t              ,
                                                  E (t - 1)

which simply capture the share of unemployed (employed) workers in month t -1 who are observed
to be employed (unemployed) in month t .
   To sum up, the figures we present and our calibration targets in the model are based on
our margin-error adjusted flow time series (under the MAR assumption) µ i j ( t ), whose missing
values and outliers are corrected by the TRAMO procedure, and are seasonally adjusted using the
X-ARIMA-12 procedure.

Robustness to Including Non-participants in New Hires. As a robustness check discussed in
Section 2.1, below in Figures A1 to A4, we provide similar figures to those presented in the main text
by including workers who flow into employment from non-participation. In Figure A1, we replicate
Figure 1 in the main text by considering the nonemployment (comprising unemployment and out
of the labor force) rather than the unemployment history of the employed, and find qualitatively
similar cyclical patterns. While the countercyclicality of NE-hire share in employment exhibits a
weaker Okun's law, our model results would remain unaffected, since the model parameterization
would simply require us to estimate a stronger degree of congestion in order to match our empirical
calibration targets, which we describe in Section 2.2, with the model calibration strategy described
in Section 5.1.

A.2   Robustness: Time-Aggregation-Adjusted Data
Our preferred measure of worker flows used in the main text is based on discrete time and hence
subject to a specific form of time aggregation bias: drawing on the CPS panel structure, we obtain
worker flows by following initially unemployed workers that move into employment by the end
of the period (are employed the beginning of next period). One type of transition we miss in this
discrete-time approach is that initially employed workers may separate within the period and find
a job again, akin to the issues laid out in Shimer (2005).
   In this appendix, we compare the properties of UE flows based on our measurement approach
in the main text to a one accounting for time-aggregation bias. Our object of interest is the total
number of UE flows within the period, into jobs that remain active until the end of the period,
mirroring our definition using the CPS ASEC in Section 2.1. We also confirm that our time series
replicate those reported by Shimer (2012).

Our Method. Our method draws on Fujita and Ramey (2006), who provide expressions for time-
aggregation-adjusted gross worker flows, whereas our interest is in cumulative UE flows that


                                                  55
                   Figure A1: Countercyclicality of the Employment Share with Nonemployment Past Year
                                       (a) Employment Shares of Workers with Nonemployment Last Year by Total Weeks
         40




                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                  Employed workers with > 0 weeks
                                                                               > 4 weeks                                > 26 weeks            Unemp. rate (right axis)
                                  of nonemployment last year




                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                          log deviation from trend
 Employment share, %
                  30




                                                                                                                                                                            Unemployment rate,
                                                                                                                                                                                         20
        20




                                                                                                                                                                                  0
 10




                                                                                                                                                                         -20
                                                                                                                                                                         -40
         0




                                   1980                     1990                          2000                                            2010                     2020


                             (b) Cyclicality: Log Deviations from Trend                                                                (c) Okun's Law
                       40




                                                                                          Employment share with > 0 weeks


                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                            of nonemployment last year,
                                                                                              log deviation from trend
 log deviation from trend
                      20




                                                                                                                2
    Employment share,




                                                                                                          0
             0




                                                                                                  -2
   -20




                                                                                           -4




                                                                                                                            -40         -20           0       20           40
                       -40




                                                                                                                               Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                1980       1990      2000          2010          2020                                        Regression coefficient = .089


Notes: The figure replicates Figure 1, but instead conditions on nonemployment duration, i.e., we also include labor
market states where a worker might be out of the labor force. Panel (a) plots the share of employed workers who have
undergone a nonemployment spell in the preceding calendar year for different nonemployment durations. Panel (b)
plots their log deviations from trend. Panel (c) reports the scatter plot of the detrended time series. The time series are
HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 100. Shaded regions denote NBER-dated recessions. Source: CPS March
Supplement (ASEC).



remain active through the end of the period. We describe our method below.
             We start with the monthly job finding f t and separation  t probabilities, whose measurement
are described above in Appendix A.1, underlying the analysis in the main text.
             Second, we compute the monthly job finding and separation hazards, f t and  t , solving the
following system of equations:

                                                                           t       u ss , t (1 - e - f t - t )
                                                                                                                                                                                 (A2)
                                                                   ft     (1 - u ss , t )(1 - e - f t - t ) ,


                                                                                     56
                               Figure A2: The Countercyclicality of New Hire Share: CPS Worker Flows
                                (a) UE Share in Employed                                                                                            (b) NE Share in Employed
          2.5




                                                                                                                           5.5
                               UE          Unemp. rate (right axis)                                                                                NE          Unemp. rate (right axis)




                                                                            Rate, ppt deviation from trend




                                                                                                                                                                                             Rate, ppt deviation from trend
                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
 Share of employed, %




                                                                                                                  Share of employed, %
                                                                                                                                     5
                2




                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                            4.5
                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
    1.5




                                                                                                                   4
                                                                               -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                           3.5
                                                                            -2




                                                                                                                                                                                             -2
          1




                        1980        1990      2000        2010           2020                                                               1980        1990      2000       2010         2020


Notes: Panel (a) plots the share of UE hires in employment. Panel (b) plots NE flows in the share of employed. All
time series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data and for visual clarity are smoothed by taking centered
four-quarter moving averages. Both panels also plot the percentage point deviation of unemployment rate from its
trend on a secondary axis. Shaded regions denote NBER-dated recessions. Source: CPS monthly files.



where u ss , t                   t /(  t + f t ) is the steady-state approximation to the unemployment rate implied by
the contemporaneous transition rates. The law of motion for unemployment in continuous time is
given by
                                                             (1 - e -( f t + t ) ) t
                                                U t -1+                                                                  L t -1 + e -( f t + t ) U t -1 ,                                        (A3)
                                                                         ft + t
for   [0, 1) and where L t is the size of the labor force in month t .
             Third, we calculate the number of employed workers at the end of month t who had any
unemployment spell during t --which we then compare to the discrete-time-based UE flows. As
an intermediate step, we consider the probability of not losing a job, from t - 1 +  until t for
  [0, 1), conditional on having a job at t . This probability is given by
                                                                                                              1- 

                                                                                                                                         e - t (1-) .
                                                                                                               
                                                             lim 1 -   t                                                                                                                         (A4)
                                                             0

Using this intermediate result, UE flows during month t , adjusted for time aggregation in that
they also count within-period EUE transitions, are given by
                                                                     1
                                                     UE t                  ft                                U t -1+ e - t (1-) d .                                                              (A5)
                                                                 0
                                                                         Find job Number of Do not
                                                                                 unemployed lose job

     Therefore, our results do not study cycles such as "EUEUEUE" transitions during the period. These are compara-
tively tiny compared to the first-order flows stemming from the initially employed losing their job during the period,
becoming reemployed, and not losing that first-found job again.


                                                                                                             57
                                           Figure A3: Cyclicality of Share of New Hires in Employment: CPS Worker Flows
                                           (a) UE Share vs. Unemployment Rate                                                                      (b) NE Share vs. Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                         NE share, log deviation from trend
 UE share, log deviation from trend
                                 20




                                                                                                                                        10
                          10




                                                                                                                               5
                 0




                                                                                                                      0
        -10




                                                                                                           -5
 -20




                                        -20       -10         0     10       20                30                                                -20       -10         0     10       20            30
                                         Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend                                                              Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                      Regression coefficient = .432                                                                            Regression coefficient = .096


                                            (c) UE Share vs. E-Population Ratio                                                                    (d) NE Share vs. E-Population Ratio

                                                                                                         NE share, log deviation from trend
 UE share, log deviation from trend
                                 20




                                                                                                                                        10
                          10




                                                                                                                               5
                 0




                                                                                                                      0
        -10




                                                                                                           -5
 -20




                                      -3       -2         -1          0        1       2                                                      -3        -2         -1          0        1       2
                                          E-population ratio, log deviation from trend                                                             E-population ratio, log deviation from trend
                                      Regression coefficient = -4.431                                                                          Regression coefficient = -1.137


Notes: The figure plots different measures of new-hire share in employment (UE or NE) against employment measures
(unemployment rate or employment-population ratio). All time series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data
and are logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600. Source: CPS monthly files.



Finally, using Equation (A3), we can integrate out the above expression to obtain UE flows adjusted
for time aggregation bias:

                                                                                             e t - 1                                          U t -1            1 - e - ft
                                                        UE t     f t L t -1 e - t u ss , t                   +                                       - u ss , t            .                    (A6)
                                                                                               t                                              L t -1               ft

Table A1 summarizes the properties of the time series we use in the main text and the time series
we construct using the alternative approach presented above. The two time series have extremely
similar standard deviations and autocorrelations, and are nearly perfectly correlated.
                     Figure A5 Panel (a) reports the time series of UE flows in our baseline definition based on
discrete time measurement, along with the time-aggregation-adjusted time series. Panel (b) shows

                                                                                                    58
                                                        Figure A4: Cyclicality of New Hires: CPS Worker Flows
                                           (a) UE Flows vs. Unemployment Rate                                                                  (b) NE Flows vs. Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                     NE flows, log deviation from trend
 UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                 20




                                                                                                                                    10
                       10




                                                                                                                           5
              0




                                                                                                                  0
  -10




                                                                                                       -5
                                        -20       -10         0     10       20            30                                               -20       -10         0     10       20            30
                                         Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend                                                         Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                      Regression coefficient = .345                                                                       Regression coefficient = .009


                                           (c) UE Flows vs. E-population Ratio                                                                 (d) NE Flows vs. E-population Ratio

                                                                                                     NE flows, log deviation from trend
 UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                 20




                                                                                                                                    10
                       10




                                                                                                                           5
              0




                                                                                                                  0
  -10




                                                                                                       -5




                                      -3       -2         -1          0        1       2                                                  -3       -2         -1         0         1       2
                                          E-population ratio, log deviation from trend                                                        E-population ratio, log deviation from trend
                                      Regression coefficient = -3.494                                                                     Regression coefficient = -.201


Notes: This figure is a complement to Figure A3. The figure plots different measures of new-hire flows into employment
(UE or NE) against employment measures (unemployment rate or employment-population ratio). All time series are
based on quarterly averages of monthly data and are logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600.
While our model relies of the share of new hires in employment rather than worker flows, this figure presents the cyclical
behavior of nonemployment-to-employment flows, which are nearly acyclical, but importantly remain countercyclical
as a share of (procyclical) employment, in turn presented in Figure A1. Source: CPS monthly files.



the Okun's law, such that the elasticity of UE flows adjusted for time aggregation bias with respect
to the unemployment rate is 0.265, similar to the elasticity arising from the discrete-time approach
in Figure 2 Panel (b), where we estimated an only slightly higher elasticity of 0.345. Hence, our
congestion dynamics are robust to time-aggregation adjustment, i.e., to counting within-period
EUE flows in addition to the transitions into employment for the initially unemployed.
                     To gauge the accuracy of the time-aggregation adjusted hazard rates, f and  , in Panel (c) of
Figure A5, we further plot the actual unemployment rate as well as its steady-state approximation
u ss , t . The steady-state approximation tracks the actual time series closely, lending credibility on


                                                                                                59
                 Table A1: Discrete vs. Time-Aggregation Adjusted Worker Transitions

                  UE flows                              Discrete      Time-aggregation adjusted
                  Standard deviation                     0.045                 0.040
                  Autocorrelation                        0.671                 0.574
                  Correlation Matrix
                  Discrete                                  1
                  Time-aggregation adjusted               0.983                       1
Notes: The table compares the time series properties of UE flows based on our discrete time measurement approach
used in the main text to a version corrected for time-aggregation bias. All variables have been logged and the empirical
cyclical components have been extracted using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.



the measurement exercise in this section.

Comparison to Shimer (2012). To further show the robustness and validity of our empirical
analysis, we compare our preferred worker transition probabilities to the ones reported in Shimer
(2012). Panel (a) in Figure A6 plots the employment-to-unemployment probability used in the main
text and compares that to the same monthly probability adjusted for time aggregation bias provided
by Shimer (2012). Panel (b) does the same for unemployment-to-employment flows. While the
time-aggregation adjusted probabilities are higher in levels, their cyclical behavior closely tracks
the underlying discrete-time probabilities that we use in our main analysis (Panels (c) and (d)).
    While Shimer (2012) does not report properties of UE flows in the paper, the similarity of the
cyclical behavior of the transition rates also implies that the UE flows implied by the Shimer (2012)
data would be similarly countercyclical. For comparison with our main analysis, we calculate the
time-aggregation-adjusted UE flow simply as

                                                UEShimer
                                                  t            U t -1 ue , t ,                                         (A7)

where ue , t is the monthly probability of a UE flow provided by Shimer (2012).
    Figure A7 compares our baseline measure of UE flows to the one based on Shimer (2012).
Panel (a) plots the cyclical component of UE flows over time and shows that UE flows adjusted for
time aggregation in a three-state model also exhibit strong counteryclicality. Panel (b) quantifies
this countercyclicality: the elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate is 0.257,
slightly lower than the elasticity we report in the main text.



    Shimer (2012) does not present UE flows, but focuses on transition rates. In the discussion of the prior evidence,
he writes: "In fact, even after accounting for time aggregation, the decline in the job finding probability almost exactly
offsets the increase in the number of unemployed workers at business cycle frequencies, so the number of unemployed
workers who find a job in a month shows little cyclicality" (page 145). Our reading is that this statement likely assesses
the the amplitude of log UE flows (i.e., percent deviations from trend) when compared with the amplitude of percent
deviations from trend of the transition rates and probabilities, rather than a different conclusion of the qualitative nature
about the countercyclicality of UE flows.


                                                             60
                                               Figure A5: Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted UE Flows
        (a) UE Flows: Discrete vs. Time Aggregation Adjusted                                                                                          (b) UE Flows vs. Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                              UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                       15




                                                                                                                                              15
                                               Discrete      Time aggregation adjusted
    UE flows, log deviation from trend




                                                                                                                                        10
                               10




                                                                                                                                  5
                        5




                                                                                                                            0
                 0




                                                                                                                     -5
         -5




                                                                                                              -10                                    -20       -10         0     10       20        30
 -10




                                                                                                                                                      Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                            1980      1990         2000                 2010        2020                                           Regression coefficient = .265


                                                                                            (c) Unemployment Rate
                                                                      12




                                                                                        Actual          Steady-state approximation,
                                                                                                        time-aggregation adjusted rates
                                                              Unemployment rate, %
                                                                 6    48        10




                                                                                     1980        1990                2000                                2010       2020


Notes: The figure shows robustness of the UE flows to time aggregation bias adjustment. Panel (a) reports the time
series of UE flows in our baseline definition based on discrete time, along with the time-aggregation-debiased time
series. Panel (b) is a scatter plot of UE flows adjusted for time aggregation bias against the unemployment rate. Panel
(c) plots the actual unemployment rate and its steady-state approximation based on time-aggregation adjusted hazard
rates, f and  . All time series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data and are logged and HP-filtered using a
smoothing parameter of 1,600. Source: CPS monthly files.




                                                                                                         61
                                            Figure A6: Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted Flow Probabilities
                                                         (a) EU Probabilities                                                                         (b) UE Probabilities
                    3




                                                                                                                  40
                                                    Discrete        Shimer (2012)                                                                Discrete        Shimer (2012)
                  2.5




                                                                                                                 35
 EU probability, %




                                                                                               UE probability, %
                                                                                                        30
         2




                                                                                                 25
 1.5




                                                                                                                  20
                    1




                                                                                                                  15


                                             1980          1990      2000       2010   2020                                               1980          1990      2000       2010   2020


                                                (c) Cylicality of EU Probabilities                                                          (d) Cylicality of UE Probabilities
 EU probability, log deviation from trend




                                                                                               UE probability, log deviation from trend
                                                                                                                                     20




                                                    Discrete        Shimer (2012)                                                                Discrete        Shimer (2012)
                                   20




                                                                                                                            10
                           10




                                                                                                                    0
                   0




                                                                                                        -10
        -10




                                                                                                -20
 -20




                                             1980          1990      2000       2010   2020                                               1980          1990      2000       2010   2020


Notes: Panel (a) compares the EU probability used in the main text to its time-aggregation adjusted counterpart provided
by Shimer (2012) allowing for flows between employment, unemployment and inactivity. Panel (b) does the same for
UE probability. Panels (c) and (d) plot the log deviations of these probabilities from their respective trends. The series
are logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600. Source: CPS monthly files.




                                                                                          62
                               Figure A7: Comparing Discrete and Time Aggregation Adjusted UE Flows (Shimer 2012)
       (a) UE Flows: Discrete vs. Time Aggregation Adjusted                                                                         (b) UE Flows vs. Unemployment Rate


                                                                                            UE flows, log deviation from trend
                                       15




                                                                                                                            20
                                                   Discrete      Shimer (2012)
    UE flows, log deviation from trend
                               10




                                                                                                                  10
                        5




                                                                                                         0
                 0




                                                                                             -10
         -5




                                                                                                                                   -20       -10         0     10       20        30
 -10




                                                                                                                                    Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                            1980          1990    2000       2010   2020                                         Regression coefficient = .257


Notes: The figure shows robustness of the UE flows to time aggregation bias adjustment allowing for worker flows
between three labor market states. Panel (a) reports the time series of UE flows in our baseline definition based on
discrete time, along with the time-aggregation-debiased time series. Panel (b) is a scatter plot of UE flows adjusted for
time aggregation bias against the unemployment rate. All time series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data
and are logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600. Source: CPS monthly files.




                                                                                       63
B      Evidence from OECD Countries
The countercylicality of UE flows extends to many OECD countries. In Figure A8 Panel (a), we
plot the elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate for a set OECD countries,
drawing on transition rates estimated in Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2013) on the basis of labor force
survey data and unemployment stocks.
     As a validation check, we point out another perspective on the elasticity in Equation (4),
building on the insight that the unemployment rate fluctuations implied by the job finding rate
shift only is du f / u f    -(1 - u ) d f / f . Fujita and Ramey (2009) show that the regression coefficient
of   du f /u f   on du /u also represents the share of the variance in unemployment rate fluctuations
due to fluctuations in the job finding rate (rather than in the job separation rate). The smaller this
                                                                      dUE /UE             du f /u f
share, the more countercyclical the UE flows on average, since         du / u
                                                                                 - 1-
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      u    du /u
                                                                                                      + 1. Drawing
on cross-country differences in the OECD, we document the empirical validity of this theoretical
property in Panel (b) of Figure A8, a scatterplot that shows a clear negative relationship between
the elasticity against the contribution of job finding rate to unemployment fluctuations, the latter
computed in Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2013). Since we apply steady-state approximations while
Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2013) point out that in many OECD countries dynamic expressions are
appropriate, and since the unemployment rates are not homogeneous, this scatter plot does not
trace out a perfectly straight line.
     Finally, Panel (c) plots the UE flows-unemployment rate elasticity against the job finding-
job separation rate elasticity in our sample of OECD countries, together with the theoretical
relationship between the two as implied by Equation (4). Broadly, the relationship between the
two elasticities holds across countries (with the approximation error reflecting the assumptions of
steady state and only two labor market states).




                                                      64
                                 Figure A8: Cyclicality of UE Flows in the OECD
                  (a) Cyclicality of UE Flows                                                                 (b) Role of f in Unemployment Fluctuations

             Sweden (1977-2009)




                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                   SWE
              Ireland (1985-2009)
               France (1976-2009)                                                                                        USA (CPS)        IRL
                                                                                                                                        FRA




                                                                                                         .4
                Spain (1978-2009)                                                                                                       ESP




                                                                                        dlog(UE)/dlog(u)
                Japan (1978-2009)                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                                           JPN            CAN    DEU




                                                                                                  .2
            Portugal (1987-2009)                                                                                                                GBR
           Germany (1984-2009)                                                                                                              USA NZL
             Canada (1977-2009)




                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                    NOR
    United Kingdom (1984-2009)
      New Zealand (1988-2009)                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                    Constant separations




                                                                                     -.2
       United States (1970-2009)                                                                                    (Typical DMP assumption)
            Norway (1984-2009)
           Australia (1979-2009)


                                                                                               -.4
                                                                                                                                                               ITA
                 Italy (1984-2009)                                                                            .4              .6          .8             1           1.2
                                      -1                 -.5   0     .5     1                                               Contribution of job finding rate
                                                        dlog(UE)/dlog(u)                                                   to unemployment fluctuations, f


                                                                 (c) UE Flows vs. Separations
                                                   SWE
                                            .5




                                                          IRL
                                                                ESP FRA
                                                                           PRT
                                                                       DEU   CAN                                     GBR          JPN
                                                                            USA NZL
                                     dlog(UE)/dlog(u)
                                                 0




                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                                                                   AUS
                                                        USA (CPS)
                                                                                                                            ITA
                                       -.5




                                                          Constant separations
                                                          (Typical DMP assumption)
                                            -1




                                                        -.7                  -.2                                            .3
                                                                           dlog()/dlog(f)


Notes: Panel (a) plots the elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate in a set of OECD countries.
Panel (b) plots these elasticities against the importance of job finding rate fluctuations in explaining the volatility in
unemployment for each country. To compute the contribution of the job finding rate to unemployment fluctuations
based on monthly CPS data (green dot), we calculate cov(-(1 - u ss ) f , u ss )/var( u ss ), where u ss is the steady-state
approximation to the unemployment rate, u ss is its trend and f is the cyclical component of (log) job finding rate (see
Fujita and Ramey, 2009), such that -(1 - u ss ) f is the unemployment rate deviation due to the job finding rate only. For
the DMP model without separation shocks, this share is one, and the elasticity on the y-axis is computed using formula
(4). Panel (c) plots the elasticity of UE flows with respect to the unemployment rate as well as the theoretical relationship
between the two based on a steady state approximation. Source: Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2013) and CPS monthly files.




                                                                                65
C     Alternative HP Smoothing Parameter
In the main text, we report business cycle statistics based on HP-filtered time series with a smooth-
ing parameter of 1 , 600, typically used for quarterly data. In this section, we instead use a smoothing
parameter of 105 --preferred by Shimer (2005, 2012)--to report business-cycle statistics.
    Table A2 reports the standard deviations, auto- and cross-correlations of the HP-filtered time
series we present in the main text. With a smoothing parameter more aggressively penalizing
movements in the trend components in the time series, the standard deviations of the variables
around these trends become considerably higher. The cross-correlations between f ,  and UE/E
become if anything even more pronounced.

                Table A2: Business Cycle Properties: Alternative Smoothing Parameter

                                    ALP           f                      u           v                   UE/E
        Standard deviation          0.017       0.093       0.108      0.190       0.198      0.376      0.116
        Autocorrelation             0.897       0.950       0.904      0.970       0.957      0.962      0.933
        Correlation matrix
        ALP                          1
        f                          -0.061         1
                                   -0.179      -0.859        1
        u                          0.015       -0.975      0.919         1
        v                          0.050        0.831      -0.830     -0.851        1
                                   0.038        0.906      -0.877     -0.928      0.978        1
        UE/E                       0.113       -0.888      0.783       0.930      -0.718     -0.818         1
Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness and share of new hires in employment. All variables have been logged and
the empirical cyclical components have been extracted using the HP-filter with the alternative smoothing parameter of
105 rather than 1 , 600.



    Most importantly, Figure A9 presents scatter plots of UE flows and shares against the unem-
ployment rate, respectively, under this alternative smoothing parameter. The elasticity of UE flows
with respect to the unemployment rate is almost identical to the one we present in the main text in
Figure 2 Panel (b) (0.348 vs 0.345). Likewise, the elasticity of new-hire share in employment to the
unemployment rate stays unchanged compared to the one reported in Figure A3 Panel (a) (0.433
vs 0.432).
    We conclude that our key facts are robust to an alternative smoothing parameter of 105 preferred
by Shimer (2005, 2012).




    The correlation of average labor productivity with the job finding rate (unemployment rate) turns slightly negative
(positive), likely due to the inclusion of additional years compared to Shimer (2005), and consistent with our aforemen-
tioned comment that ALP is not an obvious cyclical driver (see, e.g., Shimer, 2005; Mitman and Rabinovich, 2020; Galí
and Van Rens, forthcoming).


                                                            66
                                            Figure A9: The Countercyclicality of Unemployment-to-Employment Flows
                                            (a) Unemployment vs. UE Flows                                                               (b) Unemployment vs. UE Share
 UE flows, log deviation from trend




                                                                                             UE share, log deviation from trend
                                 20




                                                                                                                            20
                         10




                                                                                                                    10
                 0




                                                                                                             0
        -10




                                                                                                   -10
 -20




                                                                                             -20




                                      -40        -20            0      20          40                                             -40        -20            0      20          40
                                         Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend                                                 Unemployment rate, log deviation from trend
                                      Regression coefficient = .348                                                               Regression coefficient = .433


Notes: Panel (a) plots the log deviations in UE flows and log deviations in the unemployment rate from their respective
trends. Panel (b) plots log deviations in UE share in employment against log deviations in the unemployment rate. All
series are based on quarterly averages of monthly data. Detrended series are HP filtered with a smoothing parameter
of 105 . Source: CPS monthly files.




                                                                                        67
D     Robustness of Identification of Separation Shocks
The main text uses a three-variate VAR to identify exogenous separation shocks, which are crucial
for quantifying our congestion mechanism. In particular, the response of labor market tightness to
the separation shock, identified recursively using a Cholesky decomposition, is the key moment
that pins down our preferred value of  , which governs the extent of congestion.
    In this appendix, we show that our identified separation shocks are indeed only marginally
affected by other identified structural shocks considered in the literature. Specifically, we consider
total factor productivity shocks (Fernald, 2014), financial shocks (Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012),
discount factor shocks (Hall, 2017), uncertainty shocks (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015) and
monetary policy shocks (Romer and Romer, 2004; Wieland and Yang, 2020).

D.1    Data for Alternative Shocks
We now describe the data used for our analysis. The three-variate VAR is the same as in the main
text, described in Section 2. The data for the other macroeconomic shocks are described below.

Total Factor Productivity Shocks. We take the utilization-adjusted quarterly measure of total
factor productivity (dtfp_util) from Fernald (2014). The sample period for this shock is 1976Q 1 -
2019Q 4.

Financial Shocks. We use the "Gilchrist-Zakrajsek" credit spread as measured in Gilchrist and
Zakrajsek (2012). The sample covers 1976Q 1 - 2010Q 3.

Discount Factor Shocks. We use the discount factor shocks estimated by Hall (2017), using the
Shiller price index. The sample period is 1976Q 1 - 2015Q 2.

Uncertainty Shocks. We use the one-quarter-ahead macroeconomic uncertainty shocks esti-
mated by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015). The sample period for this shock is 1976Q 1 - 2019Q 4.

Monetary Policy Shocks. We use the monetary policy shocks proposed by Romer and Romer
(2004) and as updated by Wieland and Yang (2020). The sample period for this shock is 1976Q 1 -
2007Q 4.

D.2    Separation Shocks and Other Macroeconomic Disturbances
To ascertain whether our estimated separation shocks are not simply reflecting effects of omitted
variables, we regress them on the range of macroeconomic shocks described above. Specifically,
    An alternative approach is to identify monetary policy shocks using high-frequency identification as in, e.g.,
Gürkaynak et al. (2005); Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016); Gertler and Karadi (2015). However, these shock series cover
a considerably shorter sample period.



                                                         68
              Table A3: Separation Shocks and Other Disturbances: Adjusted R-squared

                       TFP        Financial     Discounts            Uncertainty             Monetary Policy    Joint
       R2             -0.006        0.004         0.016                -0.007                   -0.018         -0.096
       # of obs.       156           119           138                  156                       108            108
       # of coefs.      6             6             6                    6                         6              26
Notes: The top row reports the adjusted R-square from the individual regressions (A8) for the five different macroe-
conomic shocks and the "joint" regression in Equation (A9). "TFP" is the utilization-adjusted total factor productivity
(Fernald, 2014), "financial" is the "Gilchrist-Zakrajsek" credit spread (Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012), "discounts" is the
discount factor shock based on the Shiller price index (Hall, 2017), "uncertainty" is the one-quarter-ahead macroeco-
nomic uncertainty (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015) and "monetary policy" is taken from Wieland and Yang (2020).
The second and third rows report, respectively, the number of observations and estimated parameters in each regression.



we estimate
                                                           p
                                           t     j +            j, s x j, t -s +  j, t ,                                (A8)
                                                        s 0

where x j, t indicates a structural shock in period t , where j denotes one of the five structural shocks
(TFP, financial, discount factor, uncertainty and monetary policy). We choose p                                  4, thereby
considering the contemporaneous impact of the structural shocks as well as up to four of their
quarterly lags.
    In addition to estimating the individual impact of each of the macroeconomic shocks, we also
consider their joint effect by estimating

                                                       5       p
                                          t     j +                  j, s x j, t -s +  t .                              (A9)
                                                       j 1 s 0


In all the above cases, we always estimate the regressions on the maximum sample size allowed
by the data.
    Table A3 presents the adjusted R2 from each of the specifications above. The results suggest that
the separation shocks identified by our three-variate VAR are in fact not driven by other (omitted)
structural shocks that are independently identified outside of our VAR. The highest explanatory
power is obtained by considering discount factor shocks, but even there the adjusted R-square is
only 1.6%.
    Figure A10 shows how the separation shocks estimated in the main text change when con-
trolling for all of the above macroeconomic shocks using the regression model in Equation (A9).
The figure reveals that the estimated shocks are largely unchanged, as suggested by the slightly
negative R 2 in Table A3.




                                                               69
            Figure A10: Separation Shocks: Baseline and Adjusted for Identified Shocks




Notes: The figure shows the baseline separation shocks estimated in Section 2 and those shocks "adjusted for other
disturbances" using the regression model in Equation (A9), where the plotted series is given by  t .




                                                       70
E     A Generalization of the Baseline Model: Types vs. Inputs
The baseline model in the main text assumes that every worker type k is a different input in
                                                   1
                                                   
                                      K        
production, i.e., Y           z       k 1   k nk       . In this appendix we generalize this setup by allowing for
subsets of worker types i  K to be perfectly substitutable in production. That is, different types
k are not necessarily separate worker types as inputs into production, i . Instead, an input type
i I         {1 , . . . , I } is defined by a set of worker types i  K which are mutually exclusive, i.e.,
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                  
    i i    . The production function in this setting is given by Y                     z     i i ni       .
     This setup of worker heterogeneity nests multiple cases. For example, if I                               1, then 1        K
and all worker types constitute one input type (homogeneous workers). Types do not matter for
production, so that this case boils down to the standard DMP model with a redundant worker
type evolution in the background. Another setup has low- and high-skilled workers, where the
former become the latter after, e.g., three years of employment. In a quarterly calibration, this
setup would be given by assuming I                         2 with 1     {1 , . . . , 12} and 2   {13 , . . . , K }. As a final
example, each worker type is a separate input type (as in the main text), in which case I                                 K , and
i      { i } for i   1, . . . , K .
     The retailer buys { n i }iI       1
                                           units of output in a perfectly competitive market. This implies that
the prices for these goods satisfy the static first order conditions:

                                                             Y                    1    Y
                                           pi    i n i-1               i s i-1           ,                                  (A10)
                                                             
                                                            j jnj                   s
                                                                                 j j j N

where s i       n i / N denotes the share of type- i workers in production, and N                             i   n i is aggregate
employment.
     The worker and firm values now reflect the fact that worker types themselves are not imperfect
substitutes in production, but only through their position in the production sets i ( k ). The model
equations differ only in that worker heterogeneity is now indexed by i ( k ), rather than k .




                                                                 71
F      Solution Method
This appendix provides details of the solution and estimation methods used in the paper. We
begin by describing the computation of the steady state, which includes the distribution of worker
types among the employed and unemployed. We then lay out the solution method for the dynamic
model and for its estimation.

F.1     Steady State
Given our parameterization, in particular the matching of the steady state job finding and sepa-
ration rates, and our assumption that all unemployed fall to k                           1, it is possible to compute the
implied distribution of worker types without solving for the rest of the model. Specifically, the
steady state distribution of employment across worker types and steady state unemployment can
be solved from the following set of equations:

                                                           e1    f u,

                                         e k +1   e k (1 -  ) for k        1, ..., K - 1 ,

                                                  u     (1 - f )u +            ek .
                                                                           k

In addition, under our calibration ensuring that p k                       1 for all k in steady state, it is possible to
compute the steady state surplus values for each type. This result, in turn, also pins down the
steady state value of labor market tightness via the free-entry condition in Equation (21). Finally,
using the steady state distribution of employment levels, and again the assumption that p k                         1 for
all k in steady state, we can calculate the implied productivity weights  k via

                                                              -1        1         Y
                                              1    pk     ak sk                     ,
                                                                     K
                                                                     l 1    l s l N

                      K
where s k    e k /(   l 1 e k ),   and where we normalize average labor productivity Y /N                  1.

F.2     Solution and Estimation with Aggregate Uncertainty
Our model features heterogeneity in worker types and two aggregate sources of uncertainty, z and
 . The employment distribution gives another set of endogenous state variables. The distribution
is, however, described without approximation error by the masses of workers of each of the K
types. Transitions between these types shown in Equation (11), which depend on the job finding
and separation rates, describe the distributional movements over time.
      Therefore, there is no need to revert to iterative procedures, as the law of motion for the
distribution is known a priori. We solve the model using first order perturbation around its
stationary steady state (i.e., including the employment distribution). The large number of state


                                                                72
         Figure A11: Labor Productivity: Empirical Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock
         (a) ALP: VAR including Market Tightness                    (b) ALP: VAR including Unemployment




Notes: Panel (a) plots the impulse response of average labor productivity to a unit standard deviation job separation
shock using the VAR model in Equation (8) with market tightness as the last variable. Panel (b) plots the impulse
response of ALP in the VAR model with unemployment rate as the last variable. The separation shocks are identified
off a Cholesky decomposition as explained in Section 2.1. The model IRFs exhibit a tiny increase initially in ALP and
then a persistent but very small negative productivity effect for ALP; specifically, it is present for both the  1 and
 0.241 models, yet it will not generate any noticeable reduction in labor market tightness for the latter economy (see
the red dashed line in Figure 9), including in the small-surplus variant of the no-congestion model (Appendix Figure
A13).



variables (the two aggregate shocks, the distribution of employment shares and the unemployment
rate) do not impede the speed of the solution method as perturbation is not prone to the curse of
dimensionality.
      To compute business cycle statistics, we simulate the model 100 times for 176 quarters (the length
of our empirical sample). For each simulation, we detrend the logarithms of all the variables using
the HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600. The reported statistics are then averages over
the 100 simulations. This also applies to impulse responses, which are averages of the estimated
VARs over the 100 simulations.

F.3     The Kalman Filter
In addition, the linear nature of our solution allows us to estimate the model using the Kalman
filter. Specifically, in Section 5.7 we use data on average labor productivity and the share of newly
hired workers in employment to estimate the time path of the two aggregate shocks consistent
with these two time series and our parameterization. The model structure then implies a particular
time path for all model variables. We use this property in Section 5.7 to calculate the contribution
of congestion unemployment to the variation in observed unemployment fluctuations. Figure A18
shows the time paths of other labor market variables implied by our estimation.




                                                         73
G        Details of the Baseline Parameterization: Homogeneous Steady State
         Marginal Products Across Types
The main text describes the parameterization of the model, including that of the production
weights  k for different worker types. These are set such that the respective marginal products,
p k , are equal to 1 for all k . Hence, all worker types have the same (fundamental) surplus in steady
state.
    Figure A12 visualizes the calibrated values of the relative productivities. Their pattern mimics
that of employment shares. Relatively abundant types, such as worker type k                          1, would be
characterized by a lower marginal product unless its abundance is offset by a higher relative
productivity weight 1 . The spike at k            K is due to the fact that this type is an absorbing state
and therefore employment in this type is somewhat higher than in k                  K - 1.

                 Figure A12: Relative Worker Productivities in the Congestion Model




Notes: The figure plots the relative weights in production,  k , in the congestion model with    0.241. The spike at
k K ( 160) reflects the fact that it is an absorbing state.




                                                        74
H    Alternative Calibration: Small Surplus/"High b "
It is well understood that low fundamental surplus values help amplify the effects of productivity
shocks and generate realistic unemployment fluctuations (see e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2017;
Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008). In this section, we consider an alternative calibration without
congestion (    1) with low surplus.
    We calibrate most of our parameters as in the main text, except for the flow value of unem-
ployment b , which is set such that the model matches the volatility of labor market tightness. We
consider a version with and without separation shocks. The implied value of b is 0.96 in the case
without separation shocks.
    Results are presented in Table A4. While the model without separation shocks matches--
by construction--the volatility of labor market tightness, it fails on the cyclicality of UE flows,
for the same reasons as discussed in Section 2.1: separation shocks are necessary to match the
countercyclical nature of UE flows. In the case with separation shocks, the model matches well
the volatility of essentially all labor market variables. In addition, the model now also matches
the countercyclicality of UE flows, albeit to a lesser extent than in the data. However, it grossly
fails in the response of labor market tightness to a separation shock, as the standard model with
separation rate shock discussed in the main text.
    Figure A13 shows the empirical response of labor market tightness to a separation shock, with
that of the model without congestion but with a low fundamental surplus and separation shocks.
As in the standard model without congestion, there is essentially no response of labor market
tightness to a separation shock. This key result does not change with a low fundamental surplus.

Steady State Elasticities. To understand this result further, we conduct a version of the analysis
in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017), but this time for separation shocks. In order to see whether
separations have a sizable impact on hiring, we derive the elasticity of labor market tightness with
respect to separations. Following Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017), we cast our model in continuous
time in which case the hiring condition can be written as

                                       (z - b )(1 -  ) q ( )
                               r+                            -  f (),                         (A11)
                                                 

where r is the interest rate such that     1/(1 + r ). Taking z as given and totally differentiating
Equation (A11) with respect to  and  gives

                                   ( z - b )(1 -  ) q ( )
                              d                           d  -  f ()d 
                                                                                              (A12)
                                                            d
                                   - [ µ( r +  ) +  f (  )] .
                                                             




                                                75
   Figure A13: Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: No-Congestion, Low-Surplus Model
                  (a) Market Tightness                                         (b) Unemployment




Notes: The figure plots the impulse responses of labor market tightness and unemployment rate to a separation shock
in the data and model, which is calibrated under a low fundamental surplus (e.g., Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008) and
includes countercyclical separation shocks.



Rearranging the above, we can then write the elasticity of  with respect to  as

                                 d /                                                
                         ,                  -                         -Nash                ,                (A13)
                                 d /            µ( r +  ) +  f (  )           r +  +  f ()

                   r ++ f ()
where N ash       µ( r + )+  f ( )
                                     is the scaling factor, which multiplies the fundamental surplus, derived
in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017). As discussed in Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017), reasonable
calibrations of the standard search and matching model results in Nash  1. Moreover, these
calibrations also result in the denominator in Equation (A13) being roughly equal to one half.
In conclusion, the standard model features labor market tightness which is largely insensitive to
separation shocks, with an elasticity of around -2  . Moreover, this elasticity is independent of the
fundamental surplus. This is precisely the reason why even a calibration with a low fundamental
surplus cannot replicate the empirical response of labor market tightness to separation shocks.




                                                            76
              Table A4: Business Cycle Properties: No-Congestion, Low-Surplus Model

                                  ALP        f                u       v                  UE/E
                                 Panel A: Low Fundamental Surplus Model Without Separation Shocks
      Standard deviation          0.010    0.064     0      0.052 0.199 0.230            0.049
      Autocorrelation             0.706    0.706     0      0.844 0.596 0.706            0.311
      Correlation matrix
      ALP                          1
      f                          0.999       1
                                   0         0       1
      u                          -0.647 -0.648       0        1
      v                          0.980     0.981     0     -0.486     1
                                 0.999     1.000     0     -0.648 0.981        1
      UE/E                       0.476     0.476     0     -0.270 0.477 0.476              1
                                  Panel B: Low Fundamental Surplus Model With Separation Shocks
      Standard deviation         0.010     0.064   0.082    0.090 0.177 0.227            0.068
      Autocorrelation            0.691     0.689   0.560    0.825 0.558 0.689            0.623
      Correlation matrix
      ALP                          1
      f                          0.999          1
                                 -0.413      -0.430       1
      u                          -0.674      -0.684     0.699          1
      v                          0.933        0.929     -0.197      -0.368        1
                                 0.999        1.000     -0.430      -0.684      0.929      1
      UE/E                       0.005       -0.001     0.266        0.455      0.229    -0.001            1
Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness, and share of new hires in employment. Panel A reports values from the
model with a constant separation rate, Panel B reports the same for the model with countercylical job separation shocks.
All variables have been logged and the empirical cyclical components have been extracted using the HP-filter with a
smoothing parameter of 1 , 600.




                                                            77
I    Business Cycle Statistics Including Full Correlation Matrices
For compactness, Table 2 in the main text only reports correlations with unemployment. Here,
we additionally report the tables with the full correlation matrices. The tables are ordered as the
panels in Table 2.

                               Table A5: Business Cycle Properties in the Data

                                      ALP            f                     u         v                     UE/E
            Standard deviation        0.010        0.053       0.067     0.103     0.126       0.229       0.067
            Autocorrelation           0.746        0.871       0.773     0.934     0.926       0.936       0.836
            Correlation matrix
            ALP                        1
            f                        0.042         1
                                     -0.415     -0.715        1
            u                        -0.112     -0.931      0.848           1
            v                        0.309       0.874     -0.869        -0.934      1
                                     0.223       0.917     -0.874        -0.980    0.986        1
            UE/E                     0.173      -0.722      0.567         0.833    -0.711     -0.783         1

Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness and the share of new hires in employment. All variables have been logged
and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




    Table A6: Business Cycle Properties in the No-Congestion Model without Separation Shocks

                                           ALP           f                u         v               UE /E
                 Standard deviation        0.010       0.004        0   0.003     0.013     0.015   0.003
                 Autocorrelation           0.704       0.704        0   0.843     0.592     0.704   0.306
                 Correlation matrix
                 ALP                        1
                 f                        1.000          1
                                            0            0          1
                 u                        -0.643      -0.643        0     1
                 v                        0.980        0.980        0   -0.481      1
                                          1.000        1.000        0   -0.643    0.980       1
                 UE/E                     0.476        0.476        0   -0.272    0.476     0.476      1

Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness and the share of new hires in employment. All variables have been logged
and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




                                                               78
     Table A7: Business Cycle Properties in the No-Congestion Model with Separation Shocks

                                      ALP          f                    u          v                  UE/E
            Standard deviation        0.010      0.005      0.088     0.068      0.058      0.017     0.067
            Autocorrelation           0.688      0.647      0.499     0.736      0.751      0.647     0.74
            Correlation matrix
            ALP                         1
            f                         0.975        1
                                     -0.441     -0.627        1
            u                        -0.508     -0.665      0.916        1
            v                        -0.306     -0.482      0.888      0.974       1
                                      0.975      1.000     -0.627     -0.665    -0.482       1
            UE/E                     -0.348     -0.402      0.413      0.739     0.747     -0.402         1

Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness and the share of new hires in employment. All variables have been logged
and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




    Table A8: Business Cycle Properties in the Congestion Model--Baseline (Matching UE /E )

                                 ALP          f                    u          v                   UE/E          p1
       Standard deviation        0.010      0.059      0.122     0.121      0.102      0.207      0.067       0.055
       Autocorrelation           0.688      0.897      0.530     0.836      0.857      0.897      0.742       0.771
       Correlation matrix
       ALP                        1
       f                        0.443         1
                                -0.410     -0.509        1
       u                        -0.463     -0.924      0.743        1
       v                        0.348       0.922     -0.157     -0.716       1
                                0.443       0.996     -0.514     -0.940     0.909        1
       UE/E                     -0.337     -0.930      0.392      0.865    -0.876     -0.940       1
       p1                       0.490       0.952     -0.431     -0.862    0.900       0.949     -0.973        1

Notes: ALP, f ,  , u , , UE /E and p 1 indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation
rate, unemployment rate, labor market tightness, the share of new hires in employment and marginal labor product of
new hires. All variables have been logged and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




                                                            79
Table A9: Business Cycle Properties in the Congestion Model--Robustness (Matching EU & Par-
ticipation)

                                 ALP          f                    u          v                   UE/E        p1
       Standard deviation        0.010      0.054      0.067     0.099      0.099      0.189      0.052     0.051
       Autocorrelation           0.701      0.901      0.544     0.850      0.889      0.902      0.767     0.781
       Correlation matrix
       ALP                        1
       f                        0.323         1
                                -0.419     -0.488        1
       u                        -0.337     -0.941      0.693        1
       v                        0.284       0.960     -0.241     -0.819       1
                                0.326       0.997     -0.491     -0.954     0.952        1
       UE/E                     -0.240     -0.938      0.390      0.890    -0.913     -0.946       1
       p1                       0.414       0.950     -0.443     -0.882    0.926       0.948     -0.973       1

Notes: ALP, f ,  , u , , UE /E and p 1 indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation
rate, unemployment rate, labor market tightness, the share of new hires in employment and marginal labor product of
new hires. All variables have been logged and detrended using the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




                                                            80
J     Alternative Calibration: Accounting for Labor Force Participation and
      Matching EU Flows
The baseline model calibrates separation shocks such that the model matches the observed fluc-
tuations in the share of new hires in employment, UE/E , which are key to our congestion mech-
anism. However, as a result, the baseline model overpredicts the volatility of employment-to-
unemployment (EU) flows, by overpredicting the volatility of EU separation rates  .
      In this appendix, we show that this inability to match both realistic new-hire employment
shares and EU separations is primarily due to the missing non-participation margin in our two-
state framework. We choose our two-state labor market framework for convenience and its direct
comparability with canonical models in the literature (see, e.g., Shimer, 2005; Pissarides, 2009).
However, two labor-market states mean that our framework attributes any flows into and out of
non-participation (out of the labor force; OLF, or "O", as we denoted nonemployment, comprising
out of the labor and unemployment by "N") to flows between employment and unemployment.
This problem is common to all two-state models. See Elsby, Hobn, and ahin (2015a) for the
importance of the nonparticipation margin over the business cycle.

J.1    Clarifying the Problem
One consequence of the omitted third state and transitions into and out of it is that the law of
motion for unemployment--which holds in the model at all times--does not hold for the empirical
measures of f ,  and u :

                                       u t +1     (1 - f t ) u t +  t +1 (1 - u t ).                       (A14)

                                                                                                   imp
However, it is possible to compute an implied empirical measure of EU separation rates  t +1 consistent
with the two-state law of motion of unemployment given by the above equation and the measured
unemployment and job finding rates in the data. Specifically, we compute this implied process as

                                                       u t +1 - (1 - f t )u t
                                             t +1                             .
                                                imp
                                                                                                           (A15)
                                                              1 - ut

In words, this implied separation rate captures the two-state separation rate process that would,
when feeding in the empirical job finding rate and the unemployment rate, exactly predict the
empirical level of the next period unemployment rate.
      Comparing the implied EU separation rate  imp with the actual EU separation rate  permits a
useful diagnostic: whenever  imp exceeds  , it must be that out-of-steady-state transitions between
OLF and E or U occurred that, on net, lowered empirical employment or raised unemployment
by more than accounted for by EU transitions (  ) and UE transitions ( f )--where these have been
    This procedure resembles that in Shimer (2005), who backs out the job finding rate using the law of motion for
unemployment and a proxy for EU flows using short-term unemployment. In our case, the procedure is reversed, with
the EU flows being backed out from the law of motion for unemployment given a measure of the job finding rate.


                                                            81
                           Figure A14: Separation Rate: Measured and Implied




Note: "Measured"  refers to the empirical time series in the main text. "Implied" refers to  imp described above, based
on the law of motion for unemployment, the unemployment rate and the job finding rate.


constructed on the basis of panel data measuring the transitions of workers between U and E
states, i.e. measured EU and UE flows.
      Figure A14 shows the time series of the measured and implied separation rates, i.e.,  and  imp .
The implied separation rate is more volatile and less persistent compared to the measured one.
This comparison highlights the tension between a two-state model of the labor market and directly
measured flows in the data.
      Below, we recalibrate the baseline model to account for the discrepancy described above.
Subject to a recalibration of our key parameter,  , the extended model delivers essentially the same
quantitative results while, at the same time, matching the observed variation in EU flows.

J.2    Introducing Flows Into and Out of Non-Participation
We now present an alternative model that quantitatively accounts for the presence of flows into
and out of non-participation. To nevertheless retain the logic of our two-state model, we introduce
exogenous net changes in the number of unemployed. In particular, the law of motion for the mass
of unemployed of type k          1 is given by

                                                                          K
                                u 1, t   (1 - f ( t -1 ))u 1, t -1 +  t         e k , t + OU t ,                (A16)
                                                                          k 1

where we have retained our assumption that all separated workers fall to the bottom of the ladder
and become type k         1. The new feature, compared to the baseline model, is the presence of OU t
flows, which reflects the possibility of (exogenous) changes in the unemployment pool proxying
for flows into and out of OLF. Specifically, we assume that OU fluctuates according to the following


                                                            82
process:
                                           OU t       OU OU t -1 +    OU, t ,                                   (A17)

where  OU  (-1, 1) is a persistence parameter and                 OU, t    N (0 , OU
                                                                                  2
                                                                                     ) are random shocks. This
extension does not change the steady state of our model as OU flows are assumed to have zero
mean.

J.3    Parameterized Model with Empirical  Process and OU Flows
We parameterize the extended model in exactly the same way as the baseline model, except that
instead of targeting UE/E flows, we directly parameterize the  process to match the cyclical
pattern of EU flows in the data.
      In addition, we set  OU and OU to match the persistence and volatility of OU flows as a share
of the labor force observed in the data, constructed as described in Appendix A.1. In addition, we
allow for a correlation between           and   OU   to match the observed correlation between OU /(E + U )
and the unemployment rate, which is 0.72.
      Table A9 in Appendix I, and Panel E of Table 2 in the main text, show the business cycle statistics
of the extended model. This model matches not only the volatility of average labor productivity,
but now also that of EU flows--specifically, the  process now has the same volatility as in the
data (although we miss some of its persistence). Moreover, the extended model still delivers a
large amount of amplification of shocks. Specifically, the volatility of unemployment is 96% that
of the data and the Beveridge curve has a healthy correlation of -0.819. Since we no longer target
the UE/E fluctuations, they are now somewhat less volatile than in the data. But, the calibrated
separation shocks together with the additional OU flows result in unemployment-to-employment
flows being relatively close to what they are in the data.
      In order to match the impulse response of labor market tightness to separation shocks, the
extended model requires a  of 0.08. Under this calibration, however, the extended model delivers
essentially identical dynamics as the baseline model, as shown in Figure A15.
      To conclude, the baseline model refined to match the volatility of the empirical separation rate
process and extended for the possibility of (exogenous) flows into and out of non-participation
parameterized to match those observed in the data, has essentially identical amplification prop-
erties regarding labor market tightness and unemployment as the baseline model presented in
the main text. While we choose to retain the standard two-state labor market model as our main
specification, we conjecture that an explicit modelling of an endogenous non-participation choice
would yield very similar results (provided that such a hypothetical model succeeds in matching
the UE flows and congestion dynamics). Krusell, Mukoyama, Rogerson, and ahin (2017) and
Cairó, Fujita, and Morales-Jimenez (2020) present such richer models of worker flows for all three
margins (but do not study congestion dynamics).


    Because of the assumed zero mean in the model, we match the persistence and volatility in levels, rather than logs.
The average ratio OU /(U + E ) is 1.4%, with persistence of 0.57 and standard deviation of 0.001.


                                                          83
Figure A15: Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: Baseline and Alternative Calibration of
Separation Rate Process to Match EU Flows
                  (a) Market Tightness                                       (b) Unemployment




Notes: The figure plots the impulse responses of labor market tightness and unemployment rate to a separation shock
in the data and model, which is calibrated to match the business cycle patterns of EU flows.




                                                        84
K     Deriving the Iso-congestion Curve
We generalize the production function in our baseline model and assume a function that takes the
following form:

                                                                  1/ 
                                                             c 
                               Y      (1 - x )          c
                                                        k   nk             +x           k nk .
                                                                                        nc
                                                    k                              k

In words, we assume that a share 1 - x of workers are subject to short-run congestion and the
remaining share x of workers are not subject to congestion in final good production. Alternatively,
fraction x of workers enter the k step in a way that replicates the skill structure at the point of hiring.
Or, two final goods are produced, which are perfect substitutes but one uses linear production.
Search is random, so a given hire is expected to be placed into the two functions with probabilities
1 - x and x , respectively.

Marginal Product of Labor. This new production function implies that the expected marginal
product of a hire will be, when the congestion hire reaches type- k :

                                    Y                                             1/  -1
                                                         -1                  
                          pk                (1 - x )  c
                                                      k nk                c
                                                                          k nk             +x  nc .
                                    nk                                                         k
                                                                  k
                                                                                                nc
                                                                                               pk
                                                                       c
                                                                      pk


Measure of Congestion. We are interested in how fast the marginal product of labor-type k
changes with respect to the mass of employed workers of that particular type. To this end, we use
the elasticity of the marginal product of labor with respect to the mass of workers of type k ,  p k , n k .
                                               nc
    First, we observe that the elasticity of p k  with respect to n k is zero,  p k
                                                                                  nc , n
                                                                                         k
                                                                                                      0. Second, we
                                c
calculate the elasticity of    pk   with respect to n k

                                                                                   1/ -1
                                                           -1                 
                                                  c
                                                 pk     c
                                                        k nk               c
                                                                           k nk
                                                                      k
                                                         pk
                                                          c
                                                            nk
                                          pk
                                           c ,n
                                                k
                                                         nk pk
                                                             c

                                                                            c n
                                                                            k k
                                                        ( - 1) 1 -                     .
                                                                            k   c n
                                                                                k k


Third, we use the property that if z             x + y , then the following identity holds for the elasticity of z :

                                                         x       y
                                             z              x +     y.
                                                        x+y     x+y

Fourth, using this identity and the fact that  p k
                                                 nc , n
                                                        k
                                                                  0, we derive our desired elasticity of marginal


                                                             85
product with respect to worker mass:

                                                                                                    1/ -1
                                               c n             (1 - x )  c n -1
                                                                         k k             k   c n
                                                                                             k k
                                               k k
                    pk ,nk   (  - 1) 1 -                                                                             .
                                                   c n                                           1/ -1
                                                                       n -1             c 
                                               k   k k    (1 -   x ) c
                                                                     k k              k k nk             +   x  nc
                                                                                                                k

                                                         c                              nc
The Iso-congestion Curve. Our calibration ensures that p k                             pk        1 for all k , therefore the last
term above simplifies to the share of no-congestion workers 1 - x . Our congestion measure then
becomes

                                                                              c n
                                                                              k k
                                      pk ,nk       (1 - x )( - 1) 1 -                        .                                (A18)
                                                                              k   c n
                                                                                  k k

                                           1/ -1
              c
Further, as p k         c n -1
                        k k      k   c n
                                     k k
                                                       1 for all k , we have  c n -1
                                                                              k k
                                                                                                   c n -1 . This implies that
                                                                                                   l l
                                                                                                                              c n
  n         n -1 n k . Summing over k , we get                 n        n  N /n l . Then we obtain s l
                                                                                                                         nl
c         c                                              k   c        c                                                  N     
                                                                                                                               l l
                                                                                                                                 c .
k k       l l                                                k k      l l                                                     k k nk
Using this result in the elasticity expression above, we finally arrive at

                                           pk ,nk      (1 - x )( - 1)(1 - s k ).                                              (A19)

To trace out the iso-congestion curve for k                  1, we solve for  as a function of x given a level of
elasticity  p1 , n1 .

                                                                    p1 , n1
                                               (x )    1+                         .                                           (A20)
                                                             (1 - x )(1 - s 1 )

The employment distribution over worker types is characterized by the job finding and separation
rates, and the associated laws of motion for employment. Given our calibration strategy (i.e.,
ensuring p k       1 for all k ), employment share of k            1 workers, s 1 , then stays constant for different
levels of the congestion parameter  .
    Figure A16 Panel (a) plots the iso-congestion curve derived in Equation (A20) starting from our
baseline calibration of x        0 and             0.241. The figure makes clear that, as there is more weight
on no-congestion workers in final good production,  needs to be adjusted downward to maintain
the same level of congestion as in our baseline calibration. In fact, if                                 0.241 is held constant,
higher levels of x lead to smaller congestion in production.
    Panel (b) superimposes the iso-congestion curve we present in the main text based on the
solution to the full dynamic model and on matching the IRF of labor market tightness to the
separation rate shock in Figure 9 Panel (a). The figure reveals that, strikingly, the iso-congestion
curve we derive analytically overlaps with the one implied by our calibrated model almost perfectly.




                                                              86
                                       Figure A16: Iso-congestion Curves
          (a) The Analytical Iso-congestion Curve                     (b) Iso-congestion: Analytical vs. Model




Notes: Panel (a) plots the analytical iso-congestion curve as a function the share of no-congestion workers in production,
x . It also includes the level of congestion as a function of x , as well as the constant level maintained along the iso-
congestion curve. Panel (b) compares the analytical iso-congestion curve to the one we obtain solving our dynamic
congestion model by matching the IRF of labor market tightness to the separation rate shock in Figure 9 Panel (a).




                                                           87
L    Alternative Mechanism: Convex Hiring Costs
Our baseline congestion model obtains congestion in hiring through diminishing returns in the
production function. An alternative mechanism of congestion works through a countercyclical
hiring cost besides the standard DMP vacancy maintenance costs, where, for our purposes, the cost
is increasing in UE flows rather than in total hiring:
                                                                         c2
                                                                 UE t
                                           c (UE t )   c1 ·                   -1 .                                   (A21)
                                                                 UE ss

This cost is zero in steady state; outside of steady state, hiring costs increase in UE flows ( c1 , c 2 > 0).
    The only difference from the standard DMP model is in the free-entry, zero-profit condition,
which becomes
                                       
                                          + c (UE t +1 )      E t (1 -  t +1 ) Jt +1 .                               (A22)
                                       qt
In turn, we remove worker heterogeneity (essentially setting                         1 and setting the  k 's to one to
yield homogeneous marginal products). Hence, the hiring cost is the only source of congestion,
and parameter c2 guides its degree. We normalize c 1                     1.
    The model provides a promising avenue for generating countercyclical congestion by raising
the costs of hiring during recessions, when UE flows are high.
    As with the production-function based congestion parameter  , we now set c2 such that
the model minimizes the RMSE of the response of labor market tightness to separation shocks.
Figure A17 shows that the fit of this model is excellent too, closely mirroring the IRF of our main
specification in Figure 9. The estimated level of c2 is 1.2.
    The results are presented in Table A10. The model with convex hiring costs can indeed replicate
well the volatility of labor market variables. The model also features a robustly negative Beveridge
curve and countercyclical UE flows.
    Moreover, the model based on convex hiring costs--as our production-based congestion
model--is also reasonably sensitive to changes in labor market policies. The elasticity of unem-
ployment with respect to changes in unemployment benefits is 2.59 as is our baseline, production-
based congestion model, as it does not rely on a low fundamental surplus to explain labor market
volatility. We note that, naturally, the model with convex hiring costs would not generate cyclical
displacement costs that are persistent, for lack of cohort effects.




    Pissarides (2009); Silva and Toledo (2013) add a fixed costs of hiring, but it is not increasing in the amount of hires.


                                                              88
         Figure A17: Impulse Responses to a Separation Shock: Convex Hiring Cost Model
                    (a) Market Tightness                                          (b) Unemployment




Notes: The figure plots the impulse response functions of market tightness and unemployment to a unit standard
deviation separation shock in the data, and the models of congestion through the production function and the convex
hiring cost.




                    Table A10: Business Cycle Properties: Convex Hiring Cost Model

                                    ALP           f                      u           v                   UE/E
        Standard deviation          0.010       0.061       0.118      0.129       0.096      0.219      0.067
        Autocorrelation             0.691       0.855       0.536      0.845       0.856      0.855      0.840
        Correlation matrix
        ALP                          1
        f                          0.505          1
                                   -0.410      -0.726        1
        u                          -0.474      -0.984      0.748         1
        v                          0.518        0.967      -0.656     -0.907        1
                                   0.505        1.000      -0.726     -0.984      0.967        1
        UE/E                       -0.346      -0.873      0.316       0.858      -0.846     -0.873         1
Notes: ALP, f , , u ,  and UE /E indicate, respectively, average labor productivity, the job finding rate, separation rate,
unemployment rate, labor market tightness and share of new hires in employment, for the model with convex hiring
costs. All variables have been logged and the empirical cyclical components have been extracted using the HP-filter
with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




                                                            89
M      Historical Decomposition: Additional Material
The main text shows how congestion-only unemployment contributed to the evolution of overall
unemployment. In this Appendix, we provide the same exercise also for TFP- and separation-
driven unemployment. The estimated time paths of key labor market variables are presented in
Figure A18.
    The spirit of the decomposition exercise is exactly the same as in the main text and we specify
the method below. In particular, we construct counterfactual unemployment rates generated by
TFP shocks only ,u z , which would arise in the TFP-shock-only models such as in Shimer (2005);
Hall (2005b); Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) and generated by separation shocks only, u  . The
corresponding equations that characterize these counterfactuals are, for u z ,

                      +1 (1 - f ( t )) u t +  (1 - u t ) ,              q ( tz ) Et (1 -  )S1
                    z             z      z           z                                      z
                   ut                                                                         ,t
                                                                                                                   (A23)
                     z
                    Sk ,t      z t - b + Et (1 -  )S k
                                                     z
                                                       +1, t +1 -  Et (1 -  ) f ( t )  S1, t +1 for all k ,
                                                                                  z     z



and, respectively, for u  ,

                                                       
                ut +1 (1 - f ( t )) u t +  t +1 (1 - u t ) ,             q ( t ) Et (1 -  t +1 )S1
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                   ,t
                                                      
                                                                                                                   (A24)
                 Sk ,t
                            z - b +  Et (1 -  t +1 )S k +1, t +1
                                                                 - Et (1 -  t +1 ) f ( t ) S1
                                                                                            
                                                                                              , t +1 for all k .

Figure A19 plots the associated time series of these counterfactual unemployment rates together
with actual unemployment. Table A11 provides a set of business cycle statistics related to overall
unemployment and the three counterfactuals.

Volatility. Table A11 quantifies the role of congestion-driven unemployment in US business
cycles, reporting summary statistics of the actual and congestion-only unemployment rates. The
congestion-only time series accounts for approximately 30% of the historical unemployment rate
fluctuations in the United States. Its standard deviation is around 40% of the empirical one.

Persistence and Internal Propagation. Congestion-driven unemployment is considerably more
persistent than both TFP- and separation-driven unemployment. Its autocorrelation is 0.950,
compared to 0.865 for TFP-driven and 0.825 for separation-driven unemployment rates. This
additional persistence arises from the internal propagation mechanisms laid out in Section 5.6.




    As discussed in Section 5.3, our model matches UE flows by estimating a somewhat more volatile separation
rate process. In Table A11, this property leads to the model exaggerating the share of unemployment fluctuations
due to separation shocks. See Fujita and Ramey (2009) and Shimer (2012) for the empirical contributions of the two
transition rates to unemployment fluctuations in the US. A more realistic separation rate process will likely reduce the
performance of the model in explaining overall unemployment fluctuations while leaving the contribution of congestion,
which manifest itself on the hiring margin, unaffected, as long as that model generates realistic fluctuations in UE flows.


                                                                90
                           Figure A18: Time Paths of Labor Market Variables
                        (a) ALP                                                 (b) UE Share




                 (c) Job Separation Rate                                    (d) Job Finding Rate




                   (e) Unemployment                                             (f) Vacancies




Notes: The figure plots the estimated time paths of labor market variables using the Kalman Filter. Time series are
logged and HP-filtered using a smoothing parameter of 1,600.




                                                        91
                                  Figure A19: Unemployment Components
                      (a) Separations                                            (b) TFP Fluctuations




Notes: The figure plots actual, and counterfactual unemployment rates u z and u  estimated using data on the cyclical
components of average labor productivity and new hires as a share of employment. The counterfactual unemployment
time series are based on Equations (A23) and (A24).




       Table A11: Historical Decomposition of Unemployment: Model and Counterfactuals

                                              Baseline      Congestion only         z only     only
                 Standard deviation            0.124            0.050               0.004     0.088
                 Contribution to total           1              0.297               0.008     0.657
                 AR(1)                         0.905            0.950               0.865     0.825
                 corr( x , y )
                 Actual                           1
                 Congestion only                0.729               1
                 z only                         0.274             -0.264              1
                  only                          0.920             0.411             0.464         1
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the unemployment rate time series generated using our model (which
closely tracks the actual unemployment rate), and the counterfactuals from TFP shocks only, separation shocks only,
and congestion only. "Contribution to total" shows cov( ubase. , ucf. )/var( ubase. ), where ubase. is unemployment in our
baseline model, while u cf. is the respective counterfactual unemployment rate.




                                                           92
