                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CIP DEVIATIONS, THE DOLLAR, AND FRICTIONS IN
                         INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MARKETS

                                          Wenxin Du
                                         Jesse Schreger

                                      Working Paper 28777
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28777


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




This paper has been prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, Volume V, edited by
Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff. We thank Angus Lewis and Ritt Keerati
for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to Gita Gopinath, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, Ken Rogoff, Adrien Verdelhan, and Pierre Yared for comments.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Wenxin Du and Jesse Schreger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
CIP Deviations, the Dollar, and Frictions in International Capital Markets
Wenxin Du and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 28777
May 2021
JEL No. E0,F0,G0

                                          ABSTRACT

The covered interest rate parity (CIP) condition is a fundamental arbitrage relationship in
international finance. In this chapter, we review its breakdown during the Global Financial Crisis
and its continued failure in the subsequent decade. We review how to measure CIP deviations,
discuss the drivers of CIP deviations, and the implications of CIP deviations for global financial
markets.


Wenxin Du
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu

Jesse Schreger
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 821
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jesse.schreger@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

The dollar is the predominant currency in international financial transactions. While the
United States accounts for about 15% of world trade and 25% of global GDP, the U.S.
dollar accounts for about 50% of cross-border loans and international debt securities, 90%
of all foreign exchange (FX) transactions, 60% of official FX reserve holdings, and 50% of
trade invoicing (Bank for International Settlements (2020), Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger
(2020) and Gopinath and Stein (2018)). The outsized role of the U.S. dollar creates unique
challenges for global financial markets.
    In particular, the global market for dollar funding is highly fragmented. Many market
participants in need of dollars lack access to direct dollar funding from dollar-rich lenders,
such as retail and corporate depositors, U.S. money market funds (MMFs), and central
bank reserve managers. As a result, financial intermediaries (i.e. large global banks) play a
particularly crucial role channeling the global supply of dollars to accommodate the strong
demand for dollars. Since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), balance sheet constraints facing
financial intermediaries have tightened considerably, in part due to regulatory reforms on
the banking sector. The most salient manifestation of these constraints is the breakdown of
the covered interest rate parity (CIP) condition.
    CIP is a well-known textbook no-arbitrage condition, which requires that the dollar
interest rate in the cash market (the interest rate a borrower pays when directly borrowing
dollars) to be equal to the implied dollar interest rate in the foreign exchange (FX) swap
market (borrowing dollars by first borrowing in foreign currency and swapping this foreign
funding for dollars). With frictionless markets, if CIP did not hold, an arbitrageur could
borrow at the lower rate, lend at the higher rate and earn a sure profit without taking any
risk. The incentive to arbitrage away any deviations from these equations would eliminate



                                              1
the gap between the two rates, enforcing the CIP condition.
       The canonical one-period representation of the CIP condition is given by


                                         $            i           St
                                    1 + yt,t+1 = 1 + yt,t+1              ,
                                                                Ft,t+1

       $                                                        i
where yt,t +1 is the one-period U.S. interest rate in dollars, yt,t+1 is the one-period interest

rate in currency i, and St and Ft,t+1 are the spot exchange rates and the one-period outright
exchange rate defined in units of foreign currency per dollar. Alternatively, CIP can be
written in the log-form,
                                                     i        $
                                      ft,t+1 - st = yt,t+1 - yt,t+1 ,


with st and ft,t+1 being equivalent being the log spot and forward exchange rate. In other
words, the forward premium, ft,t+1 - st , should be equal to the interest rate differential
between the two currencies. Prior to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), this was indeed
the case, and CIP held nearly exactly in interbank markets.2 The situation has changed
dramatically since the GFC. Significant CIP deviations opened up during the peak of the
GFC and never went away.
       Deviations from CIP represent a major change in global capital markets and the macroe-
conomy. The breakdown of a key arbitrage relationship in FX markets points to the im-
portance of financial intermediary constraints in the determination of asset prices and the
international transmission of shocks.3 With major global borrowers dependent on dollar
funding, CIP deviations significantly affect the cost of borrowing around the world. In addi-
tion, CIP deviations raise a host of important questions about the consequences of post-crisis
regulations that caused the emergence and persistence of arbitrage opportunities.
       As in Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a), we measure deviations from CIP using the
   2
     Akram, Rime and Sarno (2008) show that short-lived CIP deviations (from 30 seconds to 40 minutes)
were documented, but generally dissipated very quickly, consistent with the efficient market hypothesis. See
Levich (2017) for a survey on CIP deviations then and now.
   3
     International macroeconomic models with financial frictions are surveyed in Maggiori (2021) in this
volume.



                                                     2
cross-currency basis, the difference between the dollar interest rate in the cash market and
the implied dollar rate (sometimes referred to as the synthetic dollar interest rate) in the FX
swap market. If CIP held, then the cross-currency basis would be equal to zero. In reality,
the failure of the CIP condition has become the new normal. In general, the cross-currency
basis is negative, suggesting the synthetic dollar interest rate in the FX swap market is higher
than the direct dollar interest rate. The basis is highly correlated with the nominal interest
rates across currencies and co-moves with global risk factors.
   In terms of the drivers of CIP deviations, we begin by exploring how post-crisis financial
regulations reduced the supply of dollar funding and hedging services from financial inter-
mediaries by increasing their balance sheet costs. Non-risk-weighted capital requirements,
in the form of the leverage ratio requirement, mandate banks to maintain capital against
all assets, regardless of their risk characteristics, and thereby restrict the ability of banks to
engage in traditional CIP arbitrage (Duffie (2017)). In particular, the traditional "matched-
book" CIP arbitrage requires large banks to borrow dollars in the cash market and lend
dollars in the FX swap market. Even though the position is riskless, it still expands the size
of bank balance sheet and therefore increases the bank's leverage ratio potentially generat-
ing a binding leverage constraint. Binding leverage constraints are also consistent with the
existence of a host of other near-arbitrages in the fixed-income market. Beyond the lever-
age ratio requirement, banks also face additional balance sheet constraints when deploying
their existing excess reserves at the Fed to support dollar lending in the FX swap market.
These explanations based on the bank balance sheet constraints as a result of the post-crisis
regulatory reform differ from the traditional explanations for the failure of the law of one
price, including transaction costs, counterparty risk, convergence risk, margin constraints,
liquidity, information, and sentiment, such as in Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Garleanu and
Pedersen (2011) and Pasquariello (2014).
   We next turn to exploring the demand for dollar funding post-crisis. Due to the dollar's
reserve currency status and ultra-low interest rates in Europe and Japan post-GFC, the


                                                3
demand for dollar funding to fund or hedge dollar-denominated assets remained robust,
especially among non-U.S. based market participants. We discuss three main types of clients
willing to pay fees to financial intermediaries in the form of the cross-currency basis to obtain
dollar funding and hedging services in the FX swap market. First, non-U.S. banks that do
not belong to the top-tier of global banks often have difficulty tapping into the direct dollar
funding markets or can only do so at a considerably higher cost. Meanwhile, they have
access to insured deposits in local currency and thus often choose to raise dollar funding
in the FX swap market to finance their dollar-denominated assets (Borio et al. (2016),
Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein (2015), IMF (2019)). Second, institutional investors outside
the U.S., such as pensions, insurances and mutual funds, have local currency liabilities and
yet choose to invest a significant fraction of their portfolios in dollar-denominated assets. An
FX swap arrangement allows them to fund their dollar portfolios and hedge the corresponding
currency risk. Finally, non-financial corporates that borrow in multiple currencies may face
asymmetric funding costs relative to the local risk-free benchmark because bond markets are
segmented by currency (Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger (2020)), and therefore may choose
to use the cross-currency swap market to minimize their funding costs (Liao (2020)). We
then discuss how central bank swap lines can be used to alleviate funding pressures from
various market participants.
   Beyond the CIP deviations for benchmark bank rates, we then review what CIP devi-
ations between government bond yields can teach us about sovereign default risk, market
segmentation, and convenience yields. Unlike CIP deviations in funding markets, CIP devi-
ations in the government bond market do not necessarily represent an arbitrage opportunity
for global banks. A higher synthetic dollar yield on foreign government bonds than the U.S.
Treasury yield could capture the perceived relative default risk on the foreign government
bonds (Du and Schreger (2016)). Even in the absence of a default risk, CIP may still fail
between two government bonds (even if it holds for benchmark bank rates) when investors
value the safety and liquidity of one country's bonds more than another, thus driving a


                                               4
pricing wedge between the two bonds referred to as the "convenience yield" (Du, Im and
Schreger (2018b), Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018)).
    Finally, we discuss the new and growing literature on the implications of CIP deviations
for exchange rate determination. We review the recent literature regarding the co-movement
of the dollar with Libor (Avdjiev et al. (2019)) and government bond CIP deviations (Jiang,
Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018) and Engel and Wu (2018)).
    The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses CIP measurements,
Section 3 presents some stylized facts about CIP deviations, Section 4 discusses the role of
bank balance sheet constraints in the supply of dollar funding, Section 5 discusses the de-
mand for dollar funding, Section 6 discusses government bond CIP deviations, and Section 7
discusses the relationship between CIP and exchange rate determination. Section 8 discusses
open research questions, and Section 9 concludes.



2     CIP: Background, Definition and Measurement

Covered interest rate parity is a no-arbitrage condition that requires the dollar interest
rate in the cash market to be equal to the implied dollar interest rate from the FX swap
market. Borrowing in the FX swap market means borrowing in foreign currency and then
simultaneously entering into an FX swap arrangement to borrow dollars in exchange for
foreign currency today and to pay back dollars in exchange for foreign currency at maturity.
We first provide a formal definition of the CIP condition and discuss a few measurement
issues.


2.1       CIP Deviation: A Wedge Between Dollar Interest Rates in

          Two Funding Markets

Figure 1 shows the cash flow diagram of two types of dollar borrowing. The first type of
funding involves the cash market where the borrower directly borrows dollars from a bank


                                             5
(e.g. JP Morgan) at the inception of the trade, and repays the principal plus interest at
maturity. The loan is unsecured unless the lender requires collateral from the borrower. The
most common secured short-term borrowing is a repurchase (repo) contract, against U.S.
Treasury bonds as collateral.
       In the second type of funding, instead of borrowing dollars directly, the borrower obtains
dollar funding in the FX swap market. The borrower first borrows in foreign currency (e.g.
Japanese yen), then exchanges yen for dollars with JP Morgan at the spot exchange rate.
Simultaneously, the borrower enters into a FX forward contract with the bank to agree on
a forward exchange rate to sell dollars at maturity.4 At maturity, the borrower fulfills the
promise of the forward contract by selling dollars in exchange for yen at the pre-determined
exchange rate, and repays the yen principal and interest. Therefore, the FX swap market
offers an alternative way to borrow/lend dollars, completely free from exchange rate risk.
       The CIP condition requires that the dollar interest rate in the cash market is equal to
the synthetic dollar interest rate implied by the FX swap market. In order to understand
why CIP fails post-GFC, it is important to first understand the fragmentation of the global
dollar funding markets and the important role of financial intermediaries.
       Figure 2 illustrates the core players and their interactions in the short-term dollar funding
markets.5 In particular, large global banks, together with their affiliated repo and FX swap
dealers, are at the center of the global dollar funding chain. They raise dollars from cash-rich
lenders, such as household and corporate depositors and U.S. MMFs, and then direct the
flow of funds to the ultimate dollar borrowers, such other banks, hedge funds, institutional
investors, and corporates. Besides getting financing from private cash-rich lenders, the large
banks can also draw from their own dollar reserves at the Fed, or enter into the FX swap
agreements through central bank FX swap line to support dollar lending to the ultimate
borrowers.6
   4
     JP Morgan can on-lend the yen without credit risk by depositing the yen at the Bank of Japan's deposit
facility, or lending it in the Japanese repo market, collateralized by Japanese government bonds.
   5
     Afonso, Ravazzolo and Zori (2019) provides a more detailed mapping of short-term dollar funding flows.
   6
     The diagram focuses on short-term dollar funding. Market participants can rely on capital markets for


                                                    6
    Importantly, Figure 2 demonstrates market segmentation in the sense that many ultimate
dollar borrowers have difficulty borrowing directly from cash-rich lenders. Large banks act
as the indispensable bridge between the two sides. Large banks borrow dollars from the
cash-rich lenders at a lower rate and proceed to lend those funds to the ultimate borrowers
at a higher rate. The spread between large banks' borrowing rate and lending rate represents
an intermediation fee that banks charge in order to provide dollar intermediation services.
The CIP deviation is one type of dollar intermediation fee large global banks charge to
borrow dollars in the cash market and lend dollars in the FX swap market. As banks face
increasing balance sheet constraints that limit their intermediation ability, they seek a higher
intermediation fee to compensate for using up precious balance sheet space.


2.2     Definition of the Cross-Currency Basis

We now formally define the CIP condition. The multi-period version of the CIP condition
is given by
                                                                              i/$
                                         $        n             i       n   St
                                 (1 +   yt,t +n )     = (1 +   yt,t +n )     i/$
                                                                                     ,
                                                                            Ft,t+n
       $                                                                   i
where yt,t +n denotes the n-year dollar interest rate in the cash market, yt,t+n denotes n-year
                                 i/$
interest rate in currency i, St        denotes the spot exchange rate between the dollar and the
                                                                                         i/$
foreign currency i (defined as units of foreign currency per dollar), and Ft,t+n denotes the
outright forward exchange at time t + n, which is locked in at t. The left hand-side of the
CIP condition gives the cost of borrowing dollars in the cash market, and the right hand-
side gives the total cost of borrowing dollars in the FX swap market by borrowing in foreign
currency i and swapping for dollars.
    When the CIP does not hold, we follow the market convention by placing a wedge on
the right-hand-side of the equation. We define the n-year cross-currency basis, or the CIP
long-term dollar funding, which is not necessarily intermediated by banks.




                                                         7
deviation, as xt,t+n in the formula:

                                                                            i/$
                                  $      n        i               i/$
                                                                   n       St
                            (1 + yt,t+n ) = (1 + yt,t+n + xt,t+n )          i/$
                                                                                   .
                                                                          Ft,t+n

Therefore, in log terms, we have that the cross-currency basis is equal to the difference
between the direct dollar rate from the cash market and the synthetic dollar interest from
the FX swap market:


                      i/$               $                         i          i/$
                    xt,t+n =           yt,t+n            -       yt,t+n - t,t+n           ,         (1)
                               Cash Market Dollar Rate       FX Swap Market Dollar Rate


        i/$           i/$            i/$
where t,t+n = [log(Ft,t+n ) - log(St )]/n is the annualized forward premium of selling foreign
                                                                                              i/$
currency i in exchange for the U.S. dollar. A negative cross-currency basis (xt,t+n < 0) means
that the direct dollar interest rate is lower than the the synthetic dollar interest in the FX
                                                                i/$
swap market, and a positive cross-currency basis (xt,t+n > 0) means that the direct dollar
rate is higher than the synthetic rate.
    As we can see in equation 1, the crucial step in calculating the CIP deviation is to
measure the annualized forward premium, . Conceptually, we can obtain  by annualizing
the log difference between the outright forward and current spot exchanges. In practice, this
requires closely following FX market conventions. We describe the details of FX forward
premium calculation in Appendix A.



3     CIP Deviations for Benchmark Bank Rates

In this section, we present several stylized facts about CIP deviations for benchmark bank
rates. The most commonly used bank rate to test CIP is the Interbank Offered Rate (IBOR),
which was used as a proxy for the risk-free rate prior to the GFC.




                                                    8
3.1       Pre-GFC and Post-GFC Dichotomy

Panel A of Figure 3 shows the three-month IBOR cross-currency bases. We can see that
CIP deviations were close to zero before the GFC, increased significantly during the GFC,
and then remained elevated post-GFC. Panel B shows the bases at the 5-year maturity. The
pre- and post-GFC dichotomy is even more stark for the 5-year cross-currency basis.
      The first thing to observe is that CIP held remarkably well prior to the GFC. Shortly after
the collapse of the Bretton Woods System, there were large interest rate differentials between
onshore-offshore markets (Rogoff (1985)). Frenkel and Levich (1975, 1977) confirm that CIP
held exceedingly well among currency pairs in the offshore market. Popper (1993) reaches a
similar conclusion for long-term rates based on cross-currency swaps. Obstfeld (1993) and
Levich (2017) survey this literature examining interest rate differentials and connecting it to
international capital mobility.
      During the peak of GFC, the CIP condition broke down, but significant CIP deviation
remained post-GFC, even under tranquil financial market conditions. Table 1 reports the
mean and standard deviation of Libor-based CIP deviations for the G10 currencies since
2008. It reports these moments for the full sample and for the subset of crisis times.7 It is
important to note that the IBOR cross-currency basis vis-`
                                                         a-vis the dollar is largely negative
for most G10 currencies, with the exception of the Australian dollar (AUD) and the New
Zealand dollar (NZD). A negative cross-currency basis means that the direct dollar interest
rate from the cash market is lower than the synthetic dollar interest rate. With a negative
basis, banks would earn a profit by borrowing dollars in the cash market and lending in the
FX swap market.
      IBOR rates are imperfect benchmarks for the risk-free rate due to their indicative and
unsecured nature. However, CIP deviations exist beyond IBOR. Figure 4 shows that the
CIP deviations remain, and even become larger on average, if we use Overnight Index Swap
(OIS) rates or repo rates. The OIS rates are indexed to overnight unsecured rate, involving
  7
      Augustin, Chernov, Schmid and Song (2021) analyze the term structure of CIP deviations in detail.


                                                     9
little credit risk. The repo rates used in the figure are collateralized with government bonds
and are free from credit risk.8


3.2       Correlation with Nominal Interest Rates

There is a strong correlation between the CIP and the level of interest rates in the cross-
section. As shown in Figure 5, high-interest-rate currencies, such as the Australian dollar
(AUD) and the New Zealand dollar (NZD), tend to have positive cross-currency bases, which
implies that the synthetic dollar interest in the FX swap market is lower than the direct dollar
interest rate. Conversely, low-interest-rate currencies, such as the euro (EUR) and the Swiss
franc (CHF), have very negative cross-currency bases, or higher synthetic dollar interest
rates than the direct dollar interest rates. The cross-sectional correlation between the cross-
currency basis and the nominal interest rate level is 90% since 2008. We defer the discussion
of why the cross-currency basis is correlated with the nominal interest rate to Section 5.2
after we introduce main drivers of CIP deviations.
       Furthermore, we note that the direction of the CIP arbitrage is the exact opposite of the
classical unhedged FX carry trade, also known as the uncovered interest rate (UIP) trade.
To arbitrage CIP deviations, an investor should go long in the low-interest-rate currencies
and short in the U.S. dollar, or short in the high-interest-rate currencies such as the AUD
and NZD, while fully hedging against the foreign currency risk. For example, the average
three-month dollar-yen cross-currency basis is negative 25 basis points post-GFC. To collect
this arbitrage profit, the arbitrageur should borrow dollars directly in the cash market for
three months, exchange dollars for yen at the spot exchange rate today, and invest in yen
for three months. Meanwhile, the investor sells yen forward against dollars to hedge the FX
risk using a three-month FX forward contract. In contrast, in a classical unhedged FX carry
   8
    To address the concern that these benchmark interest rates do not represent the true transaction rates,
Anderson, Du and Schlusche (2019) use banks' actual funding rates from the unsecured wholesale funding
markets through the issuance of certificates of deposits and commercial paper, and show that more than 95%
of this funding is raised at a cost below the implied dollar funding rate from the dollar-yen swap market by
top-tier global banks.



                                                    10
trade (such as in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2011) and
Hassan and Mano (2019)), an investor goes long in high-interest-rate currencies and short
in low-interest-rate currencies, without hedging the FX risk.
   To compare profits between the CIP and UIP trades, the average annualized profit on
an unlevered three-month CIP arbitrage earns about 20 basis points, whereas the UIP trade
earns an average annualized return of about 5%. However, the key difference is that the CIP
arbitrage profits are known ex-ante and involve no risk, and therefore, the Sharpe ratio of
CIP arbitrage is essentially infinite. In contrast, the UIP trade has an considerable amount
of risk, especially during bad times, and has a Sharpe ratio equal to 0.54 based on data
from 1994 to 2010 (Hassan and Mano (2019)). The small, but sure profits of CIP arbitrage
underscores the importance of using leverage to scale up the return to an attractive level.


3.3    Co-Movement with Global Risk Factors

CIP deviations have a strong factor structure. We perform a principal component analysis
on the quarterly changes in the five-year cross-currency basis of G10 currencies vis-`
                                                                                     a-vis the
dollar between 2008Q1 to 2020Q3, and find that the first principal component (PC) explains
51% of the total quarterly variation in the bases. This implies that much of the overall
movement in deviations from CIP is driven by common changes in funding conditions, with
the various currencies loading heterogeneously on this common variation.
   Table 2 displays cross-correlation between the first PC of the five-year basis and other risk
factors. First, we see that the first PC is effectively a "level" factor, as it is 96% correlated
with the quarterly changes in the average cross-currency basis across all G10 currencies.
Furthermore, the cross-currency basis becomes more negative, which corresponds to higher
dollar funding costs in the FX swap market, and generally larger CIP deviations in "bad
times" when the global financial conditions are tighter. During these bad times, we generally
have a strong broad dollar (Avdjiev et al. (2019)), high VIX, a wide BBB-Treasury spread,
low returns on the S&P index, and negative shocks to the intermediary capital ratio in He,


                                               11
Kelly and Manela (2017).
    The co-movement between CIP deviations and the global risk factors suggests that the
cross-currency basis is also an important barometer of leverage and risk-taking in the global
capital markets, highlighting the importance of intermediary constraints (He and Krishna-
murthy (2013, 2018)). Larger CIP deviations could reflect a combination of lower supply of
dollar funding by financial intermediaries and higher demand for dollar funding by ultimate
dollar borrowers, which we will examine in great detail in the next two sections.



4     CIP Deviations and Bank Balance Sheet Constraints

4.1    Supply and Demand Drivers of CIP Deviations

Why has CIP failed for benchmark interest rates ever since the GFC? To better understand
the drivers of CIP deviations, Figure 6 presents a set of supply and demand diagrams for
dollar funding in the FX swap market. We have the CIP deviations for bank dollar funding
rates plotted on the vertical axis, and the quantity of dollar funding (and hedging services)
demanded in the FX swap market plotted on the horizontal axis. Prior to the GFC, the
supply of dollar funding and hedging in the FX swap market was perfectly elastic at the
point where CIP holds. A flat supply curve at a cross-currency basis of zero prior to the
GFC reflects the fact that there was no cost for financial intermediaries to supply dollars
in the FX swap market regardless of the quantity demanded. If the CIP deviations were
non-zero, the FX swap market maker would borrow dollars at the lower rate and lend dollars
at the higher rate in the absence of balance sheet constraints. The force of arbitrage would
enforce the CIP condition, regardless of fluctuations in demand for dollar funding.
    In the wake of the 2008 crisis, large banks faced increased balance sheet constraints.
Therefore, the supply curve for dollar funding became upward sloping, as it became increas-
ingly costly for banks to provide larger quantities of dollar funding and hedging services
in the FX swap market. The high balance sheet costs of providing dollar liquidity in the


                                             12
FX swap market became a key driver of the persistence of CIP deviations in the post-GFC
period. In other words, banks now need to be compensated with a higher CIP deviation in
order to be willing to increase their supply of dollar funding in the FX swap market. With
an upward sloping supply curve, shifts in the demand for dollar funding (and hedging) can
also cause fluctuations in the equilibrium CIP deviation.
   In the rest of this section, we focus on the supply-side drivers of CIP deviations by
describing the specific balance sheet constraints facing the financial intermediaries. In Section
5, we will discuss the demand-side factors.


4.2    Non-Risk-Weighted Capital Requirements

The non-risk-weighted capital requirement, i.e. the leverage ratio requirement, is viewed as
the pivotal regulatory constraint for short-term arbitrage as it limits the size of positions
that can be taken by global banks (for example, Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a), Duffie
(2017), and Boyarchenko et al. (2020)).
   Prior to Basel III, the key capital regulation facing large global banks took the form of the
risk-weighted-capital requirement, under which banks were required to maintain sufficient
capital against risk-weighted assets. Since short-term CIP arbitrage position has little mark-
to-market risk, it has very little risk-weighted capital charge. Under Basel III, in addition
to the risk-weighted capital requirement, the leverage ratio requirement mandates global
banks to also maintain at least sufficient capital against all assets regardless of their risk
characteristics. In particular, the Basel III leverage ratio rule requires that

                                              Tier 1 Capital
                          Leverage Ratio =                    3%,
                                              Total Exposure

where "Tier 1 capital" includes equity and retained earnings and "Total Exposure" includes
all assets, derivatives exposure, and certain off-balance-sheet positions.
   A more binding leverage ratio requirement under Basel III can explain the persistence


                                               13
of CIP deviations and other bank-intermediated arbitrages that rely on bank balance sheet
sheet space. Non-U.S. banks did not face the leverage ratio requirement prior to Basel III.
For U.S. banks, the supplementary leverage ratio requirement increased the leverage ratio
requirement from 3%, prior to Basel III, to the current level of 5-6% for U.S. banks, making
the leverage ratio requirement more binding. The canonical CIP arbitrage requires borrowing
dollars in the cash market and lending dollars in the FX swap market, which expands the
size of the bank balance sheet and tightens the leverage ratio requirement. In Figure 6, these
non-risk weighted capital requirements transform the dollar funding supply curve from being
flat to upward sloping, as the lenders (global banks) now need to be compensated for using
up limited space on their balance sheets.
       In addition to the leverage ratio requirement, large global banks also face an additional
capital surcharge for being global systemically important banks (GSIBs). The GSIB capital
surcharge takes five components, including size, inter-connectedness, substitutability (share
of wholesale funding in the U.S. implementation), complexity, and cross-jurisdictional ac-
tivities. A plain-vanilla CIP arbitrage position, where the cash leg is funded by borrowing
dollars in the U.S. wholesale funding market (e.g. repos, commercial paper, or certificates
of deposit), and the FX swap lending leg is done with respect to a non-U.S. counterparty in
Europe or in Japan, increases every single dimension of the GSIB surcharge score.
       The large CIP deviations on quarter-ends and year-ends offer a clean illustration of the
impact of the leverage constraint and the GSIB surcharge on short-term CIP deviations. In
most non-U.S. jurisdictions, the Basel III leverage ratio is calculated based on the quarter-
end snapshot of bank balance sheets. In addition, the GSIB-surcharge score is calculated on
the year-end snapshot of bank balance sheets in almost all jurisdictions.9 As a result, many
large non-U.S. banks shed balance-sheet intensive dollar intermediation and CIP arbitrage
positions on quarter-ends in order to report a better leverage ratio. Therefore, CIP arbitrage
   9
    For U.S. banks, the leverage ratio is calculated using daily average assets within the quarter, and two
sub-components of the GSIB score (size, wholesale funding) are also calculated based on the average daily
balance sheets.



                                                    14
positions that show up on quarter-end balance sheets are associated with significantly higher
profits to justify the higher shadow cost associated with more scarce quarter-end balance
sheet capacity.
       Figure 7 plots the quarter-end dynamics of short-term CIP deviations for the dollar-yen
basis, updating a figure from Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a). We can see that the one-
week CIP deviations spike exactly one-week before the end of the quarter, stay elevated for
the rest of the quarter, and then normalize after the quarter ends. Similarly, the one-month
CIP deviations spike exactly one-month before the end of the quarter, and stay high until
the quarter-ends. Among all the quarter-ends, the year-ends are associated with higher CIP
deviations due to the additional balance sheet constraint associated with the GSIB surcharge
score disclosure in recent years (Cerutti, Obstfeld and Zhou (2019)). The one-week dollar-yen
CIP deviation reached an annualized 860 basis points at the 2017 year-end.
       Table 3 summarizes the size of the quarter and year-end effects for annualized dollar-yen
CIP deviations. The average one-day jump is equal to 148 basis points for the one-week
deviation and 40 basis points for the one-month deviation across all quarter-ends since 2015
as the contracts begin to show up on the quarter-end balance sheet. The year-end effect is
illustrated by a 20 basis point discrete jump on average in the three-month CIP deviation
as the contracts begin to show up on the year-end balance sheet.10
       Cenedese, Corte and Wang (2020) provide further evidence that the leverage ratio re-
quirement affects CIP deviations. They demonstrate that dealers who face a tighter leverage
ratio constraint due to a change in regulation charge their clients a significantly higher in-
termediation fee than the unaffected dealers do. Andersen, Duffie and Song (2019) provide
a very useful framework to analyze why shareholders are not willing to raise capital in order
to exploit the CIP arbitrage. The key insight is that the debt overhang problem dilutes the
benefits of the arbitrage profits on shareholders when banks' funding costs are high.11
  10
     In addition to tighter balance sheet constraints, Wallen (2020) show that the quarter-end spikes in CIP
deviations also in part reflect dealers' market power.
  11
     Duffie (2017) calibrates a simple numerical example for a large U.S. bank to illustrate that the CIP
deviation has to be at least 37 basis points to compensate the shareholders for the dilution effect.


                                                    15
4.3    Constraints on the Composition of Bank Balance Sheets

Since the GFC, large asset purchases by the Federal Reserve created a large amount of excess
reserves for banks. It is even more puzzling to understand why CIP deviations exist in an
environment with high levels of excess dollar liquidity. In particular, why can't large global
banks use their excess reserves at the Fed to support more lending in the FX swap markets?
Correa, Du and Liao (2020) refer to the use of excess reserves to support short-term liquidity
provision as "reserve-draining intermediation". The persistence of CIP deviations despite
large excess reserves point to additional balance sheet considerations beyond the Basel III
regulatory metrics.
   Figure 8 calculates the overnight CIP deviation for central bank deposit rates between the
Fed and other major central banks (Correa, Du and Liao (2020)). Global banks with access
to a deposit facility at the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan (BOJ), and the European
Central Bank (ECB) earn consistently higher returns by depositing their excess reserves at
the BOJ or the ECB on an FX swapped basis than they would by depositing at the Fed,
despite negative central bank deposit rates being offered by the BOJ and the ECB.
   From the perspective of the large global banks, shifting dollar reserves from the Fed
toward "swapped" dollar reserves at the BOJ and the ECB does not worsen a bank's Basel
III leverage ratio, or the liquidity coverage ratio ratio. This is because the change in the
composition of reserves does not increase the size of the bank balance sheet. Furthermore,
all reserves at major central banks are considered high quality liquid assets for the Basel III
liquidity coverage ratio calculation. Therefore, if banks were only constrained by these Basel
III regulatory ratios, then they should increase their demand for the BOJ and ECB deposits
while reducing their deposits at the Fed, shrinking the IOER CIP deviations to zero. A
higher demand for swapped ECB and BOJ reserves effectively leads to more dollar lending
in the FX swap market.
   Banks may prefer to hold dollar reserves, as opposed to holding swapped ECB and
BOJ reserves (and effectively lending dollars in the FX swap market), in part due to addi-


                                              16
tional balance sheet constraints regarding intraday liquidity and the distribution of liquidity
across entities and jurisdictions (Correa, Du and Liao (2020) and Copeland, Duffie and Yang
(2020)). First, reserves at the Fed offer the best intraday dollar liquidity, as they can be used
to settle dollar transactions. A swapped BOJ/ECB deposit only offers overnight liquidity
in dollars, as the dollar is locked by the overnight FX swap, and cannot be used to fulfill
liquidity demand during the day. The intraday liquidity advantage of reserves also showed
up prominently during the repo market turmoil in September 2019.
   Second, a lower reserve level at the Fed and higher reserve levels at the ECB and BOJ
would change the distribution of dollar liquidity across entities and geographies. From the
perspective of the U.S. banks, this is a particular concern given that U.S. banks are required
to maintain a sufficient level of liquidity in entities and jurisdictions for resolution planning
purpose, as part of the Resolution Liquidity Adequacy Positioning (RLAP) rules. RLAP cal-
culations not only take into account localized stresses but also the prospect of local regulators
outside the United States requiring incremental liquidity in their jurisdiction (ring-fencing).
Therefore, more dollar lending in the FX swap market could mean more liquidity trapped
outside the U.S. jurisdictions, which makes the RLAP rules more binding.


4.4    Co-movement with Other Near-Arbitrage Spreads

Given financial intermediaries play a central role in many asset markets, post-crisis regula-
tions should have effects in many asset prices, beyond CIP arbitrages. Most prominently, the
existing literature has documented several important fixed-income near-arbitrage opportu-
nities, including the IOER-Fed Funds arbitrage (Banegas and Tase (2020)), the bond-CDS
basis (Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2019)), the negative swap spread (Jermann (2020), Klin-
gler and Sundaresan (2019)), the Treasury cash-futures basis (Fleckenstein and Longstaff
(2020)), the mortgage dollar rolls (Song and Zhu (2019)), the Refcorp-U.S. Treasury spread
(Longstaff (2004)), and the KfW-German bund spread (Schwarz (2019)). These arbitrage
activities either only emerged post-GFC or have become much larger post-GFC.


                                               17
   Banks play a key role in arbitraging these bases, and therefore, bank balance sheet
constraints should affect all of these near-arbitrages (Boyarchenko et al. (2020)). Du, H´
                                                                                         ebert
and Huber (2019) confirm a strong co-movement in these near-arbitrages, with the first
principal component explaining about 53% of the total variation. In addition, this first
principal component has a 68% correlation with the average Libor CIP deviations for G10
currencies vis-`
               a-vis the dollar (Figure 9).
   Despite the strong comovements with other arbitrage bases, deviations from CIP mea-
sure offshore dollar funding conditions, which can directly affect the demand for dollar-
denominated assets and the currency choice of corporate issuance in a way distinct from the
other asset prices. In Section 5, we will outline how fluctuations in CIP deviations affect
cross-border funding and investment decisions.


4.5    Constraints Facing Non-Bank Market Participants

So far, we have discussed balance sheet constraints facing large global banks engaging in
dollar intermediation activities and earning the CIP deviations. The natural question to ask
is whether non-regulated entities can take over the role of global banks and become large
dollar liquidity providers.
   The FX swap market is very dealer-centric. The bulk of trade in FX swaps is interme-
diated by roughly 15 large dealers that are affiliated with large bank holding companies.
Furthermore, top banks have ready access to wholesale funding markets, which makes them
the most natural arbitrageurs for CIP deviations. Given sticky lending and trading rela-
tionships, there are significant barriers for non-bank-dealers to increase their role in the FX
swap market.
   Furthermore, levered investors such as hedge funds rely on banks to obtain funding for
arbitrage. Therefore, the constraints on the bank balance sheets would spillover to these non-
regulated entities, increasing their funding costs and reducing their ability to participate in
those arbitrage opportunities (Boyarchenko et al. (2020)). Going back to the global dollar


                                              18
funding chain depicted in Figure 2, large banks borrow dollars directly from cash-rich lenders
and levered investors borrow from large banks. The funding cost differential for large banks
and levered investors can be substantial. Taking the repo market as an example, large banks
borrow repos from MMFs in the triparty repo market and then lend to smaller banks in
the General Collateral Funding (GCF) repo market and to hedge funds in the bilateral repo
market. The bilateral repo market is more opaque with less readily available data, but
we know that the spread between the overnight GCF and triparty repo rate is about 10
basis points in normal times, with increases of about 30 basis points on average at quarter-
ends (Copeland, Davis, LeSueur and Martin (2012, 2014); Correa, Du and Liao (2020)). A
significant part of CIP arbitrage profit would be eroded by the higher funding cost.
    As opposed to levered investors, real-money investors with large dollar endowments can
potentially play a bigger role in lending dollars in the FX swap markets. In particular,
foreign exchange reserve managers can increase portfolio yields by swapping yen, euro and
Swiss franc assets into dollars, effectively lending dollars in the FX swap market. For exam-
ple, Debelle (2017) discusses that the Reserve Bank of Australia actively swapped Japanese
government bonds into U.S. dollars, which offered significantly higher returns. The likely
constraints facing real-money investors to scale up their CIP arbitrage position include rather
rigid investment mandates, aversion to benchmark tracking errors, and reluctance to main-
tain large derivatives position. However, systematic studies on these arbitrage activities by
real-money investors do not exist to our knowledge and understanding the precise constraints
non-banks face is an important area for future research.



5     Demand for Dollar Funding and Hedging Services

The persistent CIP deviations reflect not just financial intermediaries' constraints in supply-
ing dollars, but also a steady client demand for dollar funding and hedging services in the
FX swap market. With regulations causing the supply curve for dollar funding to slope up,



                                              19
fluctuations in the demand for dollar funding will now lead to changes in the magnitudes
of CIP deviations (Figure 6). Financial intermediaries are collecting the CIP deviations as
an intermediation fee, but who is paying them this fee? We first discuss the main clients
demanding dollar funding and hedging services in the FX swap market. We then review
the link between dollar funding and hedging demand and the interest rate differential across
countries. Finally, we examine the role of the central bank swap line in meeting offshore
dollar funding demand during major global funding crunches.


5.1     The Demand Side of the FX Swap Market

We discuss three main client types demanding FX swaps: banks, non-bank financial institu-
tions, and corporate issuers.


5.1.1   Banks

The first set of FX swap users are banks, with non-U.S. banks being particularly important.
These banks demand dollar funding and hedging services in the FX swap market in order
to manage currency risk between their on-balance-sheet assets and liabilities in order to
minimize currency mismatch. Any unhedged FX exposure can potentially lead to large
swings in banks' net worth and carry significant regulatory penalties.
   Why would non-U.S. banks borrow dollars in the FX swap market as opposed to directly
borrowing in the cash market? Market access to cash funding markets can be an important
barrier. Non-U.S. banks generally do not have access to steady dollar deposits and rely more
on wholesale funding than U.S. banks. For example, the U.S. MMFs account for the bulk
of the unsecured and secured wholesale funding lent to non-U.S. banks, but the U.S. MMFs
generally only lend to top-tier global banks and maintain strict requirements in terms of
counterparty risk limit and stable lending relationships (Chernenko and Sunderam (2014)).
Many smaller non-U.S. banks do not have access to MMF funding and therefore need to
choose between cash dollar funding from large banks or synthetic dollar funding in the FX


                                             20
swap markets. As shown in Rime, Schrimpf and Syrstad (2019), banks with lower credit
ratings may find it cheaper to borrow from the FX swap markets than to borrow directly
from large banks. Even for top-tier global banks, their funding from MMFs can also dry
up quickly during periods of financial distress, which can then cause them to rely more on
dollar funding from the FX swap markets (Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein (2015)). One
notable exception to the dollar shortage for the non-U.S. banks is that the Australian banks
often tap offshore dollar funding and swap back to the Australian dollar in response to low
domestic savings and attractive domestic investment opportunities (Borio et al. (2016)).
   The geography, risks and vulnerability associated the dollar funding model of non-U.S.
banks are thoroughly examined in cross-country studies based on the BIS international
banking statistics, such as McGuire and Von Peter (2009); Aldasoro and Ehlers (2018);
Barajas et al. (2020); Aldasoro et al. (2021). Abbassi and Br¨
                                                             auning (2020) examine FX
hedging decision for German banks using micro-level data on FX derivatives.


5.1.2   Non-Bank Financial Institutions

Second, non-bank financial institutions also demand large amounts of dollar funding and
hedging services. This is particularly true for long-term institutional investors based in Eu-
rope and Japan. The negative local yield environment prompted European and Japanese
investors to invest abroad, particularly in dollar-denominated assets which offered higher
nominal yields. However, these non-U.S. institutional investors, such as pensions and insur-
ance companies, typically have their liabilities in local currency. Therefore, they would need
to fund their dollar purchases today and hedge the currency risk by selling dollars in the
forward market, equivalent to borrowing dollars in the FX swap market. Liao and Zhang
(2020) and Greenwood, Hanson, Stein and Sunderam (2020) discuss the hedging demand
channel in determining the spot exchange rate and CIP deviations.
   Systematic studies that disentangle FX hedged vs. unhedged flows into U.S. fixed income
markets do not yet exist. However, the total amount of dollar hedging demand from institu-


                                             21
tional investors can be very sizable. For example, the top eight Japanese lifer insurers alone
hold about $400 billion USD-denominated assets and have a hedge ratio about 50% in 2019,
generating $200 billion demand for dollar hedging in the dollar-yen FX swap market (Goto
and Miyairi (2019)). Setser and S.T.W (2019) conduct a forensic analysis on the Taiwanese
life insurance companies and estimate about $250 billion FX demand in the USD-Taiwanese
dollar FX swap market.


5.1.3    Corporate Issuers

Corporate issuers are important users of cross-currency swaps as they seek to minimize their
funding costs and hedge other risks. As shown in Liao (2020), corporate borrowers may face
different funding costs in bond markets across different currencies. Maggiori, Neiman and
Schreger (2020) and Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2018) demonstrate that corporate bond
markets are segmented by currency, with investors having portfolios that are dramatically
overweight with bonds in their local currency, a phenomenon dubbed "home-currency bias."
Because of this segmentation in international bond markets,12 firms face a dramatically
different investor base depending on the currency in which they borrow. Firms can thereby
potentially reduce their funding costs without taking on any currency risk by borrowing in
a foreign currency and swapping the proceeds back into their local currency.13
    Suppose a firm would like to package any foreign currency borrowing with a hedge in a
way that minimizes its all-in cost of borrowing. If capital markets were perfectly integrated
and frictionless, such borrowing choice would be irrelevant: if CIP held within the firm for
any currency composition of borrowing, the all-in cost would also be the same across all
funding currencies. If instead, however, investors are segmented by currency, this suggests a
rationale for firms to engaged in hedged-foreign currency borrowing to lower their borrowing
  12
     Theoretical frameworks featuring segmentation by currency include Chien et al. (2015), Dou and Verdel-
han (2015), and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). Lustig and Verdelhan (2019) demonstrate the limits of models
featuring incomplete markets without segmentation.
  13
     These motives are quite distinct from the motives for unhedged foreign currency borrowing, such as
those explored in Bruno and Shin (2017), Bruno and Shin (2020), and Salomao and Varela (2018).



                                                    22
costs. A consequence is that if firms want to minimize their borrowing costs without taking
on currency risk, they may prefer to issue a bond where it is cheapest on the FX-hedged basis
and then use the cross-currency swap market to achieve the desired currency exposure. As
a result, issuer-specific CIP deviations predict corporate issuance, as shown in Liao (2020).
Figure 10 shows that when it is more expensive to issue in euros and then swap into dollars
than issuing directly in dollars, we observe more dollar debt issued by euro-area firms than
euro debt issued by U.S. firms.14
       McBrady and Schill (2007) present evidence that such opportunistic hedged foreign cur-
rency borrowing reduces borrowing costs by 4 to 18 basis points. However, as shown in
Maggiori, Neiman and Schreger (2020), it is only a small set the largest firms that are po-
tentially able to reduce their funding costs through hedged multi-currency issuance. There
is a large size-dependent selection pattern in bond issuance, with the largest firms borrowing
in multiple currencies while the vast majority of firms only borrow in a single currency.
       There are a number of open questions about the frictions non-financial corporate face in
engaging in hedged borrowing to lower their funding costs. For instance, little is known about
any sort of fixed costs firms pay to borrow in foreign currency or whether the frictions are
more on the bond issuance side or the currency hedging side. More generally, understanding
how market segmentation by currency in bond markets affects the firm's optimal capital
structure is an area with a need for more future research.15


5.2       Dollar Funding Demand and Interest Rates

The funding/hedging demand channel can help explain the relationship between the cross-
currency basis and interest rates we observe in Figure 5. The search for yield motive prompts
clients in low-interest-rate countries (e.g., Japan, euro area, and Switzerland) to go long in
  14
     CIP deviations for individual corporate issuers could be the opposite sign of the CIP deviations faced
by intermediaries based on Libor or OIS rates due to differences in credit conditions facing top-tier global
banks and risky corporate issuers. Therefore, the hedging demand from multi-currency issuers for funding
cost arbitrage could push the Libor/OIS CIP deviations even wider.
  15
     Alfaro, Calani and Varela (2021) examine the use of currency derivatives by firms in Chile to hedge their
cash-flow exposure.

                                                     23
high-interest-rate currencies (e.g. the U.S. dollar and the Australian/New Zealand dollar)
to earn the interest rate carry. This cross-currency investment demand generates dollar
funding and hedging demand, which has to be provided by financial intermediaries. Financial
intermediaries fund dollars in the cash market and lend dollars in the FX swap market
to fulfill the client demand. Since the low-interest-rate currencies on a hedged basis offer
higher synthetic dollar yields than high-interest-rate currencies, financial intermediaries earn
CIP deviations as an intermediation fee to justify using up precious balance sheet space.
Consistent with the hedging demand channel, Liao and Zhang (2020) link the cross-country
pattern of CIP deviations to net U.S. dollar asset holdings.
   Through the lens of the supply and demand diagrams in Figure 6, an unexpected widen-
ing of the nominal interest rate between the U.S. and foreign currency shifts the demand
curve to the right, widening the CIP deviations or the cost of funding and hedging dollars
for offshore investors. The empirical literature confirms that shocks to the nominal interest
rate arising from monetary policy surprises lead to variations in CIP deviations (Du, Tepper
and Verdelhan (2018a), Viswanath-Natraj (2020), Keerati (2020), and Dedola et al. (2021)).
In particular, unexpected tightening in the U.S. monetary policy and unexpected accommo-
dation in foreign monetary policy lead to a widening of the CIP deviations of the foreign
             a-vis the dollar.16 Furthermore, Iida, Kimura and Sudo (2018) show that the
currency via-`
difference in the slope of the yield curve between the U.S. and foreign countries are also
shown to be correlated with CIP deviations in time series. A steeper U.S. yield curve and a
flatter foreign yield curve increase the demand for dollar-denominated assets for FX-hedged
banks and investors, which increase the demand for dollar funding and hedging in the FX
swap market.
   The response of the cross-currency basis to monetary policy shocks has important impli-
cations for the external transmission of the U.S. monetary policy. Prior to the GFC, when
the CIP condition held, the offshore dollar funding conditions in the FX swap market were
 16                                                                      ¨
    Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020), Bekaert et al. (2013), and Kalemli-Ozcan (2019) consider the trans-
mission of U.S. monetary policy into global risk and asset prices.


                                                   24
nearly identical to the cash markets. Post-GFC, a negative cross-currency basis makes the
offshore dollar funding condition tighter than the cash market funding condition, gauged by
traditional indicators such as the Libor-OIS spread. Furthermore, unexpected U.S. mone-
tary policy tightening pushes the cross-currency basis more negative, further tightening the
offshore dollar funding conditions. Amador et al. (2020) present a framework with financial
intermediaries where CIP deviations emerge endogenously when interest rates are at the zero
lower bound.


5.3    The Role of Central Bank Swap Lines

The surge in dollar demand and the significant cutback in dollar funding supply during
crises times result in acute global dollar funding crunches. Large spikes in CIP deviations
correspond to elevated dollar funding and hedging costs for offshore market participants, and
pose considerable risk to financial stability. The inability to roll-over short-term dollar fund-
ing and hedging can lead to fire sales of dollar-denominated assets and propagate financial
distress to longer-maturity assets. In Figure 6, this shift in the supply of dollar funding in
crises would be captured by the counterclockwise rotation of the supply curve in the middle
panel, leading to a spike in the CIP deviation at a lower quantity of funding. If demand
shifts outward as well, CIP deviations will increase further. Central bank swap lines were
established between the Fed and other major central banks to backstop the global dollar
funding markets.
   The mechanics of the central bank swap lines are as follows. Local banks in countries with
a swap line agreement with the Fed can borrow dollars from their respective central banks by
pledging eligible collateral in their local currency. Their central banks then tap the central
bank swap lines to borrow dollars from the Fed against their local currencies. Before the
COVID pandemic, the Fed maintained standing swap line facilities with five major central
banks: Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of
Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. During the pandemic, additional temporary swap line


                                               25
agreements were established between the Fed and additional central banks.17 Since October
2008, the pricing of the dollar funding via the swap line is set at a fixed rate over the ongoing
OIS rate. The spread over the OIS rate was initially set to be 100 basis points during the
peak of the GFC, and was lowered to 50 basis points in November 2011 to address the funding
strain induced by the European Debt Crisis, and was again lowered to 25 basis points in
March 2020 in response to the COVID pandemic.18
       Figure 11 shows the central bank swap line outstanding since 2008, together with the
one-week implied dollar funding rates from the central bank dollar swap line and from the
dollar-yen FX swap market.19 The central bank swap line was heavily drawn during the
three most recent crises. The peak swap outstanding was about $580 billion at the height
of the 08-09 global financial crisis, $110 billion at the peak of the European debt crisis, and
$450 billion during the COVID pandemic. Overall, central bank swap lines are found to be
quite effective in restoring market conditions in the global dollar funding markets (Goldberg,
Kennedy and Miu (2010); Bahaj and Reis (2018, 2020); Cetorelli, Goldberg, Ravazzolo et al.
(2020)). The swap line maturities vary from one week to 84 days. One distinct feature of
the swap line take-up during COVID is that there is a higher share of demand for the three-
month contracts, which reflects the increasingly important role of institutional investors in
demanding dollar hedging services.20
       Outside these crisis episodes, swap line usage was very low, as the FX swap rate from
the private FX swap market is generally lower than the rate from central bank swap lines
outside quarter-ends. Despite the near-zero usage, the existence of the swap line as a global
  17
     For example, in response to the dollar funding crunch during the Covid-pandemic, another nine central
banks were added to the swap line agreements on a temporary basis, including the Reserve Bank of Australia,
the Banco Central do Brasil, Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark), the Bank of Korea, the Banco de Mexico,
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank (Norway), the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and
the Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden).
  18
     For detailed analyses of disruptions in the dollar funding market during the March 2020 market turmoil,
see Avdjiev, Eren, McGuire et al. (2020) and Eren, Schrimpf and Sushko (2020).
  19
     The modern-day central bank swap lines have historical predecessors going back to the 1960s. Major
central banks and the BIS used swaps to manage eurodollar liquidity conditions (McCauley and Schenk
(2020)).
  20
     The most common FX hedging practice for institutional investors is to roll over short-term FX forwards
on the one-month or three-month basis.


                                                    26
dollar liquidity backstop helps anchor pricing in the private FX swap market in normal times.
During the quarter-ends in recent years, the central bank swap line pricing is on average 150
basis points cheaper than the dollar-yen FX swap market. However, the total take-up at
the swap line was only $2 billion on average. The low take-up of central bank swaps during
normal times when it is economically attractive to do so is in part due to the stigma from
tapping the central bank facilities and moral suasion from central banks to use the central
bank swap line as a liquidity backstop, as opposed to providing regular daily funding.
    The Fed dollar swap line is only available to a very limited set of central banks. For foreign
central banks without swap line agreements with the Fed, the recently Fed established a new
temporary liquidity facility, the Foreign and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA)
repo facility in March 2020, which allows foreign central banks to pledge U.S. Treasury
securities in order to borrow dollar funding. However, the FIMA repo facility has been little
used since its inception. This is because the FIMA facility is priced at 25 basis points above
the IOER, which is higher than the repo rate from the private market for many central
bank participants. Furthermore, the FIMA repo facility requires U.S. Treasury securities
as collateral, so it is not as effective in addressing the cross-currency funding strain as the
central bank swap line.



6     CIP Deviations for Government Bond Yields

To this point, we have primarily discussed CIP deviations for benchmark risk-free rate proxies
facing large banks. In this section, we explore what can be learned from examining CIP
deviations between government bond yields.


6.1     Definition and Overview

While CIP deviations between risk-free rates represent an arbitrage opportunity for global
banks for the reasons discussed in the previous sections, CIP deviations may exist between


                                               27
government bond yields for several other reasons. There are three primary reasons that
government bond yields might differ from risk-free rate proxies.
   First, the yields could be lower than the risk-free rate because there are additional benefits
to holding government bonds, such as greater liquidity and better collateral value. The yield
differential that investors are willing to forgo while holding the government bond, relative to
the risk-free rate, is referred to as the "convenience yield" of the government bond. Second,
the government bond yield could be higher than the risk-free rate due to sovereign default
risk. Third, the government bond yield could be different from the risk-free rate facing global
investors due capital controls imposed by countries and the market segmentation between
the domestic bond market and international capital market. CIP can then fail between
government bond because of cross-country differences in convenience yields, sovereign default
risk, and varying degrees of international capital market integration.
   We begin by defining the CIP deviation between government bond yields as the difference
between the synthetic dollar interest rate created by swapping foreign government bonds into
U.S. dollars and the yield on the U.S. Treasury bonds:


                     i/$    i/$,Govt             i,Govt      i/$                      $,Govt
               t,t+n  -xt,t+n          =        yt,t +n - t,t+n             -        yt,t +n         ,   (2)
                                           Foreign Synthetic Dollar Yield       U.S. Treasury Yield


       i,Govt                                                                                  i/$
where yt,t+n is the yield on country i's local currency government bond, t,t+n is the annual-
                                                                                         $,Govt
ized forward premium of selling foreign currency i in exchange for the U.S. dollar, and yt,t +n

is the yield on the U.S. Treasury bond. We note that comparing equation 2 to equation 1,
we now define the government bond CIP deviation as the "negative" cross-currency basis for
government bond yields. The reason for deliberately flipping the sign of the cross-currency
basis is that it is more convenient to connect government CIP deviations defined in equation
2 to the concept of the "convenience yield" and "credit spread."
   As an overview, Figure 12 plots the mean five-year CIP deviations relative to U.S. Trea-
               i/$
sury yields, t,t+5 , for three groups of countries, "Developed Countries," "China, India,


                                                      28
Indonesia, Philippines and Russia" and "Other Emerging Markets."21 For developed mar-
kets (in red), the mean government bond CIP deviation vis-`
                                                          a-vis the U.S. Treasury is positive
before the GFC, increases during the GFC and then diminishes post-GFC. For the "Other
Emerging Markets" group, the mean deviation is positive throughout the sample. For China,
India, Indonesia, and Russia, we see that the mean deviation is generally positive outside
the GFC period, but is very negative during the GFC.
       In the rest of this section, we explain variations in the government bond CIP deviations
across these groups of countries and how they have developed over time. We focus our
discussion on the impact of government bond convenience yields for developed markets in
Section 6.2, and the impact of sovereign default risk and capital controls for emerging markets
in Section 6.3.


6.2       Government Bond CIP Deviations between Developed Mar-

          kets and the US

If investors value the liquidity and safety of government bonds, they may be willing to
accept a lower yield to own them instead of other assets that promise the same cash flows.
The extent to which they value these non-pecuniary benefits that reduce borrowing costs
is often referred to as the "convenience yield." There is a large and growing literature on
convenience yields within assets of the same currency (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012), Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015), and Nagel (2016)). In this closed economy
literature, the convenience yield on U.S. Treasuries or other safe assets would be defined as
the agency-Treasury Spread (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Longstaff (2004),
and Schwarz (2019)), or the T-bill General Collateral (GC) repo rate (Nagel (2016)).22
However, when comparing across currencies, a straightforward comparison is more difficult.
  21
     The group of "developed countries" include Australia, Canada, Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, the
United Kingdom, Japan, Norway, New Zealand, and Sweden, and the group of "Other Emerging Markets"
include Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hungary, Israel, South Korea, Mexico, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Thailand,
Turkey, and South Africa.
  22
     Mota (2020) examines the convenience yield on non-financial corporate bonds.


                                                  29
   In the absence of default risk and capital market frictions, CIP deviations between govern-
ment bond yields offer a clean measure of the convenience yield differential on government
bonds across countries (Du, Im and Schreger (2018b), Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig
(2018) and Engel and Wu (2018)). Because the cash flows on the two instruments are the
same after being swapped into the same currency, any remaining yield difference represents
non-pecuniary benefits from owning one asset instead of the other. These benefits include,
for example, better liquidity, higher collateral value, or closer alignments with investment
mandates.
   The key assumptions that there is no sovereign default risk, nor any financial market fric-
tions, are relatively good approximations for the group of developed countries pre-GFC. The
ten developed countries in our sample have independent monetary policies (with Germany
being the only exception), and the outright default risk on their local currency government
bonds is thought to be quite low. Furthermore, as we have discussed, the CIP condition for
benchmark interbank rates held remarkably well between these developed market currencies
and the U.S. dollar. In addition, all sample developed countries have free capital mobility.
   However, while the assumption of low default risk and free capital mobility continued to
hold post-GFC, the assumption of no financial market friction is clearly violated based on
our previous discussions of the CIP failure for benchmark bank rates. Therefore, we have to
interpret government bond CIP deviations jointly with the CIP failure for benchmark bank
rates. After all, the swap rates that we use to construct government CIP deviations are
offered by banks, and therefore are subject to all the frictions in financial intermediation.
   Figure 13 plots the mean government bond CIP deviations between developed countries
(the G10) and the U.S. from January 2000 to August 2020. We find that the mean CIP
deviations between the synthetic dollar yield on swapped foreign government bonds and
the U.S. Treasury yield are positive across all maturities pre-GFC, suggesting a positive
convenience yield on U.S. Treasury bonds. In particular, this convenience yield means that
global investors were willing to forgo an average 20-30 basis points in yield to hold U.S.


                                              30
Treasury bonds as opposed to other alternative safe-haven government bonds pre-GFC. Du,
Im and Schreger (2018b) refer to this convenience yield as the "specialness" of the U.S.
Treasury bonds relative to other safe-haven alternatives. The U.S. Treasury specialness
increased during the GFC across tenors, with the increase in the short tenors being the most
pronounced. Interestingly, post-GFC, the U.S. Treasury specialness remains robust for the
three-month and one-year maturity, but largely diminishes and even becomes negative at
the five-year and ten-year maturity.
   As discussed above, the interpretation of the government CIP deviations post-GFC should
be put in the context of CIP deviations due to financial market frictions. Figure 14 overlays
the government bond CIP deviations with the CIP deviations for the Libor and interest rate
swap rates indexed to Libor at the three-month and ten-year maturities. The significant
contrast between the short and long-term maturity, post-GFC, is that the short-maturity
government bond CIP deviations track Libor CIP deviations very closely, whereas the long-
term government bond CIP deviations diverge significantly from Libor CIP deviations. We
can refer to the Libor CIP deviations as the specialness of dollar funding, which has emerged
since the GFC as a result of limited financial intermediary capacity and strong demand for
dollar funding and hedging that we described in Sections 4 and 5. Figure 14 then demon-
strates that the specialness of U.S. Treasury securities is closely related to the specialness of
dollar funding at short maturities post-GFC. However, long-term U.S. Treasury bonds have
lost their specialness, despite the fact that long-term dollar funding remains quite special.
In other words, the loss of the convenience yield in long-term Treasury bonds cannot be
explained by the emergence of CIP deviations due to financial market frictions.
   The stark contrast between the convenience yields on short-term and long-term U.S.
Treasuries was on stark display during the peak of the pandemic-induced financial turmoil
in March 2020. The yield on the long-term U.S. Treasury bond increased significantly on
the most stressful days when the U.S. equity market hit limit downs, while the short-term
U.S. T-bill yield dipped into negative territory.


                                               31
    The declining convenience of long-term Treasury bonds relative to other safe havens
raises questions about the position of U.S. Treasury bonds as the global safe asset. The
literature has discussed some potential explanations for the diminishing specialness. First,
the United States has a faster-growing U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio relative to the other safe
havens on average post-GFC (Du, Im and Schreger (2018b)). A relative increase in the sup-
ply of U.S. Treasury bonds makes them less special (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012)).23 Second, the loss of specicalness of U.S. Treasury bonds could again be linked to
increased costs of intermediation due to tighter non-risk-weighted leverage constraints post-
GFC (Duffie (2020) and He, Nagel and Song (2020)). Banks and dealers face higher balance
sheet costs of holding Treasury bonds and in providing funding to clients to finance their
Treasury holdings in the repo market. These additional costs decrease Treasury specialness.
    More generally, there remains much work to be done to better understand the sources
and the time-variations in the "convenience yield" of the U.S. Treasury bonds in the presence
of financial market frictions post-GFC, whether it is driven by additional liquidity, safety,
collateral value of the U.S. Treasury bonds, relative debt supply across countries, dealers'
different balance sheet capacities in intermediating Treasury securities, and/or the premium
associated with the U.S. dollar being the international reserve currency.24 In addition, the
connection between the relative specialness of Treasuries and the specialness of dollar in the
international monetary system is an important open question.
   23
      However, while a reduction in the the convenience yield today implies U.S. Treasury rates are reduced
less than previously at the margin, the U.S. still would have seen its yield reduced significantly on all of its
inframarginal debt issuance.
   24
      For an examination of safety, see Caballero et al. (2017), Caballero and Farhi (2018) and Gorton (2017)
among others. For models on international reserve currency, see Maggiori (2017), Farhi and Maggiori (2018),
He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt (2019), and Gopinath and Stein (2018). Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig
(2018) present an extension to their baseline model where the relative convenience yield on Treasuries is a
function of the CIP deviation between risk-free rates.




                                                      32
6.3       Government Bond CIP Deviations Between Emerging Mar-

          kets and the U.S.

As we have seen in Figure 12, emerging market bonds have significantly larger CIP deviations
from the U.S. Treasury bonds compared to developed markets. Du and Schreger (2016)
refer to the government bond CIP deviations for emerging market sovereigns as the "local
currency credit spread." This is because the underlying risk of the emerging market sovereigns
defaulting on their local currency debt could be an important reason why CIP fails in this
case. In Figure 15, we plot the mean CIP deviations for emerging market bonds against their
sovereign CDS spreads, denominated in dollars. As we can see, the two measures have strong
co-movement, particularly from 2005-2013. The average plot hides a large degree of cross-
country heterogeneity, as the within-country correlation between the local currency credit
spread (or government CIP deviations) and the sovereign CDS spread ranges from 95% for
Poland to 1% for Brazil. As CDS spreads give a risk-neutral expectation of the expected loss
of a default on the sovereign debt that is issued by the same government, the co-movement
between government bond CIP deviations and sovereign credit spreads provides empirical
support that sovereign default risk is driving the government bond CIP deviations between
emerging markets and the U.S.25
       However, sovereign default risk is not the only source of variation for emerging market
government bond CIP deviations. In Figure 12, we see that the average CIP deviations
for China, India, Indonesia, Philippines, and Russia display a markedly different pattern
than the other emerging market countries, particularly so during the GFC. These countries
have strong capital controls that restrict foreign participation (foreign capital inflows) in
  25
    This, of course, raises the question of why governments would be charged a credit spread for borrowing
in their own currencies when they could always just inflate the debt away. Du and Schreger (2017) and
Wu (2020) emphasize the importance of foreign currency corporate debt. Aguiar et al. (2013), and Galli
(2020) examine the effect of varying inflation costs. Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) document the long history
of domestic default, including debt in local currency. Jeanneret and Souissi (2016) examine the relative
prevalence of default by domestic currency. Hofmann et al. (2020) demonstrates that reductions in local
currency credits spreads in emerging markets are associated with appreciations of the local currency against
the U.S. dollar. The authors argue the changes in spreads are driven by shifts in risk premia. Kalemli-Ozcan
and Varela (2019) show that political risk affects interest rates in emerging markets.


                                                    33
the local currency government bond markets, and/or limits on the international investments
of local institutional investors. These capital controls create segmentation in clientele and
market liquidity between the domestic government bond and the offshore, non-deliverable,
cross-currency swap markets. In particular, during times of global financial distress, the rise
in the local currency bond yields in emerging markets is more muted due to local clientele
effects, while the forward premium and CDS spreads spike in tandem with the heightened
risk aversion of global investors, creating a significant negative local currency "credit" spread.
The co-movement, or the lack thereof, between the onshore local currency bond yields and
the offshore non-deliverable cross-currency swap rates potentially offers researchers a de facto
measure of market integration and capital controls.



7        Exchange Rates and CIP Deviations

With CIP deviations representing a significant departure from a fundamental relationship
in currency markets, one may hope this change helps shed light on the core exchange rate
puzzles in international finance.26 Presently, there are two lines of thinking about the role
of CIP deviations in exchange rate determination.
       First, focusing on CIP deviations between risk-free rates, Avdjiev et al. (2019) argue that
there should be a connection between movements in the broad U.S. dollar and Libor CIP
deviations, because the dollar acts as a barometer of risk-taking capacity in global capital
markets and the CIP deviations capture the shadow costs on the balance sheet constraints of
the financial intermediary. This line of argument is also consistent with the ideas of Gabaix
and Maggiori (2015) on the central role of constrained intermediaries for the determination of
exchange rates.27 Lilley et al. (Forthcoming) document a structural break in the relationship
between exchange rates, capital flows, and risk measures around the global financial crisis
  26
     There is an enormous literature on the challenges of explaining movements in nominal exchange rates.
See, for instance, Meese and Rogoff (1983), Frankel and Rose (1995), and Engel and West (2005))
  27
     The idea of the dollar as a global risk factor builds on the work of Bruno and Shin (2015a) and Bruno
and Shin (2015b). Adrian, Etula and Shin (2010) connect the movement of the dollar to movement in USD
bank lending.

                                                   34
and that if CIP deviations were a measure of the risk-bearing capacity of the financial
system, it would be natural for CIP deviations to co-vary with the dollar along with other
risk measures. This first line of thinking treats CIP deviations essentially as a signal of
financial market constraints, which in turn drive exchange rate movements, rather than as
a determinant of exchange rates themselves.
   The second line of research focuses on the idea that if bonds earn a liquidity premium, or
a convenience yield as near-money assets, then they have the potential to explain a number of
exchange rate puzzles. For instance, Engel (2016) demonstrates that the UIP puzzle changes
signs at various horizons, with high interest rate countries experiencing high returns in the
short-run, but also forecasting lower returns at longer horizons. Engel (2016) suggests that
the liquidity premia on bonds, due to their preferred safety and collateral value, can help
rationalize this puzzle, with Valchev (2020) proposing a related explanation for this empirical
pattern by working through the endogenous bond convenience yields resulting from monetary
and fiscal policy interaction. Conceptually, the failure of UIP means that the path of interest
rates will be insufficient to explain the value of a currency, but perhaps this well-known failure
is explained by the existence of a non-pecuniary benefit that investors realize by holding
different assets. Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018) and Engel and Wu (2018) study
the relationship between the convenience yields and exchange rates empirically. They both
use the deviation from CIP between the U.S. government and FX-hedged foreign government
bond yields as their measure of convenience. This line of thinking treats changes in CIP
deviations, capturing changes in relative convenience yields, as a driving source of exchange
rates rather than just a valuable signal. Kekre and Lenel (2021) build a two-country New
Keynesian model with heterogeneity in risk-bearing capacity within and between countries
to explain the dollar carry trade, as well as the outsize importance of U.S. monetary policy
shocks and the composition of international portfolios. "Safety shocks" are the driving force
of the model and these shocks are calibrated to match the properties of CIP deviations
between U.S. Treasuries and foreign government bonds.


                                               35
       Building on Campbell and Clarida (1987), Clarida and Gali (1994), and Froot and Ra-
madorai (2005), Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018) derive a version of the present
value decomposition for exchange rates, introducing a new term for CIP deviations. The
classical present value formula for the spot exchange rate without bond CIP deviations de-
pends on the future path of the interest rate differential, risk premia, and the long-term level
of the exchange rate. In addition to these terms, Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018)
introduce a new term for the full path of relative convenience yields as measured by the CIP
deviation between government bond yields. As a result, some of the fluctuations that the
previous literature would have attributed to movements in currency risk premia should be
better thought of as coming from CIP deviations.28
       We now directly examine how CIP deviations co-vary with exchange rates empirically. We
first examine how the average cross-currency basis co-varies with the broad dollar exchange
rate, an equal-weighted index of bilateral dollar exchange rates. In Table 4, we run univariate
regressions of the form
                                        e$
                                         t =  +   xt + t ,


where e$
       t is the quarterly log change in the broad dollar exchange rate and xt is the

quarterly change in the average cross-currency basis of the G10 currencies vis-`
                                                                               a-vis the U.S.
dollar. We consider both IBOR-based and government bond-based cross-currency basis and
run quarterly regressions on the post-GFC sample from 2008Q1 to 2020Q2.29 We see that
for both IBOR-based and government bond-based measures, quarterly changes in the cross-
currency basis have little explanatory power for quarterly changes in the spot exchange rate.
However, changes in longer-dated cross-currency basis have strong explanatory power for the
spot exchange rate, with a univariate regression on the 5-year Libor basis (the benchmark
used in Avdjiev et al. (2019)) having an R2 of 30% and the 1-year government bond basis
(the benchmark used in Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018) and Engel and Wu (2018))
  28
   Engel and Wu (2018) derive a similar expression beginning from an open-economy New Keynesian model.
  29
   Jiang et al. (2018) and Engel and Wu (2018) have earlier starting dates because they focus on government
bond CIP deviations and this exercise compares bond and Libor CIP deviations.


                                                    36
having an R2 of 32%.
       We now study how the cross-currency basis co-moves with the bilateral exchange rate
against the U.S. dollar. We run a series of univariate regressions of the following forms:


                                        i/$
                                     et       = i + i xt +     i,t ,

                                        i/$
                                     et       = i + i xi,t +     i,t



            i/$
where et          is the quarterly log change in the currency's bilateral exchange rate against the
U.S. dollar. Here, in addition to reporting the regression coefficients and R2 for changes
in the bilateral exchange rate on changes in the average cross-currency basis, xt , we also
report regression results for running the changes in the bilateral exchange rates on the
bilateral cross-currency basis vis-`
                                   a-vis the dollar, xi,t . We run regressions using both the
one-year and the five-year cross-currency basis. Table 5 presents regression results. We find
that the bilateral exchange rate also generally loads negatively on the cross-currency basis,
consistent with the evidence in Engel and Wu (2018). The explanatory power of the mean
cross-currency (both for Libor and government bonds) is generally higher than that of the
bilateral cross-currency basis against the USD.30 The notable exception is that the dollar-yen
exchange rate has very little correlation with any cross-currency basis measure.



8        Takeaways and Open Research Questions

Given that a persistent failure of CIP has emerged for fewer than 15 years, the literature
surveyed in this paper is still in a relative early stage. In this section, we highlight several
important future research directions for us to better understand the landscape of global
dollar funding markets and its macroeconomic implications.
  30
    Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2019) examine the bilateral explanatory power of CIP deviations between
government bonds.




                                                  37
Re-thinking post-GFC banking regulations A central theme of this chapter is that
balance sheet constraints facing large global banks as a result of post-GFC regulatory reforms
have reduced the willingness and capacity of large banks to intermediate in the dollar funding
markets, resulting in persistent CIP failure. It is natural to ask the question whether these
post-GFC banking regulations are optimal. While there is an inherent tradeoff between
efficiency of financial intermediation and overall financial market stability, one view is that
a binding non-risk-weighted capital constraint places us in the interior of the efficiency-
stability frontier (Duffie (2017)). Meanwhile, it is clear that excessive leverage is one of the
main contributors to past financial crises, and ex-ante assessments of risk weights of assets
can be misguided. These reasons argue in favor of maintaining a minimum non-risk-weighted
capital standard.
   A set of policy design questions follow naturally. How should policymakers calibrate the
risk-weighted and non-risk-weighted capital regulations? Should central bank reserves and/or
Treasury securities be exempted from the leverage ratio calculation? Should the public
disclosure of the leverage ratio move to a daily-averaging regime in all major jurisdictions to
avoid reporting-period window-dressing?
   In addition, the repo market turmoil in September 2019 shed light on additional bank
balance sheet frictions beyond Basel III regulatory metrics, most prominently the intra-
day liquidity constraint. More research is needed to examine other dimensions of banking
regulations that have implications for dollar liquidity provision beyond capital requirements.


The role of non-banks While the bulk of the papers we surveyed emphasized the role of
large global banks, non-banks play an increasingly important role in the overall landscape of
global dollar funding markets. Given that the growth of the banking sector remained subdued
post-GFC, non-banks account for an increasing share of the demand for dollar funding and
hedging services. Furthermore, dollar-rich real-money investors can also become more active
dollar lenders to mitigate global dollar liquidity shortage.



                                              38
    There are very few systematic studies in this area, which opens up a great opportunity
for fruitful future research. A few specific examples are given below, which are by no means
exhaustive. For institutional investors, it would be useful to have a better understanding of
the relationship between CIP deviations and their investment demand and currency hedging
decisions. For real-money dollar investors, such as investment managers at central bank
FX reserves, sovereign wealth funds, U.S. pensions and insurance firms, we need further
research to pinpoint specific barriers for them to become large dollar lenders in the FX swap
market. For corporate issuers, more research can shed further light into international capital
market frictions that lead to market segmentation by currency in cash markets and how
these frictions interact with corporate funding and investment decisions across currencies
and geography.


Macroeconomic implications of CIP deviations The offshore dollar funding markets
in the FX swap markets are an integral part of the global dollar funding markets, and CIP
deviations are a gauge of the offshore dollar funding conditions. Fragility and vulnerabilities
in the offshore dollar funding markets pose stability risk to the overall global financial system.
Given the predominant role of the U.S. dollar in global financial markets, it is impossible for
the Federal Reserve to focus exclusively on domestic financial conditions. The role of the
Fed as a quasi-global lender of last resort and the availability of the central bank toolkit are
important areas for future research.
    It is also important to understand the welfare implications of CIP deviations. It is
an open question whether CIP deviations represent deadweight losses due to distortions
in dollar investment and hedging decisions or are evidence of tighter and more effective
regulation.31 To quantify these welfare costs, one not only needs a fully-fledged model, but
also more micro-evidence on who is paying a higher cost and by how much. The bulk of the
empirical analysis on CIP deviations so far use benchmark interest rates, which is inadequate
  31
     H´
      ebert (2020) theoretically examines the welfare consequences of the existence of such arbitrage oppor-
tunities.



                                                    39
in addressing the large heterogeneity in the access to dollar funding across different types of
market participants.
       From a theory perspective, the existence of CIP deviations provides a laboratory for
researchers to test intermediary asset pricing theory (He and Krishnamurthy (2013), He and
Krishnamurthy (2018)). The CIP deviations are likely the tip of the iceberg, as the balance
sheet constraints that underline the CIP deviations should be present in all asset classes.32
       Finally, we are only beginning to scratch the surface of the international macroeconomic
consequences of the breakdown of CIP. Compared to the UIP failure,33 the failure of CIP
also offers a more stringent testing ground for international macro-finance models. While
there is now an extensive theoretical literature that rationalizes UIP deviations by intro-
ducing risk premia that make currencies imperfect substitutes, only models with binding
financial constraints can generate CIP deviations. Along these lines, Gabaix and Maggiori
(2015) introduced a theoretical framework for the determination of exchange rates under
segmented markets. This literature is rapidly growing (Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig
(2020), Greenwood, Hanson, Stein and Sunderam (2020), Gourinchas, Ray and Vayanos
(2019), Bianchi, Bigio and Engel (2020), Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017), Itskhoki and Mukhin
(2019)) and Kekre and Lenel (2021), and is reviewed in the Handbook Chapter by Maggiori
(2021).



9        Conclusion

Covered interest rate parity has long been a foundational relationship in international fi-
nance and macroeconomics. Its breakdown represents a significant change in global financial
markets. The cross-currency basis has emerged from an esoteric corner of the FX derivative
market to become an important barometer of the health of global capital markets. The
breakdown of CIP puts financial frictions and intermediary constraints at the heart of inter-
  32
     Du, H´
          ebert and Huber (2019) further argue the co-variance with the future fluctuation in the balance
sheet constraint is a priced risk factor.
  33
     See Engel (2014) and Hassan and Zhang (2020) for recent surveys.

                                                   40
national finance and macroeconomics.




References
Abbassi, Puriya and Falk Br¨   auning, "Demand Effects in the FX Forward Market: Micro
 Evidence from Banks' Dollar Hedging," Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming, 2020.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Hyun Song Shin, "Risk appetite and exchange
 rates," FRB of New York Staff Report, 2010, (361).
Afonso, Gara, Fabiola Ravazzolo, and Alessandro Zori, "From Policy Rates to Market
 Rates--Untangling the US Dollar Funding Market," Technical Report, Federal Reserve
 Bank of New York 2019.
Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath, "Crisis and
 commitment: Inflation credibility and the vulnerability to sovereign debt crises," Technical
 Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Akram, Q Farooq, Dagfinn Rime, and Lucio Sarno, "Arbitrage in the foreign exchange
 market: Turning on the microscope," Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (2),
 237­253.
Aldasoro, I~naki and Torsten Ehlers, "The geography of dollar funding of non-US banks,"
 BIS Quarterly Review December, 2018.
 , Egemen Eren, and Wenqian Huang, "Dollar funding of non-US Banks through
 Covid-19," 2021.
Alfaro, Laura, Mauricio Calani, and Liliana Varela, "Currency Hedging in Emerging
 Markets," Working Paper, 2021.
Amador, Manuel, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri, "Exchange
 rate policies at the zero lower bound," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (4),
 1605­1645.
Andersen, Leif, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song, "Funding value adjustments," The
 Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (1), 145­192.
Anderson, Alyssa, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche, "Arbitrage Capital of Global
 Banks," University of Chicago Working Paper, 2019.
Augustin, Patrick, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song, "The term
 structure of CIP violations," 2021.
Avdjiev, Stefan, Egemen Eren, Patrick McGuire et al., "Dollar funding costs during
 the Covid-19 crisis through the lens of the FX swap market," Technical Report, Bank for
 International Settlements 2020.
 , Wenxin Du, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, "The dollar, bank leverage,
 and deviations from covered interest parity," American Economic Review: Insights, 2019,
 1 (2), 193­208.
Bahaj, Saleem and Ricardo Reis, "Central bank swap lines," 2018.
   and , "Central bank swap lines during the Covid-19 pandemic," Covid Economics,
 2020, 2, 1­12.



                                             41
Bai, Jennie and Pierre Collin-Dufresne, "The CDS-bond basis," Financial Manage-
  ment, 2019, 48 (2), 417­439.
Banegas, Ayelen and Manjola Tase, "Reserve balances, the federal funds market and
  arbitrage in the new regulatory framework," Journal of Banking & Finance, 2020, 118,
  105893.
Bank for International Settlements, "US dollar funding: an international perspective,"
  CGFS Paper No. 65, 2020.
Barajas, Mr Adolfo, Andrea Deghi, Claudio Raddatz, MissDulani Seneviratne,
  Peichu Xie, and Yizhi Xu, Global Banks' Dollar Funding: A Source of Financial
  Vulnerability, International Monetary Fund, 2020.
Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca, "Risk, uncertainty and mone-
  tary policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (7), 771­788.
Bianchi, Javier, Saki Bigio, and Charles Engel, "Scrambling for Dollars: International
  Liquidity, Banks and Exchange Rates," 2020.
Borio, Claudio EV, Robert N McCauley, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav
  Sushko, "Covered interest parity lost: understanding the cross-currency basis," BIS Quar-
  terly Review September, 2016.
Boyarchenko, Nina, Thomas M Eisenbach, Pooja Gupta, Or Shachar, and Pe-
  ter Van Tassel, "Bank-intermediated arbitrage," 2020.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, "Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of
  monetary policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 71, 119­132.
   and , "Cross-border banking and global liquidity," The Review of Economic Studies,
  2015, 82 (2), 535­564.
   and , "Global dollar credit and carry trades: a firm-level analysis," The Review of
  Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (3), 703­749.
   and , "Currency depreciation and emerging market corporate distress," Management
  Science, 2020, 66 (5), 1935­1961.
Burger, John D, Francis E Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock, "Currency
  matters: Analyzing international bond portfolios," Journal of International Economics,
  2018, 114, 376­388.
Caballero, Ricardo and Emmanuel Farhi, "The safety trap," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2018, 85 (1), 223­274.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, "The safe
  assets shortage conundrum," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (3), 29­46.
Campbell, John Y and Richard H Clarida, "The dollar and real interest rates," in
  "Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy," Vol. 27 Elsevier 1987, pp. 103­
  139.
Cenedese, Gino, Pasquale Della Corte, and Tianyu Wang, "Currency mispricing
  and dealer balance sheets," Journal of Finance, 2020.
Cerutti, Eugenio M, Maurice Obstfeld, and Haonan Zhou, "Covered Interest Parity
  Deviations: Macrofinancial Determinants," Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 2019.
Cetorelli, Nicola, Linda S Goldberg, Fabiola Ravazzolo et al., "Have the Fed Swap
  Lines Reduced Dollar Funding Strains during the COVID-19 Outbreak?," Technical Re-
  port, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2020.

                                            42
Chernenko, Sergey and Adi Sunderam, "Frictions in shadow banking: Evidence from
  the lending behavior of money market mutual funds," The Review of Financial Studies,
  2014, 27 (6), 1717­1750.
Chien, YiLi, Hanno Lustig, Kanda Naknoi et al., Why are Exchange Rates So
  Smooth?: A Segmented Asset Markets Explanation, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
  Research Division, 2015.
Clarida, Richard and Jordi Gali, "Sources of real exchange-rate fluctuations: How im-
  portant are nominal shocks?," in "Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public policy,"
  Vol. 41 Elsevier 1994, pp. 1­56.
Copeland, Adam, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin (David) Yang, "Reserves were not so am-
  ple after all ­ evidence from the U.S. Treasury repo market," Stanford University Working
  Paper, 2020.
  , Isaac Davis, Eric LeSueur, and Antoine Martin, "Mapping and sizing the US repo
  market," Technical Report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2012.
  , , , and , "Lifting the veil on the us bilateral repo market," Technical Report,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2014.
Correa, Ricardo, Wenxin Du, and Gordon Liao, "U.S. banks and global liquidity,"
  NBER Working Paper, 2020, (w27491).
Debelle, G, "How I learned to stop worrying and love the basis," in "Dinner address at the
  BIS Symposium: CIP­RIP" 2017.
Dedola, Luca, Georgios Georgiadis, Johannes Gr¨         ab, and Arnaud Mehl, "Does a big
  bazooka matter? Quantitative easing policies and exchange rates," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2021, 117, 489­506.
Dou, Winston Wei and Adrien Verdelhan, "The volatility of international capital flows
  and foreign assets," Unpublished Working Paper, MIT, 2015.
Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, "Deviations from covered
  interest rate parity," The Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (3), 915­957.
   and Jesse Schreger, "Local currency sovereign risk," The Journal of Finance, 2016, 71
  (3), 1027­1070.
    and , "Sovereign risk, currency risk, and corporate balance sheets," Working Paper,
  2017, (17-024).
  , Benjamin M H´       ebert, and Amy Wang Huber, "Are Intermediary Constraints
  Priced?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
  , Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, "The US treasury premium," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 2018, 112, 167­181.
Duffie, Darrell, Post-crisis bank regulations and financial market liquidity, Banca d'Italia,
  2017.
  , "Still the World's Safe Haven?," Redesigning the US Treasury Market After the COVID-
  19 Crisis. Hutchins Center Working Paper, 2020, (62).
Engel, Charles, "Exchange rates and interest parity," Handbook of international economics,
  2014, 4, 453­522.
  , "Exchange rates, interest rates, and the risk premium," American Economic Review,
  2016, 106 (2), 436­74.
   and Kenneth D West, "Exchange rates and fundamentals," Journal of political Econ-
  omy, 2005, 113 (3), 485­517.

                                             43
   and Steve Pak Yeung Wu, "Liquidity and exchange rates: An empirical investigation,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Eren, Egemen, Andreas Schrimpf, and Vladyslav Sushko, "US dollar funding mar-
  kets during the Covid-19 crisis--the international dimension," BIS Bulletin, 2020, (15).
Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori, "A model of the international monetary sys-
  tem," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 295­355.
Fleckenstein, Matthias and Francis A Longstaff, "Renting Balance Sheet Space: In-
  termediary Balance Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Derivatives," The Review of
  Financial Studies, 2020, 33 (11), 5051­5091.
Frankel, Jeffrey A and Andrew K Rose, "Empirical research on nominal exchange
  rates," Handbook of international economics, 1995, 3, 1689­1729.
Frenkel, Jacob A and Richard M Levich, "Covered interest arbitrage: Unexploited
  profits?," Journal of Political Economy, 1975, 83 (2), 325­338.
   and , "Transaction costs and interest arbitrage: Tranquil versus turbulent periods,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1977, 85 (6), 1209­1226.
Froot, Kenneth A and Tarun Ramadorai, "Currency returns, intrinsic value, and
  institutional-investor flows," The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3), 1535­1566.
Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International liquidity and exchange rate dy-
  namics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1369­1420.
Galli, Carlo, "Inflation, Default Risk and Nominal Debt," 2020.
Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Margin-based asset pricing and devia-
  tions from the law of one price," The Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (6), 1980­2022.
Goldberg, Linda S, Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu, "Central bank dollar swap lines
  and overseas dollar funding costs," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search 2010.
Gopinath, Gita and Jeremy C Stein, "Banking, Trade, and the making of a Dominant
  Currency," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Gorton, Gary, "The history and economics of safe assets," Annual Review of Economics,
  2017, 9, 547­586.
Goto, Yujiro and Yusuke Miyairi, "Lifers' FX Hedge Ratio Inched Down," Technical
  Report, Nomura JPY Weekly 2019.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Walker Ray, and Dimitri Vayanos, "A preferred-habitat
  model of term premia and currency risk," Technical Report, mimeo 2019.
Greenwood, Robin M, Samuel Gregory Hanson, Jeremy C Stein, and Aditya
  Sunderam, "A Quantity-Driven Theory of Term Premia and Exchange Rates," NBER
  Working Paper, 2020, (w27615).
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G Hanson, and Jeremy C Stein, "A comparative-
  advantage approach to government debt maturity," The Journal of Finance, 2015, 70
  (4), 1683­1722.
Hassan, Tarek A and Rui C Mano, "Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency
  world," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (1), 397­450.
Hassan, Tarek Alexander and Tony Zhang, "The Economics of Currency Risk," NBER
  Working Paper, 2020, (w27847).
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Intermediary asset pricing," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 732­70.

                                             44
    and , "Intermediary asset pricing and the financial crisis," Annual Review of Financial
  Economics, 2018, 10, 173­197.
  ,    , and Konstantin Milbradt, "A model of safe asset determination," American
  Economic Review, 2019, 109 (4), 1230­62.
  , Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, "Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from
  many asset classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 126 (1), 1­35.
  , Stefan Nagel, and Zhaogang Song, "Treasury inconvenience yields during the covid-
  19 crisis," NBER Working Paper, 2020, (w27416).
H´ebert, Benjamin M, "Externalities as arbitrage," Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2020.
Hofmann, Boris, Ilhyock Shim, and Hyun Song Shin, "Bond risk premia and the
  exchange rate," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2020, 52 (S2), 497­520.
Iida, Tomoyuki, Takeshi Kimura, and Nao Sudo, "Deviations from Covered Interest
  Rate Parity and the Dollar Funding of Global Banks," International Journal of Central
  Banking, 2018, 14 (4), 275­325.
IMF, "Banks' Dollar Funding: A Source of Financial Vulnerability," Global Financial Sta-
  bility Report: Lower for Longer, 2019.
Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, "Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
    and , "Mussa puzzle redux," Available at SSRN 3423438, 2019.
Ivashina, Victoria, David S Scharfstein, and Jeremy C Stein, "Dollar funding and
  the lending behavior of global banks," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130
  (3), 1241­1281.
Jeanneret, Alexandre and Slim Souissi, "Sovereign defaults by currency denomination,"
  Journal of International Money and Finance, 2016, 60, 197­222.
Jermann, Urban, "Negative swap spreads and limited arbitrage," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 2020, 33 (1), 212­238.
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, "Foreign safe asset
  demand and the dollar exchange rate," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2018.
  , , and , "Dollar safety and the global financial cycle," Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S and Liliana Varela, "Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Disconnect:
  The Role of Capital Flows and Risk Premia," Technical Report, Discussion paper, mimeo
  2019.
           ¨
Kalemli-Ozcan,     S
                   . ebnem, "US monetary policy and international risk spillovers," Techni-
  cal Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Keerati, Ritt, "The Impact of Monetary Policy on the Specialness of US Treasuries,"
  Available at SSRN 3682897, 2020.
Kekre, Rohan and Moritz Lenel, "The Flight to Safety and International Risk Sharing,"
  University of Chicago and Prince University Working Paper, 2021.
Klingler, Sven and Suresh Sundaresan, "An explanation of negative swap spreads:
  Demand for duration from underfunded pension plans," The Journal of Finance, 2019, 74
  (2), 675­710.


                                            45
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, "The aggregate demand for
  treasury debt," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 233­267.
    and Hanno N Lustig, "Mind the gap in sovereign debt markets: The US Treasury
  basis and the dollar risk factor," in "2019 Jackson Hole Economic Symposium" 2019.
Levich, Richard, "CIP: Then and Now, A Brief Survey of Measuring and Exploiting
  Deviations from Covered Interest Parity," in "BIS Symposium: CIP ­ RIP?" 2017.
Liao, Gordon and Tony Zhang, "The Hedging Channel of Exchange Rate Determina-
  tion," Available at SSRN 3612395, 2020.
Liao, Gordon Y, "Credit migration and covered interest rate parity," Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2020.
Lilley, Andrew, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "Exchange
  rate reconnect," Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Longstaff, Francis A, "The flight-to-liquidity premium in US Treasury bond prices," Jour-
  nal of Business, 2004, 77 (3), 511­526.
Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan, "The cross section of foreign currency risk premia
  and consumption growth risk," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (1), 89­117.
    and , "Does incomplete spanning in international financial markets help to explain
  exchange rates?," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (6), 2208­44.
  , Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, "Common risk factors in currency
  markets," The Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (11), 3731­3777.
Maggiori, Matteo, "Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve cur-
  rencies," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 3038­71.
  , "International Macroeconomics with Imperfect Financial Markets," Handbook of Inter-
  national Economics, 2021.
  , Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "International currencies and capital allocation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (6), 2019­2066.
McBrady, Matthew R and Michael J Schill, "Foreign currency-denominated borrowing
  in the absence of operating incentives," Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 86 (1), 145­
  177.
McCauley, Robert N and Catherine R Schenk, "Central bank swaps then and now:
  swaps and dollar liquidity in the 1960s," 2020.
McGuire, Patrick and Goetz Von Peter, "The US dollar shortage in global banking
  and the international policy response," 2009.
Meese, Richard A and Kenneth Rogoff, "Empirical exchange rate models of the sev-
  enties: Do they fit out of sample?," Journal of international economics, 1983, 14 (1-2),
  3­24.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and H´        elene Rey, "US monetary policy and the global fi-
  nancial cycle," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (6), 2754­2776.
Mota, Lira, "The Corporate Supply of (Quasi) Safe Assets," Available at SSRN, 2020.
Nagel, Stefan, "The liquidity premium of near-money assets," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1927­1971.
Obstfeld, Maurice, "International capital mobility in the 1990s," Technical Report, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 1993.
Pasquariello, Paolo, "Financial market dislocations," The Review of Financial Studies,
  2014, 27 (6), 1868­1914.

                                             46
Popper, Helen, "Long-term covered interest parity: evidence from currency swaps," Jour-
  nal of International Money and Finance, 1993, 12 (4), 439­448.
Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S Rogoff, "The forgotten history of domestic debt,"
  The Economic Journal, 2011, 121 (552), 319­350.
Rime, Dagfinn, Andreas Schrimpf, and Olav Syrstad, "Covered interest parity arbi-
  trage," Available at SSRN 2879904, 2019.
Rogoff, Kenneth, "Can exchange rate predictability be achieved without monetary con-
  vergence?: Evidence from the EMS," European Economic Review, 1985, 28 (1-2), 93­115.
Salomao, Juliana and Liliana Varela, "Exchange rate exposure and firm dynamics,"
  2018.
Schwarz, Krista, "Mind the gap: Disentangling credit and liquidity in risk spreads," Review
  of Finance, 2019, 23 (3), 557­597.
Setser, Brad W. and S.T.W, "Shadow FX Intervention in Taiwan: Solving a USD 100+
  Billion Enigma," Council on Foreign Relations Report, 2019.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W Vishny, "The limits of arbitrage," The Journal of
  finance, 1997, 52 (1), 35­55.
Song, Zhaogang and Haoxiang Zhu, "Mortgage dollar roll," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 2019, 32 (8), 2955­2996.
Valchev, Rosen, "Bond convenience yields and exchange rate dynamics," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2020, 12 (2), 124­66.
Viswanath-Natraj, Ganesh, "Unconventional Monetary Policy and Covered Interest Rate
  Parity Deviations: is there a Link?," 2020.
Wallen, Jonathan, Markups to financial intermediation in foreign exchange markets, Stan-
  ford University, 2020.
Wu, Steve Pak Yeung, "Corporate Balance Sheets and Sovereign Risk Premia," Available
  at SSRN 3685278, 2020.




                                            47
   Figure 1: Cash Flow Diagram for Dollar Funding in the Cash and FX Swap Markets


                         (A) Dollar Funding in the Cash Market




                       (B) Dollar Funding in the FX Swap Market




Notes : This figure shows a schematic representation of the dollar borrowing in the cash and
FX swap market by a USD borrower from a large bank, e.g., JP Morgan. Panel (A) shows
dollar funding in the cash market. Panel (B) shows dollar funding in the FX swap market.




                                            48
                          Figure 2: Global Dollar Funding Chains




Notes : This figure shows the global dollar funding chains from the cash-rich lenders, like the
U.S. MMFs, to the ultimate dollar borrowers. Large global banks play a central role in the
intermediation of dollar funding.




                                              49
          Figure 3: IBOR-CIP Deviations for G10 Currencies vis-`
                                                               a-vis the USD


                              (A) Three-Month Deviations




                                (B) Five-Year Deviations




Notes : This figure shows the ten-day moving averages of the three-month (Panel A) and the
five-year (Panel B) cross-currency bases based on IBOR. The figure is an updated version of
Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a).




                                            50
 Figure 4: Three-Month Dollar-Yen Cross-Currency Basis for Libor, OIS and Repo Rates




                       100
                       0  -100
                 Basis Points
                 -200  -300
                       -400




                                 2008   2010      2012   2014        2016   2018     2020

                                          Libor basis         OIS basis       Repo basis


Notes : This figure plots the three-month dollar-yen cross-currency basis for Libor (in red),
OIS (in green), and Repo (in blue) rates.




                                                         51
                Figure 5: Cross-Currency Basis and Nominal Interest Rates

                                                                                                               NZD
                                                                                                             AUD




                                                     20
                  5Y IBOR Cross-Currency Basis (bps)
                                                                                              CAD

                                          0                                          SEK
                                                                                        GBP
                                                                                                    NOK
                               -20




                                                                         EUR
                                                               CHF
                     -40




                                                                               DKK

                                                              JPY
                                     -60




                                                          0          100               200             300       400
                                                                        5Y Interest Rate Swap Rate (bps)


Notes : This figure plots the average five-year IBOR cross-currency basis against the average
five-year plain-vanilla interest rate swap rate indexed to IBOR in basis points. The sample
period is 01/01/2008-08/21/2020.


        Figure 6: Supply and Demand for Dollar Funding in the FX Swap Markets




Notes : This figure shows supply and demand diagrams for dollar funding in the FX swap
market pre- and post-GFC. The vertical axis shows the the price of FX swap market dollar
funding relative to the cash market dollar funding, as measured by the CIP deviation for
bank rates. The horizontal axis shows the quantity of dollar funding (and hedging activities).




                                                                                      52
                                                                     Figure 7: Quarter-End Dynamics for 1-Week and 1-Month CIP Deviations

          100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
                     Basis Point
                            0




                                      1/14 3/31/15 6/30/15 9/30/15 2/31/15 3/31/16 6/30/16 9/30/16 2/31/16 3/31/17 6/30/17 9/30/17 2/31/17 3/31/18 6/30/18 9/30/18 2/31/18 3/31/19 6/30/19 9/30/19 2/31/19 3/31/20 6/30/20 9/30/20 2/31/20
          12/3                                                   1                               1                               1                               1                               1                               1

                                                     1M contracts cross quarter-ends                   1W contracts cross quarter-ends                   (negative) 1W USDJPY basis                    (negative) 1M USDJPY basis
53




     Notes : This figure updates the figure in Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a) and plots the one-week and one-month dollar-yen
     CIP deviations based on the OIS rates in basis points. The light yellow shading denotes trading dates on which the one-month
     contract shows up on the quarter-end balance sheet, and the light blue shading denotes trading dates on which the one-week
     contract shows up on the quarter-end balance sheet.
                    Figure 8: Overnight CIP Deviations Between Central Bank Deposit Rates

                  1200




                   800
    basis point




                   400




                    0


                         2016         2017              2018               2019        2020



                                             FX IOR basis (EUR)   FX IOR basis (JPY)


Notes : This figure is reproduced from Correa, Du and Liao (2020) and shows the overnight
CIP deviations between interest on excess reserves paid by the Fed and by the ECB/BOJ.
"FX IOR Basis (EUR)" is defined as the difference between the swapped ECB deposit rate
and the interest on reserves at the Fed. "FX IOR Basis (JPY)" is defined as the difference
between the swapped BOJ deposit rate and the interest on reserves at the Fed. The dashed
vertical lines denote quarter-ends.




                                                        54
        Figure 9: Correlation Between CIP Deviations and Other Near-Arbitrages


               8




                                                                                                                           40
               6




                                                                                                                                        30
         Index for first PC
                         4




                                                                                                                           Basis points
                                                                                                                               20
        0       2




                                                                                                                           10
               -2




                                                                                                                           0
               -4




                              2005    2007          2009         2011          2013       2015         2017         2019

                                     First PC of other arbitrage bases (lhs)      (negative) G10 average 5Y Libor basis (rhs)


Notes : This is plots the average 5-year Libor cross-currency basis and the first principal
component (PC) of seven other near-arbitrages: the bond-CDS basis, the CDS-CDX basis,
the U.S. Libor tenor basis, the 30-year Treasury-swap spread, the Refco-Treasury spread,
the KfW-Bund spread, and the TIPS-Treasury spread. The construction of the first PC of
other arbitrage bases follows Du, H´
                                   ebert and Huber (2019).




                                                                          55
                       Figure 10: Corporate Basis and Issuance Flow




Notes : This figure reproduces Figure 2 in Liao (2020). The figure shows the corporate CIP
basis and the bilateral debt issuance flow between the European Monetary Union (EMU)
and the US. Issuance flow is measured as the amount of USD debt issued by EMU firms
minus the amount of EUR debt issued by U.S. firms scaled by the total amount of debt
issuance each quarter. The corporate basis is the estimated differential between the synthetic
dollar funding cost by borrowing in EUR and the direct dollar borrowing cost for individual
corporate issuers.




                                             56
               Figure 11: Central Bank Swap Line Outstanding and Rates




Notes : This figure shows the implied dollar funding rate from the one-week dollar-yen FX
swap market, the rate charged by the central bank swap line, and the central swap line
outstanding (in USD billions).




                                           57
                      Figure 12: Government Bond CIP Deviations




Notes : This figure plots the CIP deviation for 5-year government bonds in "Developed Coun-
tries" (Australia, Canada, Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, the United Kingdom, Japan,
Norway, New Zealand, and Sweden), "Other Emerging Markets" (Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Hungary, Israel, South Korea, Mexico, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Thailand, Turkey, and South
Africa).




                                            58
                                Figure 13: Term Structure of Government Bond CIP Deviations




                                            300
                                            200
                                       Basis Point
                                          100
                                            0
                                            -100




                                                     2000     2002        2004     2006         2008   2010                      2012     2014       2016     2018         2020

                                                                                 3M                    1Y                                 5Y                       10Y


Notes : This figure plots the mean CIP deviation of G10-currency government bonds relative
to the U.S. Treasury bonds at the three-month, one-year, five-year and ten-year tenors. The
German bund is used for the euro-area sovereign bond. All data are constructed as in Du,
Im and Schreger (2018b). One-week moving averages of the series are plotted.


                                         Figure 14: Government Bond vs. Libor CIP Deviations

                                                             3M                                                                                                     10Y
         300




                                                                                                                          100
         200




                                                                                                                          50
    Basis Point




                                                                                                            Basis Point
       100




                                                                                                                          0
         0
         -100




                                                                                                                          -50




                  2000   2002   2004   2006          2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018    2020                            2000   2002   2004   2006   2008    2010   2012   2014   2016   2018    2020

                                   Govt CIP Deviation                     Libor CIP Deviation                                                    Govt CIP Deviation               Libor CIP Deviation



Notes : This figure shows the comparison between the average CIP deviations for G10 cur-
rencies and the government bond yields ("Govt CIP deviations") and Libor and interest rate
swap rates indexed to Libor ("Libor CIP deviations"). The left panel shows the comparison
at the three-month maturity, and the right panel shows the comparison at the 10-year matu-
rity. Both CIP deviations are defined in terms of the difference between the swapped foreign
currency yield into dollars (synthetic dollar yield) and the direct dollar yield. One-week
moving averages of the series are plotted.




                                                                                                       59
       Figure 15: Emerging Market Government CIP Deviations and CDS Spreads




Notes : This figure plots the average CIP deviations relative to U.S. Treasuries at the 5-year
tenor for emerging markets and their CDS spreads. Emerging markets consist of Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Hungary, Israel, South Korea, Mexico, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Thailand,
Turkey, and South Africa.




                                             60
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics on Libor CIP Factors


                             Post-2008                             Crisis
       Currency    3M       1Y       5Y       10Y      3M        1Y      5Y       10Y
        AUD        1.7     13.2     22.3      24.0     3.6      8.2     11.1       5.1
                  (17.6)   (8.2) (9.1)       (15.0)   (39.4)   (15.2) (14.8)     (23.1)

         CAD       -19.3    -10      1.7      5.8      -9.3     -1.0     7.6      9.5
                  (14.1)   (12.3)   (10.5)   (8.9)    (22.2)   (16.8)   (17.7)   (17.3)

         CHF       -23.4    -25.3    -32.1    -35.9    -30.9    -31.6    -31.3    -29
                  (22.2)   (13.8)   (14.9)   (16.7)   (43.7)   (16.8)   (18.2)   (18.6)

        DKK        -58.1    -56.5    -45.3    -37.8    -95.3    -86.4    -54     -35.1
                  (32.4)   (23.5)   (15.9)   (14.7)   (64.8)   (40.2)   (16.1)   (9.8)

         EUR       -29.6    -28.2    -26.5    -22.3    -69.3    -55.5    -34.5    -22
                  (25.7)   (17.5)   (12.9)   (11.7)   (54.4)   (29.2)   (15.0)   (9.9)

         GBP       -16.6    -10.9    -8.0     -7.6     -43.1    -23.9    -13.5   -10.4
                  (23.3)   (14.1)   (12.2)   (11.5)   (54.2)   (26.2)   (13.7)   (7.2)

         JPY       -25.4    -33.3    -53.4    -52.8    -27.3    -37.7    -50.8    -41.7
                  (19.3)   (15.5)   (21.7)   (22.7)   (37.9)   (14.0)   (29.4)   (29.3)

        NOK        -28.9    -24.6   -14.1    -11.9     -70.3    -51.6    -22.7   -15.6
                  (23.7)   (16.9)   (9.2)    (7.1)    (48.7)   (30.8)   (10.7)   (6.8)

         NZD       9.2     16.6      26.7     33.1     23.1     18.3     22.4     23.1
                  (15.5)   (6.9)    (11.1)   (14.2)   (34.8)   (11.9)   (17.5)   (22.5)

         SEK       -24.8    -21.3    -5.2     3.7      -48.9    -36.8    -8.7      -.3
                  (19.9)   (13.2)   (8.3)    (9.8)    (47.3)   (24.0)   (8.6)    (10.7)

        Mean       -21.4   -18.3    -13.7    -10.5     -36.5    -29.8   -17.7    -12.1
                  (15.3)   (9.7)    (7.7)    (7.0)    (36.2)   (16.0)   (7.4)    (5.2)

Notes : This table reports the means and the standard deviations of the daily Libor CIP
deviations at the three-month, one-year, five-year, and ten-year horizons. The Post-2008
sample runs from January 1, 2008 to August 27, 2020. The "Crisis" periods are August 2008
- December 2008, November 2011 - February 2012, and March 2020 - May 2020.




                                              61
 Table 2: Correlation Between First PC of Cross-Currency Basis and Global Risk Factors


  Variables      First PC   Mean Basis     Dollar   VIX     BBB-Tsy     S&P Ret.    HKM Factor
 First PC           1.00
 Mean Basis         0.96        1.00
 Dollar            -0.61        -0.60       1.00
 VIX               -0.33        -0.33      0.55      1.00
 BBB-Tsy           -0.52        -0.55       0.66    0.55      1.00
 S&P Ret            0.56         0.57      -0.67    -0.78     -0.82       1.00
 HKM Factor         0.62        0.62       -0.42    -0.35     -0.79       0.74           1.00

Notes : This table presents the correlations between the first principal (PC) component of the
quarterly changes in the 5-year cross-currency basis of G10 currencies vis-`
                                                                           a-vis the U.S. dollar
and the quarterly changes in other global risk factors. The variables are as follows: "First
PC" denotes the first principal component; "Mean Basis" denotes the quarterly change
in the average cross-currency basis across G10 currencies; "Dollar" denotes the quarterly
percentage change in the Federal Reserve Board broad dollar index; "VIX" denotes the
quarterly percentage change in the implied volatility of the S&P options; "BBB-Tsy" denotes
the quarterly change in the BBB-Treasury spread; "S&P Ret" denotes the quarterly total
return on the S&P index, and "HKM factor" is the quarterly innovations to the intermediary
capital ratio in He, Kelly and Manela (2017). The sample period is 2008Q1-2018Q3.




                                              62
Table 3: Quarter-End & Year-End Jumps in CIP Deviations for Dollar-Yen (Basis Points)


                  One-Week Jump        One-Month Jump         Three-Month Jump
                    (1)    (2)           (3)     (4)            (5)      (6)
          Year    1st QE All QE        1st QE All QE          1st YE   All YE

          2015     128      136.5        35.8      39.7         13.4       9.4
                  (68.9)    (82)        (31.2)    (25.8)         .          .

          2016     194.1    237.3        51.5      63.7         14.4       3.1
                   (63)     (54.3)      (35.7)    (16.5)         .          .

          2017      182      245.2       37.9       53          14.4        18
                  (200.5)   (298.2)     (17.9)     (50)           .          .

          2018    136.7      113         50.9      52.9         32.5       34.9
                  (82.4)    (60.2)      (39.6)    (40.5)         .           .

          2019     142.7    144.8        43.9       46           31        21.6
                   (70)     (92.3)      (43.1)     (40)           .          .

          2020    104.6      81.7        19.7      63.9         15.8       13.8
                  (88.7)    (109)       (16.3)    (73.7)         .           .

          Total    148      159.7        39.9      53.2        20.3        16.8
                  (99.6)    (141)       (30.6)    (40.7)       (8.9)       (11)
            N       24       24           24        24           6           6

Notes : This table reports the mean and the standard deviations of the quarter(year)-end
jumps in dollar-yen CIP deviations based on the OIS rates by year. Column 1 summarizes
the one-day jump in the 1-week CIP deviation on the first quarter-end crossing (QE) date for
each quarter relative to the average 1-week CIP deviation across the five business days prior
to the first QE date. Column 2 summarizes the average quarter-end jump in the 1-week
CIP deviation across all trading dates that cross the quarter-end, relative to the average
1-week CIP deviation across the five business days prior to the first QE date. Columns 3
and 4 repeat the exercise to summarize the one-day and average quarter-end effect for the
one-month CIP deviations. Columns 5 and 6 summarize the one-day and average year-end
(YE) effect for the three-month CIP deviations.




                                             63
                   Table 4: The Broad Dollar and Mean CIP Deviations



                                          3m      1y          5y         10y
               Libor Mean USD            -0.01 -0.17***    -0.42***   -0.44***
                                        (0.03)  (0.06)      (0.09)     (0.11)
                                   R2    0.01    0.14        0.30       0.25
                                   N      50      50          50          50

               Govt Mean USD             -0.01 -0.15***    -0.18***    -0.14**
                                        (0.02)  (0.03)      (0.06)      (0.06)
                                   R2    0.03    0.32        0.18        0.08
                                   N      50      47          50          44

Notes : The table reports regressions of the form

                                   e$
                                    t =  +  xt + t .

The dependent variable in all regressions is the quarterly change in log broad dollar exchange
rate. The column heading denotes the tenor of the CIP deviation, "3m" for three-month,
"1y" for one-year, "5y" for five-year, and "10y" for ten-year. The Libor Mean USD is
the quarterly change in the average Libor CIP deviation against the USD and the Govt
Mean USD is the mean Government Bond CIP deviation against the USD. All variables
are constructed as in Du, Im and Schreger (2018b). Significance levels are denoted by ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.1.




                                             64
                                                  Table 5: Bilateral Exchange Rate Against the USD

                                       Pooled      AUD        CAD           CHF      DKK        EUR        GBP       JPY      NOK        NZD        SEK

               One-Year Tenor
               Libor Mean USD          -0.19***   -0.26**     -0.08     -0.21***    -0.25***   -0.25***    -0.17*    0.03    -0.23**     -0.18*    -0.25***
                              R2         0.10       0.13      0.03        0.18        0.23       0.23       0.09     0.00      0.10       0.07       0.16

               Govt Mean USD           -0.15***   -0.26***   -0.11***   -0.12***    -0.16***   -0.16***   -0.14***   0.04    -0.22***   -0.21***   -0.21***
                                  R2     0.19       0.34       0.14       0.17        0.27       0.28       0.19     0.01      0.27       0.27       0.31

               Bilateral Libor         -0.08***     0.22      -0.08     -0.12***     -0.10*    -0.10***    -0.03     -0.03   -0.19***   0.26**      -0.18*
                                  R2     0.04       0.06       0.01       0.16        0.11       0.20      0.01      0.00      0.16      0.10        0.13

               Bilateral Govt          -0.08***    -0.11*    -0.15***       -0.05    -0.08     -0.11***     0.00     -0.01   -0.14***   -0.14***    -0.09*
                                  R2     0.09       0.09       0.23         0.09     0.10        0.20       0.00     0.00      0.31       0.17       0.16

               Five-Year Tenor
               Libor Mean USD          -0.42***   -0.58***   -0.39***   -0.27**     -0.42***   -0.42***   -0.56***   0.15    -0.62***   -0.57***   -0.56***
65




                               R2        0.19       0.23       0.25       0.12        0.23       0.24       0.37     0.02      0.29       0.27       0.30

               Govt Mean USD           -0.18***   -0.26**    -0.15**    -0.13**     -0.17***   -0.17***   -0.20***   0.04    -0.22**    -0.29***   -0.27***
                                  R2     0.10       0.14       0.12       0.08        0.12       0.12       0.14     0.00      0.11       0.21       0.20

               Bilateral Libor         -0.17***    -0.08     -0.17**    -0.21***    -0.11**    -0.24***   -0.38***   -0.05   -0.43***     0.01     -0.52***
                                  R2     0.08       0.01       0.12       0.17        0.09       0.27       0.27     0.01      0.18       0.00       0.27

               Bilateral Govt          -0.10***    -0.04     -0.13***   -0.11***     -0.04      -0.07*    -0.12**    -0.05   -0.17***   -0.16***    -0.07
                                  R2     0.07       0.01       0.23       0.13        0.01       0.05       0.11      0.02     0.18       0.14       0.03

     Notes : The table reports regressions of the form
                                                                        i/$
                                                                       et     = i + i xi,t +     i,t

     The dependent variable in all regressions is the quarterly change in the bilateral exchange rate against the USD. The column heading denotes the
     currencies, and "Pooled" indicates all currencies were pooled in a single panel regression. The Libor Mean USD is the quarterly change in the average
     Libor CIP deviation against the USD and the Govt Mean USD is the mean Government Bond CIP deviation against the USD. Bilateral Libor is the
     currency-specific Libor-based CIP deviation against the USD and Bilateral Govt is the bilateral CIP deviation between the government bond yield in
     that particular currency and US Treasuries. All variables are constructed as in Du, Im and Schreger (2018b). Significance levels are denoted by ***
     p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.1.
Appendix

A         Calculating the Annualized Forward Premium

In this section, we describe the calculation method for the FX forward premium for various
maturities. To be precise, we let t denote the trade date, ts denotes the spot settlement date,
which is typically two business days after the trade date,34 and tm denotes the maturity date
of the forward transaction. Depending on the time between the trade date and the maturity
date, we have different calculation methods for the forward premium.
       First, if the maturity date is within one-year after the spot settlement date, i.e., 0 <
tm - ts < 1, we calculate the FX premium from the spot and forward exchange rates. In
particular,
                                                     360        t,tm
                                       t0 ,tm =                      ,
                                                  ACT (ts , tm ) St

where ACT (ts , tm ) denotes the number of calendar days between the spot settlement date
ts ,35 and the forward settlement date tm , and t,tm = Ft,tm - St is the forward point for
forward contract traded at t and maturing at tm .
       Second, if the maturity date is greater than one year away from the spot settlement date,
FX forward market becomes illiquid at these longer maturities. Instead, we can calculate
the long-term forward premium based on the fixed-for-fixed cross-currency swaps.36 As
discussed in Du and Schreger (2016) and Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2018a), for developed
market currencies, the fixed-for-fixed cross-currency swap rate can be constructed in three
                                                                 i,IRS
steps. First, we pay the fixed-for-floating interest rate swap, rt,t+n , in order to swap the

fixed interest rate in currency i, for a floating benchmark interest rate in currency i. At
  34
      The notable exception is the Canadian dollar, for which the spot settlement date is 1 business day after
the trade date.
   35
      The annualization factor for foreign exchange forward rates is generally 360/ACT . The British pound
is an exception, for which the annualization factor is 365/ACT .
   36
      We provide Bloomberg tickers to construct the long-term forward premium for major developed and
emerging market currencies in the internet appendix for Du, Im and Schreger (2018b). An updated dataset
used to measure CIP throughout this chapter is available for download here.



                                                      66
this point, we are still in the same currency, but only swapped the fixed interest rate to
                                                                               i/$
get a floating rate. Second, we pay the cross-currency basis swap, xccyt,t+n , to swap the
floating benchmark in currency i for a floating benchmark in the dollar, i.e., the U.S. Libor.
Third, we swap the U.S. Libor back to a fixed dollar interest rate, so, we receive the U.S.
                                              $,IRS
fixed-for-floating interest rate swap, i.e., rt,t +n . By combining these three steps, we are able

to swap a fixed foreign currency interest rate for a fixed dollar interest rate. The expression
for the long-term forward premium is therefore given by:


                               i/$     i,IRS              i/$$,IRS
                              t,t+n = rt,t +n + xccyt,t+n - rt,t+n .




Comparing this expression to equation 1, we see that the cross-currency basis swap rate
    i/$
xccyt,t+n directly measures the long-term deviations from CIP for IBOR-indexed interest
rate swap rates.
   For many emerging market currencies, the first two steps of the swaps are combined into
                              i/$,N DS
a single instrument. We let rt,t+n       denote a non-deliverable cross-currency swap that swaps
the fixed interest rate in currency i for U.S. Libor, such that we have:


                                      i/$      i/$,N DS      $,IRS
                                     t,t+n = rt,t+n       - rt,t+n .




   Third, if the maturity date is actually before the spot settlement date, we need to adjust
the formulas. The complication is that the spot exchange rate refers to the exchange rate
on the spot settlement date, two business days away from the trade date. There are two
important short-dated FX swap contracts that mature before the spot settlement date. In
an overnight (ON) FX swap, the near leg of the swap settles on trade date, whereas the far
leg settles on the next business date. In a tomorrow-next (TN) FX swap, the near leg of the
swap settles on the next business date after the trade, and the far leg of the swap settles on
the spot settlement date. We let the forward point associated with the ON and TN swaps
be on                    tn
   t = Ft,t - Ft,ton and t = St - Ft,ttn , respectively. Therefore, we have the ON forward



                                                 67
premium equal to
                                 360                  on
                                                       t
                        ON
                        t  =                                       ,
                               ACT (t, ton )     St - t - on
                                                      tn
                                                          t

and the TN forward premium is equal to

                                     360                tn
                                                         t
                          T
                          t
                            N
                              =                                .
                                  ACT (ton , ttn )   St - tn
                                                           t




                                            68
