                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRODUCTIVITY, PLACE, AND PLANTS

                                       Benjamin Schoefer
                                           Oren Ziv

                                     Working Paper 28772
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28772


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Luke Watson for excellent research assistance. We thank Dominick Bartelme, Gabriel
Chodorow-Reich, Jonathan Dingel, Cecile Gaubert, Steven Haider, Andrei Levchenko, Martin
Rotemberg, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, Yue Yu, and Ben Zou for useful discussions.
We thank participants of the NBER Summer Institute Urban Economics Meeting, the Third
International Workshop "Market studies and spatial economics," the 10th European Meeting of
the Urban Economics Association, and at Michigan State University for feedback. For financial
support, we thank the UC Berkeley Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, and the
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The paper draws on confidential data from the US
Census Bureau, which requires the following disclaimer: "Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the US
Census Bureau. This research was performed at a Federal Statistical Research Data Center
under FSRDC Project Number 1890. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Benjamin Schoefer and Oren Ziv. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Productivity, Place, and Plants
Benjamin Schoefer and Oren Ziv
NBER Working Paper No. 28772
May 2021
JEL No. D22,D24,E23,R0,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

Why do cities differ so much in productivity? Using a split-sample IV strategy, we document that
up to three quarters of the large measured dispersion in productivity across US cities is spurious
and reflects the "luck of the draw" of idiosyncratically heterogeneous plants. Due to this
granularity bias, economies with randomly reallocated plants exhibit nearly as high a variance as
the empirical economy. For new plants, four fifths of the raw dispersion reflects granularity bias,
and their productivity is only imperfectly correlated with that of older plants, which dominate
measured productivity levels. These US-based patterns broadly extend to European countries.


Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
schoefer@berkeley.edu

Oren Ziv
Michigan State University
Department of Economics
orenziv@msu.edu
1    Introduction
The sources and consequences of spatial differences in productivity are a frequent focus in
urban economics, starting with the state-level analysis of Ciccone and Hall (1996). Spatial
differences in productivity contribute to regional dispersion in wages and employment
(Caliendo, Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte, 2018; Hornbeck and Moretti, 2018), drive
location choices of plants (Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010; Gaubert, 2018) and of people
and hence the city size distribution (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2013). They are also
testable implications of core urban economics models (e.g., Gaubert, 2018; Davis and
Dingel, 2020). Furthermore, these differences motivate studies of spatial misallocation
and the design of spatial policies (Moretti, 2012; Boeri, Ichino, Moretti, and Posch, 2019;
Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suárez Serrato, and Zidar, 2019; Hsieh and Moretti, 2019; Fajgelbaum
and Gaubert, 2020). Often, the underlying assumption of this literature is the presence
of total factor productivity (TFP) differences in place-specific production functions, which
shift productivity of all local plants, incumbent and new.
    Yet, due to measurement challenges, existing research does not typically assert and
dissect the raw empirical dispersion of city-specific productivity levels directly. Instead,
productivity differences are indirectly measured on the basis of observable symptoms such
as city size (Gabaix, 1999b,a), city growth (Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman, and Shleifer, 1992;
Henderson, 1994), rent levels (Dekle and Eaton, 1999), or wage levels (Glaeser and Mare,
2001; Hsieh and Moretti, 2019; Ehrlich and Overman, 2020). Other research studies city-
level productivity directly, but does so either as a dependent variable (Sveikauskas, 1975;
Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, and Roux, 2010; Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and
Roux, 2012), or, if as an explanatory variable, uses instruments for productivity growth
rather than raw productivity levels (Hornbeck and Moretti, 2018).
    We provide a direct measure of the spatial dispersion in productivity in the United
States and 15 European countries. Besides providing the raw dispersion measures, we
estimate the dispersion of true place effects, which we define as the expected productivity
of a randomly drawn plant from a potentially place-specific distribution. This statistical
definition of place effects is agnostic to their sources, encompassing exogenous or endoge-
nous causal effects, sorting--the economic sources that are the object of much research in
urban economics--or even spatially correlated mismeasurement.
    In our framework, true place effects stand in contrast to statistical differences in observed
averages of productivity of finite populations of plants, which are finite draws from the
latent productivity distribution of each location's infinite superpopulation of plants. Of
course, the resulting raw, prevailing productivity conditions of the actually existing plants


                                               1
are real in that they matter for core outcomes. They drive, for instance, the dispersion in
wage levels (see, e.g., Figure 1 plotting region averages of TFP and wages against density
in Combes et al., 2010), and may hence be revealed in the observed wage or rent levels
(Albouy, 2016). Moreover, even randomly placed plants of course have real effects on local
economies (Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2010). Finally, raw productivity averages
may also indicate the degree of spatial misallocation (Hsieh and Moretti, 2019).
    However, rather than true place effects, these commonly measured productivity aver-
ages may simply reflect the "luck of the draw" of finite counts of plants, tremendously
heterogeneous in idiosyncratic productivity and size, that happen to be located in a given
place. That is, our setting is granular in the sense that a given plant need not wash out
in the average. Hence, the average productivity level in a given location indeed features
considerable sampling variability--which enters the raw variance of place averages as a
term we call granularity bias. In the extreme case, all of the observed spatial differences
would reflect granularity bias, which would leave no room for the other economic sources
that have been heretofore marshalled to explain this variation. In the data, we find that
granularity bias accounts for two thirds to four fifths of the spatial raw differences in
productivity--accordingly shifting the goalpost for what economic sources captured by
true place effects should explain to one fifth to one third of the variance of standard
average-based productivity measures.
    Indeed, we document large dispersion in the raw variance of average productivity
across US cities (metropolitan statistical areas, MSAs) demeaned within the national 4-digit
industry (which nets out mechanical productivity differences working through industry
composition). Our main measure of plant-level productivity is log of revenue total factor
productivity (TFPr), although we also study log value added per worker. Our headline
number of the raw variance of average-based location effects is 0.026--the dissection of
which is the focus of the paper. That is, a city one standard deviation above the mean
has about a 16 log points (17%) higher average productivity. Manufacturing plants in the
top 10% most productive MSAs are on average 48 log points (61%) more productive than
plants in the bottom 10%. While MSA-level results involve averages across many plants
(the average plant count per MSA is around 300 in our sample), we also construct finer
industry-specific location effects, which exhibit four times the variance, at 0.110.
    We assess, and ultimately strip out, the scope of granularity bias in three comple-
     See Syverson (2011) for a canonical overview of the degree and potential determinants of between-plant
differences in productivity. We take this heterogeneity as given. Gaubert and Itskhoki (forthcoming) explore
comparative advantage, of specific firms rather than all firms in a sector, in international trade. Dingel and
Tintelnot (2020) study the impact of small and zero numbers of commuter flows on the estimation of
general-equilibrium spatial models.



                                                      2
mentary strategies. First, we provide a nonparametric permutation test by calculating
the probability that the observed level of spatial dispersion would emerge if plant-level
productivity were independent of place. We simulate 1,000 US economies that randomly
reassign the empirical plants across MSAs, preserving the empirical plant count in each
MSA-industry cell. The resulting series of raw variances in the average-based place effects
of these simulated economies makes up our nonparametric sampling distribution. The
average simulated variance is 0.017. This dispersion is high, but one third less than the
empirical number (0.026)--which is in the 99th percentile of the distribution of the ran-
domized economies. For industry-specific location effects, the empirical variance of 0.110
is close to the permutation-based average variance of 0.096. But the empirical variance is
in the 98th percentile of the distribution of permuted variances. Hence, while granularity
can generate substantial spurious variation, the US economy does exhibit a statistically
significant degree of dispersion in true place effects.
    Second, we constructively estimate the bias-corrected variance of true place effects. We
employ a split-sample approach. In every MSA-industry cell, we randomly split plants
into two equally sized groups. We then estimate average-based place effects for each of the
two resulting economies. The covariance between the average-based place effects of these
paired cities is an unbiased estimator of the variance of the true place effects, which, by
definition, are the common components of both split samples. This bias-correction shrinks
the variance substantially, from 0.110 to 0.023 for the industry-specific location effects, and
even for the MSA-level location effects, from 0.026 to 0.008. In robustness checks, we find
similar reductions in the raw variance when studying labor productivity (value added per
worker) rather than TFP, as well as when using different industry definitions. In sum,
when identifying the variance of true place effects, places are much more similar than the
raw variance of average productivity levels suggests, and the majority of spatial differences
in realized productivity reflect largely the luck of the draw from highly dispersed plant
distributions.
    Some immediate implications of the large role of granularity are that counterfactuals
involving spatial reallocation of inputs from low to high TFP places (see, e.g., Desmet
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2013; Hsieh and Moretti, 2019) would have lower effects on aggre-
gate output, to the degree that new plant draws absorb the inputs (rather than through
intensive-margin expansion of existing plant draws). Moreover, empirical correlations and
variance decompositions accounting for spatial productivity differences between places
are subject to granularity bias.
   Broadly, our test is in the dartboard spirit of Ellison and Glaeser (1997), who study whether the observed
geographical concentration is statistically different from randomly located plants.



                                                     3
    Third, we assess the role of three sources of granularity bias: idiosyncratic plant-level
heterogeneity in productivity, finite plant counts, and plant size (as our baseline speci-
fication weights by plant employment). Regarding idiosyncratic variance, we winsorize
plant-level TFP by 0% and 2.5% rather than our baseline of 1%, and find similar results.
Regarding plant size, we also provide unweighted results, which imply smaller raw vari-
ances that nonetheless continue to overstate the variance of true place effects considerably.
Regarding finite plant counts, we replicate our analysis but raise the minimum plant count
for each location-industry cell incrementally from two (our baseline) to 150. While indeed
the raw variance falls somewhat, it never reaches the bias-adjusted variance. In fact, re-
quiring more populous cells throws out the baby with the bathwater: the number of places
included in the sample falls more than proportionately with the raw variance. By design,
this seeming solution to the granularity problem changes the sample, and, we find, does
so towards a more homogeneous one with a lower bias-corrected variance--leaving the
raw variance overstating the true place effects by a fairly stable amount. At a cell-size
cutoff of 100, the remaining sample features only 10% of MSAs (and a much lower fraction
of industry-MSA cells), fails the permutation test, and yields a bias-corrected variance of
zero. Overall, therefore, granularity bias is a robust feature of the data, and alternative
solutions that build on adjusting the sample and other dimensions of the data may defeat
the purpose of quantifying the dispersion in the true and complete economy. Furthermore,
our results persists even in our MSA-level analysis, where averages are taken over large
numbers of plants (so that idiosyncratic dispersion and size skew contribute to granular-
ity bias). Instead, our strategy reveals the true variance net of granularity that takes into
account the, we find dominant, contribution from smaller--most granular--cells.
    Hence, granularity bias accounts for two thirds of the raw variance of MSA effects, and
fourth fifths of that of industry-specific MSA effects. The remaining dispersion in true
place effects arises from at least three sources: causal effects of place, sorting among and
selection of ex-ante differentiated plants, and remaining measurement error common to
a place. Focusing on differences in expected values of productivity, we do not speak to
spatial differences in other moments of the distribution of plant-level productivity. By
focusing on differences in location averages and taking plant-level productivity measures
as given, our approach also does not resolve the largely orthogonal but important issue
of plant-level measurement of productivity (see, e.g., Haltiwanger, Kulick, and Syverson,
2018; Bils, Klenow, and Ruane, 2020; Rotemberg and White, 2020).
    We close with three further applications of our method. First, we zoom in on the
dispersion in place effects for new plants. We are motivated by a specific implication of
our main findings, that productivity measures of existing plants need not be informative


                                             4
for and carry over to the outcomes of new plants and projects in the location. Indeed, raw
productivity averages measured from new plants (at most five years old) have markedly
higher raw variances of 0.084 and 0.152 for location and industry-specific location effects.
However, the bias-corrected variances drop by dramatically more, to 0.015 and 0.019,
respectively. Additionally, we quantify systematic divergence of true place effects of
new plants from those of incumbent, older plants, which dominate the raw measures.
Using our split-sample method to instrument for the relationship between the true place
effects of new and old plants, we find that places that are 10% more productive for old
plants are only 6% more productive for new plants. This considerable divergence again
implies that aggregate effects of counterfactual distributions of inputs across seemingly
heterogeneous places are attenuated when absorbed at the extensive, plant margin. The
imperfect relationship may also caution against using TFP levels implied by all plants as
those affecting entrepreneurship, plant location choices, and investment decisions, or as
a guide for place-based policies targeting those outcomes, in favor of measures estimated
off new plants.
    Second, we also study log value added per worker (labor productivity), which may be
a less demanding productivity concept, which is the symptom of spatial misallocation of
labor (Hsieh and Moretti, 2019), and which, mapping into the marginal product of labor,
is the canonical labor demand factor determining wages. We find that granularity bias is
if anything more pronounced for this productivity measure.
    Third, we show that the role of granularity bias extends to the within-country regional
dispersion of 15 European countries, drawing on Bureau van Dk firm-level data.
    Section 2 defines the conceptual and statistical framework of our analysis. Section 3
presents the data, and the sample and variable construction. Section 4 presents the main
results, covering the United States, TFP, and all plants in a place. Section 5 presents the
analysis of new plants. Section 6 presents the results for labor productivity. Section 7
presents the analysis for 15 European countries.


2    Statistical Basics: Place Effects Under Granularity
We start by defining true place effects, then clarify the pitfalls of estimating the dispersion
of place effects, and present our strategies to overcome these measurement challenges.




                                              5
2.1   Formal Framework
We formulate a statistical definition of true place effects of productivity--the expected
value of productivity of a randomly drawn plant from a potentially place-specific distribution--
and clarify how those relate to measured raw averages of finite counts of idiosyncratically
heterogeneous plants.

Setting The economy is characterized by a set L of count NL locations indexed by l  L.
Each location has a count of N Pl plants, which are indexed by p  Pl , where Pl denotes the
population of location-l plants; we will also consider subsets Sl  Pl of size N Sl .
     Plant p in location l has log total factor productivity apl = ln Apl --but our derivations
below would also apply to, e.g., average labor productivity and alternative productivity
concepts. In fact, while we refer to apl as plant productivity, we also leave open the
possibility that it also reflects mismeasurement.
     Plants are heterogeneous in productivity in ways that potentially depend on their
location l. We agnostically describe this property in the statistical form of a latent data-
generating process a  Fla (a), of plant-level productivity in a location l.
     Importantly, this latent data generating process does not describe the given finite pop-
ulation of existing plants (as in the real economy, or our census data). In statistical terms,
Fla (a) describes the location's infinite superpopulation of plants, from which the finite
observed population is drawn. The draws from Fla (a) give the plans that would, if drawn,
be active (unlike the potential-entrants distribution that include non-viable plants as in
plant selection models such as in Melitz, 2003), and hence the distribution may reflect a
host of underlying economic forces--e.g., selection on entry and exit, and sorting.
     In addition, a plant is characterized by size ep (e.g., employment); the exposition below
starts with unweighted (or equally sized) plants within locations, and no weighting across
locations. We discuss the extension to weighted averages and heterogeneity in size in
Section 2.6.

True Place Effects   We define true place effects as expected values of plant-level productiv-
ity in location l:

                                  l = E apl l] =    adFl (a).                               (1)

This statistical definition of place effects is agnostic to and captures a variety of specific
economic mechanisms that manifest themselves in the expected value of productivity of
plants in a location. Causal effects of place on productivity, including from agglomeration


                                              6
effects (including productivity spillovers), would affect (not necessarily exclusively) this
expected value. Systematic sorting or collocation of plants into places by productivity
would show up in this place effect. Location-specific mismeasurement of productivity
(e.g., in the production functions, input and output prices, quantities or qualities--or the
presence of multi-plant firms with their constituent plants having similar productivity)
can be reflected in this place effect. By drawing on plants after plant location choices and
entry and exit dynamics, it may also capture productivity-relevant spatial differences in
these selection margins. Of course, our formulation of place effects as expected values
would not sufficiently characterize any given specific model or mechanism (see Combes,
Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux, 2012, for a discussion of potential effects on other
moments); instead, other moments of the latent location-specific productivity distribution
Fla (a) may differ across places l  L due to the aforementioned factors.
     Our goal is to characterize the dispersion of true place effects l across locations l  L.
We now contrast the true place effect defined in Equation (1) with the average productivity
level of a finite set of plants in a place.

Idiosyncratic Plant-Level Productivity Using our definition of place effects in Equation
(1), we can rewrite a plant's log productivity apl as the sum of the place effect l and an
idiosyncratic component upl :

                                          apl = l + upl .                                      (2)

That is, plants' idiosyncratic residuals upl within a location l are simply deviations around
the true place effect, expected value l , and the residuals too are hence drawn from a
potentially location-specific distribution u  Flu (u). Hence, their expected value is zero:
E upl l = 0. Moreover, Fla (a) = Flu (a - l ). Again, just as with place effects, this statistical
definition of the idiosyncratic deviations upl takes no stance on their economic origins.
Like plant productivity apl , idiosyncratic deviation upl may capture actual productivity
differences between heterogeneous plants in a location, mean-reverting shocks (although
we will study one cross section), or plant-specific measurement error (e.g., Bils, Klenow,
and Ruane, 2020; Rotemberg and White, 2020).

Average-Based Place Effects Since E upl p  Sl = 0 for any random sample Sl , the average
productivity lSl of any given single and finite set of plants p  Sl is an unbiased and




                                                7
consistent estimator of the true place effect of location l, the expected value l :

                                                1
                                        Sl =
                                                            apl .                            (3)
                                               N Sl   pSl


For the rest of the paper, unless we consider specific samples, we will consider the--
finite--population of plants Sl = Pl (rather than a sample Sl  Pl in each location), as with
our census data. We then we denote the population average by     l :

                                                1
                                       l =
                                                            apl .                            (4)
                                               N Pl   pPl


We will also consider and label specific samples (split samples, old or new plants etc), for
which we index place effects by a superscript X , i.e., lX . We will also denote cell-level
plant counts by Nl (population) or NlX (for subsamples indexed by X ).
   However, even the population average defined in Equation (4) generally differs from
our object of interest, namely the expected value E apl l defined in Equation (1). That
expectation is taken over the latent data-generating process Fla (a) of plant productivities,
from which the real economy and the census data draw a finite set of plants. We next
discuss the pitfalls of estimating the true place effects on the basis of average productivities
taken over finite sets of plants, and then our identification strategy stripping out the
associated measurement error, which we characterize as granularity bias below.


2.2   Pitfalls of Estimating Dispersion in Place Effects
While each place effect l is estimated without bias, dispersion measures based on averages
l are upward-biased estimates of the dispersion of true place effects l , for reasons we

jointly label as "granularity." We formalize this bias with the example of our leading
dispersion statistic, namely the variance.

Variances of Place Averages The following equation, written in the notation for the
population of finite plants, clarifies the pitfalls of estimating the variance of place effects




                                                  8
l on the basis of location averages lSl :

  Raw Var of Place Averages
                                      1                            1         
          Var(l )             = Var           [l + upl ] = Var l +       upl                                             (5)
                                       Nl pPl                      Nl pPl 
                                                                      1   l (u)2                       1    
                              =          Var (l )             +                            + 2 Cov l ,   upl ,           (6)
                                                                      L lL Nl                      Nl pPl 
                                  Var of True Place Effects
                                                                   >0 if Nl < (u)>0                     =0
                                                                  Bias from Granularity:    Orthogonal by Construction
                                                                  Var of Sample Means


where l (u)2 is the variance of plant-specific deviations upl from place effect l in location
l. The l-index permits heteroskedasticity in the distribution of plant-level idiosyncratic
productivities Fl (u) across locations. The third term in the second line is zero because the
idiosyncratic deviations from the expected value are orthogonal to the expected value.
    In the second line, the first term is the variance of true place effects. The second term is
a term that biases upward the raw variance of productivity averages as an estimate of the
variance of true place effects due to the granular nature of plants in places. We call this
term granularity bias, and characterize it below.


2.3   Granularity and its Sources
While the variance of the place averages   l is a consistent estimator of the variance of true
place effects l , with finite populations of plants within locations it is biased upward by the
second term in the second line of Equation (6): the weighted average of within-location
variances divided by location count of plants. This term reflects "granularity" in the sense
that a given plant need not wash out in the average. It arises under finite cell counts
of plants Nl combined with large idiosyncratic variance l (u)2 within a cell l, so it is
present even when Sl = Pl as the populations of existing plants are finite. Intuitively, these
factors generate realized deviations of sample averages from expected values l , raising
the observed variance of place averages above the variance of true place effects. Below we
dissect each source of granularity and discuss the potential empirical relevance of each.

Plant Counts per Cell First, to gauge the empirical range of cell sizes (plant counts) Nl ,
we plot the CDF of cell sizes from public-use data on manufacturing plants in the US
County Business Patterns in Appendix Figure A.1. Panel (a) plots the CDF of plant counts
for cells defined as MSAs (pooling all industries); Panel (b) does so for MSA-industry
cells, at the level of the 86 4-digit NAICS manufacturing industries. While small cells are


                                                                  9
an obvious issue in measuring variance across location-industries, for which 60% have
fewer than 5 plants, there are more plant observations at the MSA level when pooling all
industries. Our empirical implementation will exclude varying degrees of small cells from
our analysis.

Idiosyncratic Dispersion Second, Equation (6) clarifies that even for larger Nl , granular-
ity bias can be large if plants exhibit large idiosyncratic variance in at least some locations.
In the national data, within-industry dispersion of productivity across manufacturing
plants is indeed tremendous. Cunningham, Foster, Grim, Haltiwanger, Pabilonia, Stewart,
and Wolf (2020) report standard deviations of 0.460 and 0.684 for log TFP and log la-
bor productivity (revenue per hour worked), respectively, covering 1997-2016 and the US
manufacturing sector, using US Census data similar to ours, and studying 4-digit NAICS
industries (with equal weights across industries and years). The 90th percentile of plants
in a 4-digit NAICS industry are, nationally, 193% (1.078 in logs) or 490% (1.773 in logs)
more productive than the 10th percentile, for TFP and labor productivity respectively.
The important work by Syverson (2004) reports similar statistics for an earlier period.

Large, Dominant Plants A third source of granularity arises in the common specifi-
cation in which plants are weighted by size such as employment, as we will do in our
empirical implementation (although our theoretical exposition above is written in terms
of unweighted (or equally sized) plants). Then, large plants can dominate plant averages.
(We additionally discuss weighting in Section 2.6.) In Appendix Figure A.2, we present
Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients of employment-plant concentration at the MSA and
MSA-industry (4-digit NAICS) cells. We do so for the p10, p25, p50, p75 and p90 of cells
in terms of their Gini coefficient. We drop MSAs and MSA-industry cells with fewer than
ten plants, which zooms into the cells least likely to be subject to granularity bias (and for
the Lorenz curve to have a clear interpretation). This restriction does not bind when we
define cells as MSAs. Again we draw on public-use CBP data, with further details on the
construction of the indices contained in the figure note.
    In manufacturing, the typical (median) MSA and MSA-industry cell are tremendously
concentrated. Pooling all industries, the Gini coefficient for the median MSA is 0.76 and
ranges from 0.70 to 0.82 for the 10th and 90th percentile MSAs. In the median MSA, the
top 5% of plants employ 46% of manufacturing workers. The top 20% of plants account
for 80% of manufacturing employees. For the MSA-industries, where the restriction of at
least ten plants drops 75% of cells and hence selects cells least subject to granularity, the
   The corresponding 75th to 25th percentile differences are 68% (0.520 in logs) and 145% (0.898 in logs).


                                                   10
median Gini coefficient is 0.63, and the 10th and 90th percentile Gini coefficients are 0.49
and 0.77. In the MSA-industry cell with the median Gini coefficient among even these
remaining cells, the top 5% of plants account for 24% of employment, and the top 20%
account for 64%. But even in the bottom 10th percentile of the MSAs and MSA-industries
in terms of concentration (Gini coefficient), 72% and 44% of employment are accounted
for by the largest 20% of plants.


2.4    Permutation Test: Pure Granularity and No Place Effects
To assess the scope for granularity bias in the data, our first strategy is to consider an
extreme benchmark for the distribution of place effects: that all locations l  L have the
same data-generating process for plant productivity Fla (a) = F a (a) l  L. We test a more
specific version, namely that all places have the same expected value l =  l  L, so that
the variance of true place effects is zero. Then, dispersion in measured place averages
arises solely as an artifact of grouping heterogeneous plants, i.e., from granularity bias.
    We implement a nonparametric (or randomization), exact test of this hypothesis in the
spirit of permutation tests. We construct the sampling distribution of our test statistic
of interest under the following procedure: plants are randomly distributed across space
into places. Specifically, we preserve the count of plants in each place (in practice in each
location-industry cell). Under this procedure, the rank of a given empirical dispersion
static in the CDF of those of the random economies gives the nonparametric p-value
corresponding to that null hypothesis.
    Broadly, by referencing a random-location benchmark, our test of productivity place
effects is in the spirit of Ellison and Glaeser (1997), who study whether the observed
geographical concentration is statistically different from randomly located plants.


2.5    Bias Correction of Variance: Split Samples
To provide a constructive measure of the dispersion in true place effects, we implement a
split-sample procedure to remove the granularity bias. We construct an average using one
half of the plants within a given location and use it as an instrument for the average in the
other half. Formally, we split the plants into two random and equally sized subsamples
indexed by superscript A and B in each location l. We then estimate subsample-specific
place effects (l A ,  B
                     l ) for all cells (l, A) and (l, B ), now described by place times half-
                     
sample. We then calculate the covariance of the two separate sets of fixed effects across
    A potential alternative statistical test, however requiring parametric assumptions, is an F -test of all place
averages (for example, estimated as fixed effects in a regression) being statistically different from zero.


                                                       11
locations l between half-samples A and B :

                Cov lA , lB , = Cov l + u
                                        ¯A        ¯B
                                          l , l + ul                                                          (7)
                                                      ¯A
                                 = Var (l ) + Cov l , u            ¯B
                                                       l + Cov l , u         ¯A
                                                                     l + Cov u   ¯B
                                                                              l ,u l ,                        (8)
                                                     =0               =0                =0

                                                        1
where we have introduced the notation of u      ¯S
                                                 l = N S pSl upl as the sample average of
                                                         l
deviations upl in a sample Sl of location l. Because subsamples are drawn randomly in
our procedure, the second and third terms are zero. To ensure the fourth term is zero, we
introduce a, we believe plausible, assumption, that errors upl , up are independent within
locations l.
    Hence, the covariance of averages of randomly chosen subsamples is an unbiased
estimator of the variance of the true place effects, eliminating granularity bias.


2.6    Weighting and Industry Variation
There are two ways in which weighting might enter and affect the above exposition. First,
the exposition above does not weight locations differently when constructing the cross-
regional variance. That is, the bias term is the unweighted average over all location-specific
bias terms. Consistent with this specification, in our empirical implementation, we weight
MSAs equally (rather than giving larger MSAs a larger weight).
   Second, the expressions above have presented the case where place effects l equally
weight (or consider equally sized) plants within a location. In practice, we weight plants
by a plant employment epl when constructing cell-level averages. The true place effect
then takes the weighted expectation of productivity over the joint distribution of plant
productivity and size, F l (a, e). The main implication is that the bias from granularity now
also encompasses the potential dominance of large plants. Importantly, the covariance
remains the unbiased estimator of the variance of true place effects also in the weighted
case. (For the permutation tests, we do not reassign plants based on size.) We additionally
present specifications without weighting by plant size.
    This adjustment has been used in the context of group-level wage differences (namely, AKM firm wage
fixed effects, by Gerard, Lagos, Severnini, and Card, 2018; Drenik, Jäger, Plotkin, and Schoefer, 2020; Kline,
Saggio, and Sølvsten, 2020), or to estimate peer effects in personnel economics (Silver, 2020). We are not
aware of applications to the measurement of group-level averages of productivity. Bils, Klenow, and Ruane
(2020) use a within-firm IV strategy to adjust for measurement error in plant-level productivity, i.e., a separate
method that reduces idiosyncratic measurement error but could not be used to estimate place effects on plant
groups. An alternative method to remove measurement error may be shrinkage (see Chandra, Finkelstein,
Sacarny, and Syverson, 2016, for an application to hospital fixed effects). We are not aware of shrinkage
estimators in the context of productivity place effects.



                                                       12
   Finally, the above exposition sidesteps industry differences, being written as if only
one industry existed. We account for differences between industries in two ways. First,
we implement our approach within industries and report our results as averages across
industries. Second, we define plant productivity as deviation from industry average and
pool across industries. These measures are presented in Section 3.


3    Data and Construction of Place Effects
We now describe our empirical implementation of the framework developed in Section 2.

Plant-Level Data: US Census of Manufactures Our primary data set is the US Census
of Manufactures (CMF), which provides plant-level data on production and plant charac-
teristics for the universe of US manufacturing plants. We use the most recently available
wave, 2012. As our location measure, we use plants' MSA (dropping plants outside of
MSAs). While the data contain 6-digit NAICS industry codes (we use industry definitions
from Fort and Klimek, 2018), we will coarsen the measure to 4-digit for most purposes
below.
    The CMF contains information on revenue, employment and payroll (separately for
production and non-production workers), production worker hours, material and energy
expenditures, and capital expenditures. Value added is revenue minus non-labor/capital
inputs. Since we include an extension studying place effects for new and old plants in
Section 5, we also construct plant age as the difference between 2012 and the first time the
plant enters the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which we merge onto the CMF for
this purpose.
    We require plants in our sample to have an industry code, to be located in an MSA, and
to have positive value added as well as TFP, described below, and remove administrative
records.

Plant-Level Productivity: TFP and Labor Productivity Our primary measure of plant
productivity is revenue-based TFP ("TFPr"). For this productivity measure, we draw on
the TFPr measures constructed by Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2016) and updated in
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (forthcoming) through 2013 and covering our
2012 CMF wave. The construction assumes a standard Cobb-Douglas production function
    While 2012 is in the aftermath of the Great Recession and Kehrig (2015) documents that TFP dispersion
is countercyclical in the US manufacturing sector, we have found that our findings are overall robust to
cyclical properties, e.g., by pooling multiple Census waves.



                                                   13
              c i(p) with constant returns in input quantities Q of type , each with industry-
Yp = Ap  Q    p                                                     p
                         
specific factor shares ci . A plant p's TFP is the residual of its inputs (capital, labor, materials,
and energy) subtracted from revenue output, with industry-level factor shares i(p):

                  ap = ln Yp - cs          k          h          m          n
                                i ln Sp + ci ln Kp + ci ln Hp + ci ln Mp + ci ln Ep               (9)

Details are provided in Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2016) and Decker, Haltiwanger,
Jarmin, and Miranda (forthcoming), which we summarize here. Revenue-based output
Y is the real value of shipments plus changes in inventory (or value of shipments if
the difference is negative), deflated using a 6-digit NAICS industry output price deflator
from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. For lack of comprehensive plant-
level price data, between-plant demand factors in the form of plant-level product price
differences show up in this revenue-based TFPr measure (unlike "TFPq"). The labor input
H is total hours of production workers (marked up by the ratio of total to production
worker payroll if both are nonmissing, otherwise production worker hours). The capital
stock construction also draws on the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM), consists of
structures S and equipment K , and is, in most cases, obtained from the perpetual inventory
method separately for equipment and structures, with initial values given by the book value
(adjusted by the ratio of real to book value from BEA data, at the 3-digit NAICS level), and
then evolves using capital expenditure data from the ASM where applicable. Materials
M are the cost of materials plus the cost of resales plus the work done by other plants
on the materials, deflated by the 6-digit NAICS input price deflator from the NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database, similarly for energy costs E as the costs of electricity
and fuels. For each factor (with buildings and equipment separately), industry cost shares
ci are at the 6-digit NAICS level constructed in the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
Database.
    We complement our primary productivity measure, TFP, with value added per worker
(labor productivity), where our labor input concept is total employment (Foster, Halti-
wanger, and Krizan, 2001, find that using total hours and employment yield similar re-
sults). This measure is less demanding, requiring neither specifying a production function
nor comprehensive input measures. As a benchmark, with Cobb-Douglas production, the
marginal product of labor corresponds to the labor share in production times output per
worker. As we take logs and include industry effects, we would net out industry labor
shares, such that one can think of this alternative measure as marginal product of labor.

Winsorization In our primary specifications, we winsorize the final plant-level pro-
ductivity measures at 1% and 99%. We also probe robustness to no as well as 2.5%

                                                 14
winsorization.

Defining Places Our primary definition of places are location-industry cells, by MSA
and 4-digit NAICS industry. We also probe robustness to 6-digit industry classification.
    We keep location-industry cells with at least two plants, the minimum number required
for our split-sample strategy described in Section 2.5. We will probe robustness to varying
this cutoff between two to 150 plants.
    Our main sample consists of around 120,000 plants in around 11,500 cells. (Plant, MSA,
and cell counts must be rounded to meet Census disclosure requirements.) There are 384
US MSAs and 86 4-digit NAICS manufacturing industries.

Industry-Specific Location Effects (Averages) We define industry-specific location ef-
fects as in Equation (2) (plus an index for industry i), where a plant p is characterized by
TFP apli , 4-digit NAICS industry i(p), and location l(p). Industry-specific location effects
are estimated as industry-demeaned averages:

                                   l,i = Avg[apli l, i] - Avg[apli i].
                                                                                                    (10)

By subtracting industry mean Avg[apli i], we construct the industry-specific location ef-
fect i,l as the location-industry's plant-level average log TFP premium over the national
industry average of plant-level log TFP. (Thanks to the dramatically larger sample size,
we sidestep granularity bias in the national industry average Avg[apli i].) We follow the
literature in weighting both these averages by plant employment (see, e.g. Hornbeck and
Moretti, 2018). We will also probe robustness to unweighted specifications.
    Since the place effects are demeaned by industry, we can pool all industries' place effects
and report the resulting variances across all industries, corresponding to the average of
within-industry variances, and our headline number. Whenever we refer to dispersion
statistics or plot distributions of location-industry effects, we do so weighted by the share
of the industry in total employment within its respective location, for comparability with
the location effects that pool all industries in a location, described below.
    Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2016) also drop a small number of plants with imputed data as well as
plants with TFP more than 200 log points above or below the industry-year mean.
    Our choice to demean within industry is also taken by, for instance, Cunningham, Foster, Grim, Halti-
wanger, Pabilonia, Stewart, and Wolf (2020), who express plant-level TFP from an industry mean when
studying between-plant dispersion. They do not study geographical dispersion, nor do they touch on
granularity bias.




                                                   15
Location Effects (Averages) As our most comprehensive place effect measure, we col-
lapse (average) the industry-specific location effects l,i into one location effect for each
location l, defined as
                                       l = Avg[
                                               l,i l].                                   (11)

Here, we weight each industry-specific location effect       l,i by the industry's local employ-
ment share (among the cells surviving sample restrictions i.e., with non-missing      l,i ) within
location l. This weighting mimics the plant-employment measure of the industry-specific
location effects and hence the scenario of a single national industry. Again, we will also
probe robustness to specifications equally weighting plants. Of course, the industry-MSA
panel will not be balanced if some locations do not have (at least two) plants in a given
industry, such that this value is constructed among an MSA's filled industries. The afore-
mentioned demeaning of the industry-specific location effect           l,i ensures that we have
removed industry composition and industry-level TFP levels as confounders in the loca-
tion effects   l . In a final step, we center the national (unweighted across MSAs) mean of
these location effects too around zero.
    Hence, location effects      l can be thought of as the common location component across
all industries in a given location, whereas the industry-specific location effects     l,i essen-
tially treat location-industries as independent entities with no connection to neighboring
industries. When place effects are not perfectly correlated across industries, the dispersion
of location-industry effects will be larger than that of location effects.

European Countries: Bureau van Dk Firm-Level Data We complement our primary
analysis, of US plant-level data, with firm-level data from Bureau van Dk (BvD) covering
15 European countries. On a country-by-country basis, we replicate our analysis using
NUTS-2 within-country regional divisions, which most closely resemble US MSAs, with
each containing between 800,000 and 3 million inhabitants. We construct TFP measures for
the manufacturing sector, at the 2-digit NACE industry level (due to the lower number of
observations in BvD rather than census data), which gives us 23 industries. We obtain the
industry-country-specific labor share by dividing the sum of payroll at the industry level
of all sample firms by the corresponding sum of value added for firms with nonmissing
observations on both variables. We then construct firm-specific TFP by assuming a Cobb-
Douglas production function, and subtracting from log value added labor-share-weighted
employment and one-minus-labor-share-weighted log capital. We use fixed tangible assets
as the capital stock measure. We winsorize the resulting TFP measures at 1% and 99%.
    Our location effect l hence resembles the "TFP2" measure in Combes et al. (2010), which, at the location
level, averages residuals of TFP after controlling for sector.


                                                    16
We again keep all location-industry cells with at least 2 firms. Appendix Table A.2 lists
number of regions, cells, and firm counts in each country.
   These data have several drawbacks for our purposes compared to the US plant census.
For instance, coverage is imperfect, and data quality varies across countries specifically
regarding value added (see, e.g., Gopinath, Kalemli-Özcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-
Sanchez, 2017; Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, 2019). To maximize coverage and mimic a
census, we keep each firm's most recent observation, implying that most observations
come from the late 2010s. The capital stock measure is based on book value of assets. We
do not apply industry-specific input price indices (industry fixed effects absorb national
output price indices). Since BvD is at the firm rather than plant level, all production units
of multi-plant firms are assigned to a single industry and headquarter location.


4     Results: Productivity Dispersion Across US Cities
We first measure the raw geographic dispersion in productivity across US cities. We
then implement our permutation test of the null hypothesis that this empirical variance
is entirely spurious and would arise even if plants were randomly allocated across places.
We implement our split-sample strategy to cleanse the naive dispersion of granularity bias
and provide the unbiased estimate of the variance of true place effects. Finally, we run a
series of robustness checks which dissect the sources of the granularity bias we uncover.
Table 1 reports the key numbers cited here. In all of our figures and dispersion statistics,
we weight MSAs equally, and MSA-industries by local employment share, as discussed in
Section 2.6.


4.1   Raw Dispersion
Figure 1 plots the distribution of average-based productivity place effects for locations, l,
                                                                                           
and for location-industries,  l,i . In accordance with Census disclosure requirements, the
graphs present kernel densities rather than histograms and censors the density plots at
the 5th and 95th percentiles. Hence, tails and potential skewness are not depicted (so the
mode need not be centered at zero although we have centered place effects at zero over
the full support).

Location Effects (Averages)    l Figure 1 Panel (a) plots the distribution of location-specific
effects based on averages, l . The focus of this section is the black solid line, representing
                           
the raw distribution of average-based place effects. The location effects    l trace out a bell-



                                              17
Table 1: Spatial Dispersion of Productivity (TFP) in the United States (x100 For All Disper-
sion Statistics)
                              (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)       (9)      (10)
                             Main     10 Plants   6-Digit Ind.   Unwins.    2.5% Wins. Plant Weights     Labor Prod.   New & Old   New       Old
                                                                            Panel A: Location Effects
 Empirical:
    Raw Var(  l)
                               2.55       2.07        1.38         2.86           2.21        0.50            6.32        3.19      8.40     3.26
    90th - 10th Percentile 47.48         46.26       36.95        51.08          45.33       23.46           85.20       56.87     74.43    60.66
 Permutations: Var(   l)
    Mean                       1.71      1.44        1.37         1.93            1.45        0.30           4.62        2.47       6.17     3.21
    Standard Deviation         0.28      0.24        0.28         0.36            0.21        0.04           0.61        0.41       0.96     0.61
    p-value                   0.010      0.017       0.425        0.017          0.005       0.004           0.009       0.056     0.022    0.420
 Bias-Corrected: Cov(  A , B ) = Var(l )
                         l l
    Mean                       0.81      0.81        0.33         0.91           0.66         0.21           1.58         0.87      1.49     0.84
    97.5th Percentile          0.98      1.05        0.46         1.12           0.82         0.27           1.97         1.30      2.38     1.22
    2.5th Percentile           0.61      0.55        0.19         0.66           0.49         0.14           1.17         0.46      0.44     0.40

                                                                   Panel B: Industry-Specific Location Effects
 Empirical:
    Raw Var( l,i )              10.96      4.45       7.23        12.37           9.41        4.88           28.96        6.39     15.24     6.59
    90th - 10th Percentile 98.01          66.14      75.89        102.3          93.13       68.81           188.9       81.89     111.0    84.96
 Permutations: Var(  l,i )
    Mean                        9.64      3.47       7.08         10.95           8.25        4.24           26.75       5.04      12.71     6.13
    Standard Deviation          0.53      0.31       0.48         0.71            0.41        0.13           1.12        0.48       1.09     0.69
    p-value                     0.016     0.005      0.352        0.037          0.006       0.002           0.029       0.009     0.019    0.234
 Bias-Corrected: Cov(    A, 
                       l,i  B ) = Var( )
                            l,i       l,i
    Mean                        2.32      1.39       0.88         2.63           1.87         0.84           4.05         1.71      1.90     1.59
    97.5th Percentile           2.70      1.74       1.08         3.12           2.19         0.96           4.84         2.21      2.87     2.06
    2.5th Percentile            1.86      1.00       0.65         2.07           1.50         0.73           3.24         1.20      0.70     1.04

 N, MSAs                      400         250         400          400            400         400            400          300       300      300
 N, MSA-Industries          11,500       2,800      18,000       11,500         11,500      11,500         11,500        2,800     2,800    2,800
 N, Plants                  120,000      86,000     105,000      120,000        120,000     120,000        120,000       78,000    14,000   64,000

Note: The table reports statistics on the dispersion of productivity of MSA effects (Panel A) and MSA-industry (4-digit NAICS) effects
(Panel B), estimated in the 2012 US Census of Manufacturers. In order to satisfy Census disclosure requirements, 90th-10th percentile
differences are calculated by reporting the difference in the average of place effect from the 85th to 95th percentiles, and the average of
place effects from the 5th to 15th percentiles. All specifications use TFPr as the productivity measure, except for Column (7), which
studies labor productivity (log value added per worker). Column (1) reports on our baseline sample and specification. All other
columns report specifications that each change one aspect of Column (1), as follows: Column (2) requires at least ten (rather than two)
plants per industry-MSA cell. Column (3) defines industries at the 6-digit rather than 4-digit NAICS level. Column (4) uses plant-level
data that has not been winsorized, as opposed to our main specification with 1% winsorization. Column (5) uses 2.5% winsorization.
Column (6) uses identical plant weights (rather than weighting by plant employment). Column (7) repeats our main specification using
log value added per worker. Column (8) requires at least two plants each five years or younger (new plants) and two plants older than
five years (old plants). It is stricter than the baseline specification of at least two plants, and is the pooled comparison for the following
two columns. Column (9) includes only the new plants from the sample of Column (8). Column (10) includes only the old plants from
the sample of Column (8).



shaped distribution. (The censoring by the Census disclosure process masks potential
skewness.) As printed into Figure 1, the variance is 0.026. This statistic is our headline
number reported in the introduction in Section 1. That is, plants in MSAs with location
                                                                              
averages one standard deviation above the mean have on average around 0.026 = 0.16
higher productivity (log TFP) than plants in their peer industries nationally.
    While our main dispersion statistic is the variance, we also provide the productivity
difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles in the second row of Table 1. This
difference in log TFP is 0.47 (61%)--on average, plants in the 90th percentile MSA are 61%
     In order to avoid disclosure of identifiable data, we approximate the 90-10 dispersion ratio using the
difference in the averages of the 85th-95th percentiles and 5th-15th percentiles.



                                                                           18
Figure 1: Spatial Dispersion in TFP Across US MSAs: Raw Empirical Place Averages,
Benchmark from 1,000 Random Permutations of Plants Across Places, and Corrected for
Granularity Bias
                     (a) Location Effects                                          (b) Location-Industry Effects




Note: The figure reports kernel density plots representing the distribution of location effects (Panel (a)) and industry-specific location
effects (Panel (b)) estimated across US MSAs and MSA-industry (4-digit NAICS) cells, in the 2012 US Census of Manufacturers. The
solid black line plots the distribution of the raw, average-based place effects in the actual US data. The dash-dotted red line shows
the distribution of analogous average-based place effects from a permutation tests, randomly allocating the empirical plants across US
MSA-industry cells (plotting the representative randomized economy with the raw variance that is closest to the mean raw variances
of all 1,000 permutations). The blue dashed line illustrates the distribution corrected for granularity bias. It does so by applying a
mean-preserving variance-adjustment using a linear transformation of the original distribution as described in Footnote 12. Panel (a)
is not weighted; Panel (b) weights location-industry effects by the industry's employment shares within the location. In accordance
with Census disclosure requirements, the figure presents kernel densities rather than histograms and censors the density plots at the
5th and 95th percentiles.



more productive than plants in the MSA at the 10th percentile.

Location-Industry Effects (Averages)     l,i Panel (b) replicates this analysis for the location-
industry effects  l,i , which permit place effects to vary by industry. Recall that, when plot-
ting the variance and constructing dispersion statistics, we weight each location-industry
effect by the share of the industry in total employment within its respective location, for
comparability with the location effects       l plotted in Panel (a), which at the MSA level
weighted industries by employment shares.
    As a benchmark, if all industries in a location deviated by the same percent from their
national industry benchmark, then the location and location-industry effects would exhibit
the same dispersion. If productivity premia are imperfectly correlated across industry
within a location, then industry-specific location effects may exhibit more dispersion than
location effects. We find a considerably more dispersed distribution of the industry-specific
location effects, with a variance of 0.110. The difference in log TFP between the 90th and
10th percentile is 0.98 (i.e., 166%).




                                                                   19
Figure 2: Permutation Test: Sampling Distribution of Raw Variances of Place Effects From
1,000 Random Allocations of Plants Over Places
                    (a) Location Effects                                        (b) Location-Industry Effects




Note: The figure reports kernel density plots corresponding to the sampling distribution of 1,000 economies' raw variances of average-
based place effects, for location effects (Panel (a)) and industry-specific location effects (Panel (b)). The randomization procedure
reassigns MSA IDs over the empirical plant observations within an industry, preserving the plant count distribution in each MSA-
industry cell. The vertical dashed line denotes the empirical raw variance.



4.2      Permutation Test: Pure Granularity and No Place Effects
Section 4.1 has quantified the degree to which places differ in their observed average
productivity. However, some of this dispersion could be spurious, reflecting dispersion
in idiosyncratic productivity levels of heterogeneous plants rather than true place effects.
We now test the extreme hypothesis that there is no variation in place effects, and that
the raw variance of the measured average-based place effects reflects idiosyncratic plant
heterogeneity only.

Implementation Implementing the general methodology in Section 2.4, we randomly
relabel each plant's location l(p) while preserving the empirical plant-count distribution
in each location-industry l  L, ensuring MSAs' industry structures are unaltered in terms
of plant counts. Since we draw without replacement, all plants are used exactly once per
randomization. We generate 1,000 randomized economies. We treat each randomized
economy as we did the empirical one, calculating place averages of productivity and their
raw variance. We also construct 95% "confidence intervals" by extracting the 25th and
975th ranked observations in this sampling distribution; the position of the empirical raw
variance in this sampling distribution gives the p-value, which we also report.

Results Across the 1,000 randomized US economies, the mean variances are 0.017 for
the location effects, and 0.096 for the location-industry effects, compared to 0.026 and


                                                                 20
0.110 for the empirical raw variances calculated and discussed above in Section 4.1. That
is, granularity on its own already generates tremendous--purely spurious--variation in
average-based place effects.
    For illustration, Figure 1 also includes, as dot-dashed red lines, the distribution of place
effects in the specific randomized economy most closely matching the mean permuted
variance. Intuitively, the closer that red dot-dashed line is to the black line representing
the actual US economy, the more similar the random economies are to the empirical
distribution, and the more granularity alone could account for the observed dispersion.
    In Figure 2, we present the distribution of raw variances of the 1,000 randomized US
economies, the mean of which we reported above. (Here, Census disclosure guidelines do
permit us to release the uncensored distribution.) This distribution is the nonparametric
sampling distribution of the variance of place averages under the assumption of no place
effects. The vertical dashed line denotes the level of the empirical variance. For location
effects, Panel (a) clarifies that the empirical variance is above 991 of the 1000 permutation
values given the sampling distribution; the location-industry effects in Panel (b) puts the
data above the 985th observation of the 1000 permutation values. These values imply
one-sided p-values of 0.010 and 0.016. That is, the empirical variance is statistically more
dispersed than would be expected from a null hypothesis of no place effects, even though
such economies would generate substantial purely spurious variance.
    This test provides a nonparametric statistical rejection of the absence of true place
effects, which hence contribute to the observed variance of place averages of productivity.
But to obtain an estimate of the variance of true place effects, we cannot simply subtract
the raw variance from the counterfactual mean variance of the random economies, for
instance, as, in the permutation test, plants' productivity levels apli take with them their
potential true place effects l . Instead, we next implement our split-sample correction to
constructively quantify the variance of true place effects.


4.3   True Place Effects: Bias Correction of Variance With a Split Sample
      Instrumental Variable Strategy
We now implement our split-sample procedure in order to constructively quantify the
variance of true place effects, by removing the granularity bias.

Implementation The concrete implementation of the methodology laid out in Section
2.5 takes the following steps. While the covariance is an unbiased and consistent estimator
of the variance, granularity--the very reason we draw on this method--may still imply


                                              21
Figure 3: Illustration of Method: Split-Sample Correction of Raw Variance Removing
Granularity Bias

                             .6
                                                      (a) Location Effects                                                                 (b) Location-Industry Effects




                                                                                                           Industry-Specific Location Effect, Remaining Sample
                                                                    Benchmark: Full Sharing of                                                                                    Benchmark: Full Sharing of




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                      Location Effects,  = 1                                                                                    Location-Industry Effects,  = 1
            Location Effect, Remaining Sample
                                          .4




                                                                                                                                              .5
                                 .2




                                                  Empirical Relationship:                                                                                                                       Empirical Relationship:
                                                    = .275 (SE 0.073)                                                                                                                             = .166 (SE 0.032)
                        0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                                              Benchmark: Perfectly
                                                                               Uncorrelated,  = 0                                                                                                Benchmark: Perfectly
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Uncorrelated,  = 0
             -.2




                                                                                                               -.5
                             -.4




                                                -.4      -.2        0        .2      .4          .6                                                                    -.5            0              .5         1
                                                       Location Effect, 50% Random Sample                                                                        Industry-Specific Location Effect, 50% Random Sample

Note: The figure presents scatter plots juxtaposing, along the common location or location-industry ID, the estimated place effects
from one split sample on place effects of the other split sample. The observations are binned into 25 equally sized bins, although the
regressions are run on the underlying observations. We also plot two benchmarks.  = 0 represents the scenario of no place effects
whatsoever, i.e., no relationship between place effects of the split samples;  = 1 represents the scenario in which place effects feature
no attenuation bias from measurement error such as granularity. The blue line traces out the linear slope from the regression of the
y-axis effects (one split sample) against those of their x-axis neighbor (other split sample). Since the underlying univariate regression
coefficient represents the covariance of the variables on the two axes divided by the variance of the x-axis variable, and since the
split-sample covariance is the bias-corrected estimator of the variance, this coefficient also represents the share of the variance (of the
half sample depicted on the x-axis) surviving the bias correction. Panel (a) is not weighted; Panel (b) weights location-industry effects
by the industry's employment shares within the location.



substantial error in one given random sample split. We therefore implement 1,000 ran-
dom sample splits, and extract the resulting distribution of covariances. We report the
mean as our preferred statistic, but additionally provide information on the distribution.
Specifically, we extract the, informal, nonparametric 95% "confidence intervals" implied
by the sampling distribution of the resulting 1,000 covariances.      When constructing
location-industry effects and computing covariances, we weight by the location-industry
employment share of the industry in the MSA of the full rather than split sample employ-
ment shares. (As before, we do not weight across MSAs.)

Results The bias correction dramatically reduces the variance of productivity across US
regions, by more than two thirds for location effects, from 0.026 to 0.008, with 95% of
our draws falling in the range of 0.006 to 0.010. For industry-specific location effects, the
variance is reduced by four fifths, from 0.110 to 0.023, with 95% of the draws falling in
the range of 0.019 to 0.027. Figure 1 illustrates the effect of the bias-correction on the
distribution of place effects as a blue dashed line, drawing on a simple mean-preserving
    See Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2020) for a formal econometric framework for leave-out estimation of
variance components with an application to firm fixed effects in worker-level wages.



                                                                                                      22
linear transformation of the raw distribution to match the bias-corrected variance. That is,
this distribution corresponds to one that matches the variance of true place effects, which
is dramatically more compressed than the raw distributions. Hence, on the one hand,
two thirds to four fifths of the cross-regional variation in productivity reflects the bias
arising from granularity unrelated to true place effects. On the other hand, and consistent
with our permutation test, the remaining variation constitutes the still economically and
statistically significant variance in true place effects.

Visualization of Method We visualize the bias correction in Figure 3. The binned scatter
plot depicts one specific split-sample economy, selected among the 1,000 randomizations
to have its covariance-to-variance ratio be closest to the corresponding mean value of our
1000 split-sample economies' coefficients, as described below. Panel (a) reports on the
location effects, Panel (b) on the industry-specific location effects. The panels are scatter
plots, juxtaposing, for each place, its pair of place effects computed separately on the basis
of the samples split in half within each place. The graph bins the underlying observations
into 25 equally sized bins, but the regressions are run on the underlying individual place
effects. The x-axis captures the means of each bin from one split sample, and hence traces
out the raw dispersion of average-based place effects (in the half sample). As throughout,
we do not weight across MSAs, although, for industry-MSA effects, we weight by the
industry's employment share in the MSA (here again, as above, weights are constructed
off the pooled sample, rather than on the basis of a specific sample).
    The figure also includes two extreme benchmarks. Intuitively, if there were no relation-
ship in productivity whatsoever between the two split samples A and B within a place,
each split sample average would reflect idiosyncratic effects only, and a line fitted to the
scatter plot would have a slope of zero through the origin. As another benchmark, in
the absence of idiosyncratic effects, place effects, common to both split samples, would
dominate the split samples' averages, such that the scatter would aligned along the 45
degree line.
    The empirical effects, depicted as the binned scatter points, fall somewhere in between
these two extremes, providing a striking visual clarification that the empirical economy
is characterized by a large degree of granularity in productivity differences across places.
Besides plotting the binned scatter points, the figure plots the linear regression line implied
                                                                            Var(x )
    That is, we construct x = a + bx and fx = f ((x - a) b) b. We set b =   Var(x)    to match the desired variance
of the transformed distribution, and a = (1 - b) E[x] to preserve the mean. We resort to this procedure as an
illustration of the split sample method, which provides an estimate of the variance, but of no other moment
of the distribution.



                                                       23
by the data (where estimation is on the actual underlying data rather than the binned data).
In fact, out of the 1,000 split samples, we have chosen the representative split sample
depicted in the figure as the one with the slope that is closest to the mean slope of the
1,000 split-sample economies. We estimate a slope of 0.275 for the location effects, and
a slope of 0.166 for industry-specific location effects. The linear regression coefficient
                         Cov(A ,  B )
corresponds to  =         Var(
                              l
                               A )
                                  l
                                      for the location effects, and analogously for the location-
                                l
industry   effects. Since Cov(    A , B ) is our bias-corrected estimate of the (full sample A  B )
                                    l  l
variance   Var(l A  B ), the regression coefficient represents the share of the raw variance
(of the half sample making up the variation traced out on the x-axis) that survives bias
correction. These positive slopes therefore confirm the attenuated, yet existent, presence of
true place effects we have discussed above by comparing the mean covariance of the split
samples with the population raw variance. Of course, the slope actually implies a slightly
smaller fraction because the split-sample variance (i.e., the denominator corresponding to
the estimated coefficient, Var(A )) is slightly larger exactly due to heightened granularity
                               l
from halving the sample size.


4.4    Assessing the Sources of Granularity
We now provide a series of alternative specifications with the goal of tracing out the sources
of granularity bias and explore, but ultimately dismiss, potential alternative strategies to
reduce it. Mirroring the discussion in Section 2.3 and guided by our core Equation 6,
we dissect the three potential sources: finite plant counts per place, large idiosyncratic
dispersion in plant-level productivity unrelated to place, and heterogeneity in plant size.
Our main exhibits for these checks are Table 1 and Figure 4.

Plant Counts per Cell As a direct way to gauge the role of cell counts, we vary the
minimum (location-industry) cell size cutoff. Table 1 Column (1) reports the baseline
specification with minimum size requirement of at least two plants per cells. Column
(2) reports the statistics for a sample restriction with at least ten plants. In Figure 4, we
vary this restriction incrementally from two to 150 (with spacing determined by Census
disclosure rules).
     The robust standard errors of those slope estimates are 0.073 and 0.032, respectively; we do not emphasize
the standard errors and sidestep that the fixed effects are generated regressors.
     We find that the split sample raw variance is 133% as large as the population variance for the location
effects (Var(A ) = 0.034 vs. Var( AB ) = 0.026) and 126% as large for location-industry effects (Var(     A
                                                                                                         l,i )=
              l                     l
                AB
0.138 vs. Var( l,i ) = 0.110). On average across our 1,000 split economies these numbers are 0.030 and 0.140
respectively. Another granularity factor (besides idiosyncratic heterogeneity) is skewed plant size, which
we discuss in Section 4.4.


                                                      24
    Consistent with a decline in granularity bias, the raw variance falls when we raise the
minimum cell count. Column (2) of Table 1 clarifies that moving to ten rather than two
plants per cell, the raw variance falls from 0.026 to 0.021 for location effects, and, more
dramatically, from 0.110 to 0.045 for location-industry effects. As depicted with the solid
black line in the figure, the raw variance falls as the minimum plant count per cell increases,
and more so for the industry-specific location effects (Panel B in the table, and Panel (b) in
the figure) than for the location effects (Panel A and panel (a)).
    Yet, inevitably, restricting the sample to larger and larger cells has compositional effects
beyond granularity bias. It is possible that the remaining places have place effects that
are more and more similar. As shown in Table 1 Column (2) Panel A, starting from
the threshold two and moving to ten, the covariance for location effects is essentially
unchanged. Figure 4 Panel (a), which plots the (mean) covariance in the blue dashed-
dotted line, reveals that the covariance fluctuates around the original value until around
40 plants as the minimum sample restriction, and then the covariance starts dropping
gradually, reaching zero at around 100 plants. For industry-specific location effects, Table
1 Column (2) Panel B reports a drop in the covariance to 0.014 with at least ten plants
compared to 0.023 with at least two plants. Figure 4 Panel (b) reports this moderately
steeper gradient of the covariance to the minimum cell count for industry-specific place
effects.
    The p-values of the permutation tests for the specification with at least 10 plants,
reported in Table 1 Column (2), continue to indicate that even with more cells, the empirical
economies exhibit a raw variance that remains squarely statistically different from what
a random allocation of plants across places would have predicted. This fact is indicated
by the red dashed line and the associated 95% confident intervals, making clear that the
empirical raw variance only crosses these confidence bands at around 100 plants, for both
location and location-industry effects.
    The figure also makes clear the catch-22 that granularity bias provides: the easiest
"solution" to reduce granularity bias is to restrict one's analysis sample to cells that are
less subject to it--throwing the baby out with the bathwater. Comparing Column (1) (our
baseline specification with at least two plants per cell) with Column (2) (where we require
at least ten plants) in Table 1, illustrates this trade-off: only about 250 out of our initial set
of MSAs remain, 2,800 out of the 11,500 MSA-industry cells, and around 86,000 out of the
    An alternative route is to hold the MSA-industry sample constant (at a new baseline sample with more
than two plants per cell) but randomly drop plants in cells. In this alternative route, the covariance would
stay stable, and the raw variance and permutation results would reflect purely plant counts. Our split-sample
method implements exactly this approach in the context of cutting the sample randomly in half and permits
an analysis of the raw variance (but not the covariance), on which we report in Footnote 14.



                                                     25
120,000 plants (where Census disclosure requirements force us to round all counts). The
black dots in Figure 4 report on the steep sample count (cells) trade-off for the interval
between two and 150 plants, which is most dramatic when going from two to around 20-
30, and then continues more gradually. At a cell-size cutoff of 100, the remaining sample
features only 10% of MSAs (and a much lower fraction of industry-MSA cells), fails the
permutation test, and features a bias-corrected variance of zero.
    Another way to adjust plant cell counts is to redefine cells. Our results for location
effects l as aggregates of industry-specific location effects l,i already speak to the impact
of aggregating industry cells. Alternatively, we now redefine industry cells from 4-digit
to 6-digit NAICS, reporting results in Column (3) of Table 1. There are 359 6-digit NAICS
manufacturing industries nested in the 86 4-digit industries, and indeed, Column (3)
reveals that the number of plants per location-industry cell falls while the number of
location-industry cells increase. A pure granularity perspective, holding the composition
of place effects constant, would predict an increase in raw variances. Yet, there is a
composition shift as well, as some 6-digit cells do not have at least two plants at the 6-digit
industry-location level, as indicated by the lower plant count. Indeed, the remaining cells
appear more homogeneous: though the raw variance falls by less than half, the covariance
falls by around two thirds. Moreover, this sample and specification fails the permutation
test, with average permuted variances being close to the empirical raw variance. Overall,
we here conclude that the composition differences that go along with the cell definition
appear to again prevent us from isolating granularity.
    Besides the limitation that the above exercises inevitably change the underlying funda-
mentals of the remaining cells in the analysis sample, they do not address the other two
dimensions of the bias, namely the degree of idiosyncratic plant heterogeneity and plant
size differences, which we separately study next.

Idiosyncratic Dispersion As described in Equation (6), granularity can also reflect large
plant-level, idiosyncratic within-location variance, even if cells have relatively many plants.
Our first lever to study this source of granularity bias is to vary the winsorization of plant-
level TFP, winsorizing by 0% and 2.5% rather than, as in our baseline specification, 1% (at
the national level). The results are reported in Column (4) of Table 1 for the 0% winsoriza-
tion, and in Column (5) for the 2.5% winsorization. While indeed winsorization and hence
extreme values of plant-level productivity play a role in the dispersion measures, the effect
   Serving as another source of mechanical attenuation of the dispersion, the industry demeaning is now
conducted at a lower level, perhaps removing a source of compositional dispersion.
   An alternative route is to redefine industries at lower rather than higher levels of aggregation, or to
aggregate to larger geographical units such as the state level.


                                                   26
                                                                         Figure 4: Varying Cell Thresholds of Plant Counts
                                                                                                 (a) Location Effects
                                                 0.030


                                                                                                                                                   Empirical: Raw Var(l)                     400
                                                 0.025                                                                                             Permutations: Var(l)
                                                                                                                                                   Bias-Corrected: Cov(A
                                                                                                                                                                       l ,l ) = Var(l)
                                                                                                                                                                          B                  350

                                                                                                                                                   Number of Locations
                                                 0.020                                                                                                                                       300




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of Locations (rounded)
 Variance: Location Effects




                                                                                                                                                                                             250
                                                 0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                             200


                                                 0.010                                                                                                                                       150


                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                 0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                             50


                                                 0.000                                                                                                                                       0




                                                -0.005

                                                         2    10    20    30    40      50       60       70         80      90       100     110        120       130       140         150
                                                                                        Minimum Number of Plants in Location-Industry Cell

                                                                                     (b) Industry-Specific Location Effects

                                                 0.11
                                                                                                                                                                                         11000
                                                                                                                                               Empirical: Raw Var(l,i)
                                                 0.10
                                                                                                                                               Permutations: Var(l,i)                    10000
                                                 0.09                                                                                          Bias-Corrected: Cov(A
                                                                                                                                                                   l,i,l,i) = Var(l,i)
                                                                                                                                                                       B
 Variance: Industry-Specific Location Effects




                                                                                                                                               Number of Industry-Locations              9000
                                                 0.08




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of Industry-Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                         8000
                                                 0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                         7000

                                                 0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                         6000

                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                         5000

                                                 0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                         4000

                                                 0.03                                                                                                                                    3000

                                                 0.02                                                                                                                                    2000

                                                 0.01                                                                                                                                    1000

                                                 0.00                                                                                                                                    0


                                                -0.01
                                                        2    10    20    30    40      50       60       70         80     90       100      110       120       130       140       150
                                                                                       Minimum Number of Plants in Industry-Location Cell
Note: The figure reports the raw variances (solid black line), permutation variances (dashed red line), and mean covariances (dot-dashed
blue line) of the US place effects (TFP) for various sample restrictions on the minimum levels of plant counts per location-industry cell.
Panel (a) does so for location effects; Panel (b) does so for industry-specific location effects. The red and blue shaded regions report 95%
confidence intervals for variances from 1,000 permuted economies and 1,000 split-samples, respectively. Referring to the secondary
y-axis, the black doted lines plot in Panel (a) and (b) the number of MSAs and the number of MSA-industries, respectively.



of our exercise is somewhat limited. Studying variances, abandoning winsorization leads
to a small increase from 0.026 to 0.029 for location effects, and 0.011 to 0.012 for industry-
specific location effects; raising the threshold to a symmetric 2.5% winsorization leads to

                                                                                                               27
a modest attenuation to 0.022 for location effects and 0.094 for location-specific industry
effects. The 90th-10th percentile difference is also quite robust to winsorization.
    Turning to the permutation tests, the p-values remain clearly below the 5% threshold,
although, if anything, winsorization boosts the statistical significance of the empirical raw
variance compared to the randomization benchmark, consistent with granularity bias.
    A priori, winsorization should probably lower the bias-corrected variance, if extreme
plant values are clustered in specific places and reflect true place specific effects. Indeed,
the covariances are 0.009, 0.008, and 0.006 for the location effects for the 0%, 1% and 2.5%
winsorizations, and, respectively, 0.026, 0.023 and 0.019 for the location-industry effects. In
sum, granularity bias withstands our attenuation strategy of adjusting tails in the national
data, even as this strategy itself alters the sample and erodes the true variance.

Large, Dominant Plants The third source of granularity bias is heterogeneity in plant
size, by which place effects are weighted. (For exposition, Equation (6) is written with
equal plant weights.) Large plants will dominate average-based raw place effects, and
may generate much of the spurious dispersion in the permutation tests. To gauge the role
of large plants, we also present results that weight each plant equally, with results reported
in Column (6) of Table 1. Consistent with the role of large plants in granularity bias, the
raw variances fall by around four fifths for the location effects, and slightly more than half
for the location-industry effects. The permutation test reveals a tantamount decline (in
percent terms) for the mean raw variance of the randomized economies. But the p-values
of the empirical raw variance become even lower, falling below 1%, indicating if anything
that the role of granularity has not declined. Congruently, a similar scaling down occurs for
the bias-corrected variance of true place effects, which falls by three quarters for location
effects and by less than two thirds for industry-location effects, compared to the weighted
specifications in Column (1). Hence, we conclude that the unweighted specifications
yield a similar picture for the share of the raw variance reflecting granularity bias, while
scaling down the overall level of dispersion. Again, we caution that this specification
check inevitably entails a substantive redefinition of productivity place effects and the
underlying (weighted) sample, so that, even if granularity bias had been less pronounced
in the unweighted specification, equal weights naturally do not provide a solution if the
preferred specification is weighted (for it to be consistent with aggregation, for instance).

Assessment Overall, we conclude that, granularity bias is a robust feature of the data,
which dominates the raw variances of average-based place effects, and that potential alter-
natives to our covariance-split-sample strategy that build on adjusting the core dispersion-


                                              28
relevant fundamentals of the data run the risk of throwing out the baby with the bathwater.


5    Additional Application I: The Productivity of New Plants
Our main findings have revealed that due to plant idiosyncracies, systematic place effects
are considerably less pronounced than raw averages suggest. An interesting specific
question is the degree to which new plants inherit the place effects of the old, incumbent
plants. For instance, a common assumption is that spatial TFP differences across places
are a fixed property of the place-specific production function that would also determine
productivity "at the margin" for counterfactual input reallocations (e.g., Desmet and Rossi-
Hansberg, 2013; Hsieh and Moretti, 2019). To the degree that the extensive margin (new
plants) absorb reallocated inputs (rather than incumbent plants scaling up or down), our
strategy can quantify the degree to which TFP effects indeed carry over to new plants. As
one extreme, if new plants' productivity is considerably more compressed across places, or
unrelated to that of incumbent plants, such counterfactual reallocation would not generate
the gains from reallocation implied by the productivity average of existing plants.
    A priori, older and larger incumbent plants dominate the pooled averages constructed
in Section 4, leaving room for the place effects for new plants to differ. In 2012, plants older
than five years made up 78% of manufacturing plants, and 91% of total employment in
the manufacturing sector (US Census Business Dynamics Statistics, 2014 Release). On the
theoretical side, in models of embodied technological change (as in, e.g., Sakellaris and
Wilson, 2004) new projects reflect the frontier technology while incumbent, old projects
reflect legacy technologies, so that measured place averages may reflect age composition, or
place effects would show up among new plants. Some models (e.g., Duranton and Puga,
2001) specifically predict that some cities are better environments for entrepreneurship
than others. The entry and location choices of new plants can also be considered revealed-
preference proxies for productivity differences (Henderson, 1994).

Strategy We partition the population of plants into new plants aged five years and
younger (superscript Y for "young," not N , which we use for counts), and old plants (O)
aged six years and older. To implement our split-sample method, we now require at least
two plants per age group per location-industry cell, rather than two plants of any age, as
before. This restriction has limited effects on dispersion statistics for the pooled (i.e., not
age-specific) sample, which we report in Table 1 Column (8). Compared to the baseline
    See Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2016) and Pugsley, Sedlacek, and Sterk (forthcoming) for dedi-
cated studies of the growth dynamics and selection of new plants.


                                                   29
sample requiring two plants of any age (Column (1)), the new restrictions leave the raw
variance of the location effects (Panel A) fairly stable and essentially leaves the covariance
unaffected, despite dropping of around a quarter of MSAs. For the industry-specific
location effects in Panel B, the restriction drops around three quarters of cells. The raw
variance drops by around 40%, but with a much smaller drop (a quarter) in the covariance,
suggesting that the restriction drops particularly small and noisy location-industry cells.

Dispersion Figure 5 Panels (a) and (b) plot, in thick black lines, the distribution of raw
location effects for new plants,   Y , and, respectively, location-industry effects,   Y . Table
                                                                                      l,i
                                    l
1 reports the full set of dispersion statistics for the new plants only (Column (9)). In
thinner black lines, the figure plots the distributions of old plants' place effects, for which
Table 1 Column (10) reports the dispersion statistics for the sample of old plants. In these
two panels, as well as the dispersion statistics reported, we now weight location-industry
effects by the industry's employment share in total employment in the location with both
numbers separately computed for the old and new plants. We continue to not weight
across locations.
    At Var( Y ) = 0.084, location effects of new plants are two-and-a-half times as as dis-
             l
persed as the old place location effects (Var( O ) = 0.033), which in turn appear to dominate
                                                l
the pooled sample's raw variance (0.032, see Table 1 Column (8) Panel A, which reports dis-
persion statistics for the pooled sample). The new plants' location-industry effects are also
two-and-a-half times more dispersed at Var(    l,iY ) = 0.152 compared to the (pooled) raw vari-

ance of 0.064, in turn again close to those for the old plants' place effects (Var( O ) = 0.066).
                                                                                   l,i
For the new plants, Table 1 Column (9) also reveal that the top 90th to 10th spread of
location effects is 0.744, and 1.11 for location-industry effects.
    Hence, taking the raw variances at face value, new plants appear dramatically more
dispersed in their productivity than old plants or as would be suggested when pooling all
plants. This increased dispersion would imply, for instance, that place matters much more
for the productivity of marginal projects, or entrepreneurship, than would be suggested
by a standard pooled measure, and that, potentially, forces leading to this dispersion, such
as sorting or agglomeration forces, might be even more pronounced for such new projects.
    However, much of this higher variance of the new plants' place effects may simply
reflect heightened granularity bias, due to smaller populations and potentially even higher
idiosyncratic dispersion in true or measured TFP. Our split-sample strategy permits us to
again remove this bias, and to isolate the variance of true place effects for new plants.
Indeed, the bias-corrected variances of the new plants drop dramatically to 0.015 for
location effects and to 0.019 for location-industry effects. These corrections for new plants'


                                               30
                                                              Figure 5: Place Effects of New vs. Old Plants

           (a) Location Effects: Distributions                                                         (b) Location-Industry Effects: Distributions




            (c) Location Effects: Scatter Plots                                                        (d) Location-Industry Effects: Scatter Plots




                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                Benchmark: Full Sharing                                                                                      Benchmark: Full Sharing
                                                                of Location Effects,  = 1



                                                                                                             Industry-Specific Location Effect, New Plants
                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                        of Location-Industry Effects,  = 1
             Location Effect, New Plants
                                      .4




                                            Empirical Relationship:
                                            RF = 0.121 (SE 0.119)                                                                            .5
                                                                            Bias-Corrected                                                                                                      Bias-Corrected
                                            IV = 0.620 (SE 0.686)             Benchmark:                                                                     Empirical Relationship:              Benchmark:
                               .2




                                                                         FS = 0.194 (SE 0.074)                                                               RF = 0.125 (SE 0.066)           FS = 0.184 (SE 0.049)
                                                                                                                                                             IV = 0.683 (SE 0.376)
                      0




                                                                           Benchmark: Perfectly
                                                                                                                              0




                                                                            Uncorrelated,  = 0                                                                                              Benchmark: Perfectly
                                                                                                                                                                                             Uncorrelated,  = 0
             -.2




                                                                                                             -.5
                           -.4




                                              -.4      -.2     0      .2     .4       .6                               -.5              0              .5           1
                                           Location Effect, 50% Random Sample of Old Plants                 Industry-Specific Location Effect, 50% Random Sample of Old Plants

Note: The figure presents place effects for new and old plants. The top panels are kernel density plots representing the distribution
of estimated location effects (Panel (a)) and industry-specific location effects (Panel (b)). In each panel, the solid black line plots the
empirical raw distribution of the place averages. The blue dashed line illustrates the biased-corrected distribution, and reflects a
mean-preserving variance-adjustment of the raw distribution using a linear transformation as described in Footnote 12. The thick pair
of lines refers to place effects of new plants (five years and younger); the thin pair of lines refers to the effects of remaining plants,
i.e., those older than five years. In accordance with Census disclosure requirements, Panels (a) and (b) present kernel densities rather
than histograms and censors the density plots at the 5th and 95th percentiles. The bottom panels are scatter plots of the average-based
location effects (Panel (c)) and industry-specific location effects (Panel (d)), with new plants on the y-axis and the old plants' place
effects in the same place on the x-axis. The graph bins the underlying observations into 25 equally sized bins, but the regressions are
run on the underlying observations. The red line represents the linear regression slope  RF , which is the reduced-form effect in the IV
interpretation of the split-sample method of new against old plants' place effects. We also report the IV effect  IV =  RF  FS drawing
on first-stage effect  FS , which we describe next. The blue line plots the regression slope  FS of the first stage, which is obtained by
regressing the half sample of old plants' place effects on the y-axis with the place effects estimated in the complementary set of old
plants on the x-axis. We also plot two benchmarks.  = 0 represents no relationship between place effects of old and new plants;  = 1
represents the naive effect assuming no attenuation bias from measurement error such as granularity. The appropriate comparison for
full sharing of place effects is the first-stage slope. Intuitively, the IV effect measures the distance to that corrected benchmark of full
sharing. Panels (a) and (c) are not weighted; Panels (b) and (d) weight location-industry effects by the industry's employment shares
within the location.



place effects entail much larger reductions from the corresponding raw variances than for
the pooled samples' place effects, while still leaving the dispersion of true place effects
higher than that of the old plants (which exhibit bias-corrected variances of 0.008 and 0.016


                                                                                                  31
for location and industry-specific effects, respectively).

Are the Places that Appear Productive for Old Plants also More Productive For New
Plants? True place effects for new and old plants may be distinct. For example, a nurs-
ery cities view (Duranton and Puga, 2001) would permit some cities to be particularly
suitable for entrepreneurship, in ways that need not carry over to incumbent, large and
old production units. Alternatively, place-based productivity differences could be entirely
cohort-specific.
    Augmenting our split sample method, we investigate this question. In Figure 5 Panels
(c) (location effects) and (d) (location-industry effects), we juxtapose the new-plants place
effect of a given place with the corresponding place effect of old plants only. As one
benchmark, we plot a slope of one: place effects would show up for both new and old
projects identically. As another benchmark, we plot a slope of zero, which would indicate
no relationship between new and old plants' respective place effects.
    The red hollow scatter points trace out the empirical relationship between the new
and old place effects. They suggest that the place effects for new plants are much closer
to a no-correlation benchmark than the 45 degree line. We also include, as a red solid
line, the estimated linear regression slope  RF , which is the reduced-form effect in the IV
interpretation of the split-sample method we describe below. The slopes reveal a small
(and imprecisely estimated) elasticity of 0.121 (SE 0.119) and 0.125 (SE 0.066) for location
and location-industry effects of new plants' to old plants' place effects.
    However, the unity benchmark is inappropriate due to granularity bias, which shows
up as attenuation bias in the regression estimate. To construct a bias-corrected benchmark,
we implement a formal instrumental variables (IV) approach. We estimate a first stage
using the split samples, regressing the place averages of a random half sample of old plants
indexed by (O, B ) (y-axis) on those on the other sample of old plants (O, A) (x-axis). (In
fact, the aforementioned slope between new and old plants used that half sample on the x-
axis rather than all old plants.) The blue line plots the resulting first-stage regression slope
     Because TFP may be especially noisily measured for new plants, Appendix Table A.1 Columns (7)-(9)
additionally present the analogous results for log value added per worker.
     A motivating finding, reported in Table 1 Columns (9) and (10), is that while location effects for the
new remain significantly dispersed over a random location benchmark (p = 0.022) and location-industry
benchmarks (p = 0.019), we can no longer reject that old plants differ from random allocations--an intriguing
result that suggests that places are considerably more similar for old plants. However, since the permutation
test carries over place effects (and the covariance adjustment yielded economically large biased-corrected
variances for the old plants, with the confidence interval excluding zero), the results overall point towards
significant place effects for the old plants too.
     For this exercise depicted in Panels (c) and (d), we now weight location-industries by their pooled
employment share. For consistency with Panels (a) and (b) as well as Table 1 Columns (9) and (10), we
demean location effects by industry-age group.


                                                     32
 FS , which provides benchmarks of 0.194 (SE 0.074) for location effects and 0.184 (SE 0.049)
for industry-specific location effects, hence far from one. This first-stage relationship is
analogous to the visualization of the overall bias correction in the full sample in Figure
3. With this bias-corrected benchmark, the new plants appear to inherit a larger--but far
from perfect--share of the place effects of the old. The formal IV effect  IV =  RF  FS is
0.620 (SE 0.686) for the location effects and 0.683 (SE 0.376) for location-industry effects.
Intuitively, the IV effect measures the distance of the reduced form effect from the first
stage, i.e., the corrected benchmark of full sharing.
    To generate the figure, we generate 1,000 split-sample economies, and then select,
for visualization in the scatter plot, two economies with first-stage and reduced-form
coefficients being closest to the mean coefficients across the 1,000 economies (putting twice
as high a penalty on the error in the first-stage coefficients). Across the 1,000 split samples,
the mean estimated first-stage, reduced-form, and IV coefficients are, respectively, 0.194,
0.113 and 0.681 for the location effects, and 0.183, 0.127 and 0.716 for the location-industry
effects.
    We conclude that while place effects for new plants appear to comove by about 62­
68% (using the point estimates), with those of old plants, there is a substantial degree
of independent variation in the new plants' place effect, with estimates having wide
confidence intervals.


6     Additional Application II: Labor Productivity
We complement our primary productivity measure, log TFP, with log value added per
worker (labor productivity). This measure is less demanding, requiring neither specifying
a production function nor comprehensive input measures. We restrict our sample to those
plants that have TFP defined, so the samples of the TFP and labor productivity analyses
are identical. As a benchmark, with Cobb-Douglas production, the dispersion of log labor
productivity corresponds to that of the log marginal product of labor (which equals the
log labor share in value added--netted out by the industry-level labor shares--plus the
plant's log value added per worker).
   Across places, dispersion in marginal product of labor can indicate spatial misallocation
(see Hsieh and Moretti, 2019, who study average wages to proxy for raw average labor
productivity, but do not directly measure TFP or MPL across places). While a benchmark
    The F -statistics for the first-stage regressions in Panels (c) and (d) are 7.0 and 13.8, respectively, which,
besides the attenuated level of the IV coefficient below one, provides another caveat to the interpretation of a
strong relationship between old and new plants. The F -tests are quite dispersed across the 1,000 simulated
economies.


                                                       33
model of perfectly competitive factor markets would predict marginal products to be
equalized within a market, which would suggest little room for idiosyncratic dispersion
and hence for granularity bias therein, such idiosyncratic within-market between-firm
dispersion can emerge with frictions and indicate another dimension of misallocation
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2009).
    Column (7) of Table 1 replicates our main specification using labor productivity in
place of TFP. Appendix B contains replications of other main exhibits. In contrast to
the prediction that marginal products are more compressed than TFP, we find that raw
variances increase compared to those of TFP, by about 150%, from 0.026 to 0.063 and from
0.110 to 0.290 for location and location-industry effects. Given the tantamount increase
in permutation variances, p-values remain similar. Finally, the bias-corrected variance
estimates increase by about 100%, from 0.008 to 0.016 for location effects and from 0.023 to
0.041 for location-industry effects.
    We conclude that the dispersion in true place effects is if anything more pronounced
for marginal products than for TFP. Moreover, the relative share of the raw variance
that reflects granularity bias is in fact somewhat higher: three quarters (rather than two
thirds) for location effects, and sixth sevenths (rather than four fifths) for location-industry
effects.


7    Additional Application III: The Countries of Europe
We close our empirical study by applying our analysis to the within-country, cross-regional
dispersion of 15 European countries. We draw on internationally comparable firm-level
data from Bureau van Dk (BvD), construct firm-level TFP measures, as described in
Section 3, and study regional dispersion among the NUTS-2 regions, which most closely
correspond to US MSAs.
   Figure 6 and Appendix Tables A.2 (TFP) report dispersion statistics country by country.
The figure recapitulates the US Census based findings as the leftmost entry. For each
country, it reports three dispersion statistics: first, the raw variance (solid black circles),
second, the mean raw variance implied by 1,000 random allocations of plants across
places (hollow red diamonds) along with the 95% confidence intervals (dashed red lines)
taken from the sampling distribution given by the 1,000 randomizations, and, third, the
     For misallocation measures, weighting MSAs by plant or employment may be an alternative specification
of interest; for consistency with the TFP approach, we do not weight MSAs by size here either.
     The increased dispersion of labor productivity place averages (and effects) compared to TFP-based
dispersion measures is consistent with the studies of within-industry, between-plant dispersion in Syverson
(2004); Cunningham, Foster, Grim, Haltiwanger, Pabilonia, Stewart, and Wolf (2020).


                                                    34
mean covariance (blue triangles)--the bias-corrected estimate of the variance--of the 1,000
randomly split samples along with 2.5% and 97.5% confidence intervals implied by the
sampling distribution (solid blue lines).
    Consistent with the US findings, the European applications exhibit large--and quite
heterogeneous--raw variances of average-based place effects. The raw variance of the
location effects range from 0.005 for Austria to high values of around 0.024, 0.029, 0.037,
and 0.053 for Norway, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Germany. It is tempting to ascribe
these high raw variances to intuitive regional divergences in those countries (the high-
unemployment regions in the North in Norway, the productive urban centers in the United
Kingdom, the South-North gap in Italy, the East-West division in Germany). Yet, in the
United Kingdom, random allocations would have yielded similar dispersion for location
effects, which is the case for 7 countries (Austria, Denmark, France, Hungary, Spain,
Sweden, and the United Kingdom). Encouragingly however, that null hypothesis of no-
more-than-random productivity dispersion can be rejected at the 5% level in many but not
all of those aforementioned countries with anecdotal divergences and high raw variances
(the full list is Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, Norway, and Romania). Poland
and Portugal exhibit marginally significant results.
    The biased-corrected variances are lower than the raw variances in all cases, but their
ratios vary substantially. The covariance is only a quarter lower in Bulgaria, Norway,
Romania, Portugal, and Italy, compared to a 70% difference for Austria, France, the United
Kingdom.
    For the industry-specific location effects, granularity bias is amplified, as with the US
data. As with the US data, the raw variances are dramatically larger, by an order of
magnitude, but the bias-corrected estimates using the split-sample covariances settle in
at quite similar (but generally slightly higher) levels to the location effects. However,
reflecting the heightened granularity bias, the p-values of the permutation tests reveal that
the industry-specific location effects are only insignificantly different from the random
allocation benchmark in all countries but Germany and Romania.
    We end our assessment of the cross-country context by noting the small amount of
locations (NUTS-2 regions), which range between 5 and 42, industry-location cells, ranging
from 132 to 717, and firms, ranging from 1,678 to 132,244 (reported in Appendix Table
A.2). Appendix Table A.3 and Appendix Figure A.4 report the results for value added
per worker. The value added results, much like in the US context, in many instances
double the dispersion statistics, although again with considerable heterogeneity.
    We have also probed robustness to the, considerably smaller, NUTS-3 regional divisions, for which
location counts increase but within-location firm counts drop, such that granularity bias would grow further.



                                                     35
                                                         Figure 6: Spatial Dispersion of TFP: United States and European Countries
                                                                                                                      (a) Location Effects

                                                  .08
                                                                   Empirical: Raw Var(l )
                                                                   Permutations: Var(l )
                                                                   Bias-Corrected: Cov(l A,l B) = Var(l)
   Variance: Location Effects




                                                  .06



                                                  .04



                                                  .02



                                                   0
                                                                   ria




                                                                                                         k



                                                                                                                  e



                                                                                                                             y


                                                                                                                                      ry



                                                                                                                                              ly
                                                         es




                                                                                ria



                                                                                              ic




                                                                                                                                                       ay



                                                                                                                                                                   d



                                                                                                                                                                              l


                                                                                                                                                                                       ia



                                                                                                                                                                                              n


                                                                                                                                                                                                      en



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                       ar




                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                c




                                                                                                                                                              an




                                                                                                                                                                                              ai
                                                                                                                                           Ita
                                                                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                                     ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      do
                                                                                          ub
                                                        at




                                                                                                             an




                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                               st


                                                                           ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed
                                                                                                                                                                         tu




                                                                                                                                                                                            Sp
                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                         m




                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                   or
                                                        St


                                                              Au




                                                                                                                                                            Po




                                                                                                                                                                                  om
                                                                                                                                 un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                         ep




                                                                                                             Fr




                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                            l




                                                                                                   en




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sw
                                                                         Bu




                                                                                                                      er




                                                                                                                                                                       Po
                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                 H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ki
                                                    d




                                                                                      R




                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                   D




                                                                                                                      G
                                                  te




                                                                                    ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                  ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                            te
                                                                                 ze
                                        U




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ni
                                                                                C




                                                                                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                         (b) Industry-Specific Location Effects

                                                  .25
   Variance: Industry-Specific Location Effects




                                                                   Empirical: Raw Var(l,i)
                                                                   Permutations: Var(l,i)
                                                   .2              Bias-Corrected: Cov(l,iA,l,iB) = Var(l,i)


                                                  .15


                                                   .1


                                                  .05


                                                   0
                                                                   ria




                                                                                                                                              ly
                                                         es




                                                                                ria



                                                                                              ic



                                                                                                         k



                                                                                                                  e



                                                                                                                             y


                                                                                                                                      ry




                                                                                                                                                       ay



                                                                                                                                                                   d



                                                                                                                                                                              l


                                                                                                                                                                                       ia



                                                                                                                                                                                              n


                                                                                                                                                                                                      en



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                       ar




                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                c




                                                                                                                                                              an




                                                                                                                                                                                              ai
                                                                                                                                           Ita
                                                                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                                     ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      do
                                                                                          ub
                                                        at




                                                                                                             an




                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                               st


                                                                           ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed
                                                                                                                                                                         tu




                                                                                                                                                                                            Sp
                                                                                                     m




                                                                                                                         m




                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                   or
                                                        St


                                                              Au




                                                                                                                                                            Po




                                                                                                                                                                                  om
                                                                                                                                 un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                         ep




                                                                                                             Fr




                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                            l




                                                                                                   en




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sw
                                                                         Bu




                                                                                                                      er




                                                                                                                                                                       Po
                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                 H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ki
                                                    d




                                                                                      R




                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                   D




                                                                                                                      G
                                                  te




                                                                                    ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                  ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                            te
                                                                                 ze
                                        U




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ni
                                                                                C




                                                                                                                                                                                                        U



Note: The figure reports, for each country, the raw variance (solid black dot), the mean and 95% confidence intervals of the raw
variances of 1,000 permutations, i.e., random allocations of firms across location-industry cells (hollow red diamond and dotted line,
respectively), and the mean and 95% confidence intervals of the bias-corrected variances from 1,000 split samples (solid blue triangle
and line, respectively). Panel (a) reports the location (NUTS-2) effects and Panel (b) reports the location (NUTS-2) x industry (2-digit
NACE) effects for European countries; the leftmost entry reiterates the US numbers using the MSA and 4-digit NAICS cell definitions.
The place effects for the European countries are measured using Bureau van Dk (BvD) firm-level data. Appendix Table A.2 details the
statistics printed here.



   We tentatively conclude that granularity leads to large--if anything more dramatic--
upward bias in productivity differences across place in the 15 European countries we can
study in internationally comparable firm-level micro data. Obvious challenges are the
lower cell-level firm observation counts in the internationally comparable BvD data, and
the series of data quality issues associated with the BvD data, which we have discussed in
Section 3.



                                                                                                                                      36
8    Conclusion
We have revisited the measurement of the dispersion in productivity across places. We
have confirmed the high raw variance of productivity averages across cities, which has been
a frequent focus of research in urban economics. We have investigated the possibility that
some of this dispersion might reflect the "luck of the draw" of tremendously heterogeneous
plants that happen to be located in a given location, especially when zooming into fine-
grained industries. Indeed, we show that randomly allocating plants across places would
generate nearly as much dispersion as the empirical economy--the dispersion of which
however does differ statistically significantly from what random economies could have
generated. We have also provided a bias-corrected estimate of the variation in true place
effects, i.e., those differences in productivity that are systematically related to the place
in which plants are located. We have found that the majority--around two thirds to
four fifths--of the raw variation is an artifact of granular data: cells of finite plants with
high idiosyncratic variation in productivity and size. This pattern holds when measuring
productivity as TFP as well as log of average value added per worker, in US plant-level data
and in firm-level data of 15 European countries. Furthermore, we uncover substantially
more, and independent, variation in location effects measured from new plants, implying
that place effects may not perfectly carry over to new plants.
    Importantly, by conducting within-industry comparisons across locations and demean-
ing plant productivity by national industry, our location measures remove industry com-
position as a factor in place effects (even when we aggregate location-industry effects into
location effects). An interesting question beyond the scope of our paper is whether indus-
try composition and location choice itself may be a reflection of a broader notion of place
effects on productivity.
    We close by reiterating that our bias-corrected numbers are model-agnostic and reduced-
form. They may reflect a combination of causal effects of place on productivity (such
as agglomeration forces), as well as sorting. Moreover, our method does not correct
for even more fundamental sources of measurement error, for example arising from
location-specific production function misspecification or mismeasurement of inputs or
prices. Hence, the remaining true dispersion in place effects may be even lower than our
bias-corrected estimates. Overall, our results suggest a substantially reduced upper bound
for the potential productivity impact of the actual underlying spatial forces, to the degree
that they show up through the kind of true place effects we study, namely place-specific
expected values of plant productivity.

    In a separate project, we are applying our strategy to measuring the between-firm dispersion in plant


                                                   37
References
Albouy, David. 2016. "What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the
  Total Value of Amenities." Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (3):477­487.

Bils, Mark, Peter Klenow, and Cian Ruane. 2020. "Misallocation or Mismeasurement?"
  NBER Working Paper .

Boeri, Tito, Andrea Ichino, Enrico Moretti, and Johanna Posch. 2019. "Wage Equalization
  and Regional Misallocation: Evidence from Italian and German Provinces." CEPR
  Discussion Paper .

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte.
  2018. "The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the US Economy."
  The Review of Economic Studies 85 (4):2042­2096.

Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016. "Health
 Care Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector." Amer-
 ican Economic Review 106 (8):2110­44.

Ciccone, Antonio and Robert Hall. 1996. "Productivity and the Density of Economic
  Activity." The American Economic Review 86 (1):54.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga, and Sébastien
 Roux. 2012. "The Productivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomera-
 tion from Firm Selection." Econometrica 80 (6):2543­2594.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux. 2010.
 "Estimating Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker Effects." In
 Agglomeration Economics. University of Chicago Press, 15­66.

Cunningham, Cindy, Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, Sabrina Wulff Pa-
 bilonia, Jay Stewart, and Zoltan Wolf. 2020. "Dispersion in Dispersion: Measuring
 Establishment-level Differences in Productivity." BLS Working Paper 530 .

Davis, Donald and Jonathan Dingel. 2020. "The Comparative Advantage of Cities." Journal
 of International Economics 123:103291.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. forthcoming. "Chang-
 ing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness." The American
 Economic Review .

Dekle, Robert and Jonathan Eaton. 1999. "Agglomeration and Land Rents: Evidence from
 the Prefectures." Journal of Urban Economics 46 (2):200­214.
productivity studying multi-plant firms rather than locations (for a study of between-plant dispersion, see
Kehrig and Vincent, 2020, who however do not account for measurement error using a split-sample method),
a topic of active research in the misallocation literature (Bils, Klenow, and Ruane, 2020; Rotemberg and White,
2020; Haltiwanger, Kulick, and Syverson, 2018).


                                                      38
Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. "Urban Accounting and Welfare."
 American Economic Review 103 (6):2296­2327.

Dingel, Jonathan and Felix Tintelnot. 2020. "Spatial Economics for Granular Settings."
  NBER Working Paper .

Drenik, Andres, Simon Jäger, Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer. 2020. "Paying
  Outsourced Labor: Direct Evidence from Linked Temp Agency-Worker-Client Data."
  NBER Working Paper .

Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2001. "Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Inno-
 vation, and the Life Cycle of Products." American Economic Review 91 (5):1454­1477.

Ehrlich, Maximilian and Henry Overman. 2020. "Place-based Policies and Spatial Dispar-
  ities Across European Cities." Journal of Economic Perspectives 34 (3):128­49.

Ellison, Glenn and Edward Glaeser. 1997. "Geographic Concentration in US Manufacturing
  Industries: a Dartboard Approach." Journal of Political Economy 105 (5):889­927.

Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. "What Causes Industry Ag-
  glomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns." American Economic Review
  100 (3):1195­1213.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo and Cecile Gaubert. 2020. "Optimal Spatial Policies, Geography, and
  Sorting." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2):959­1036.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen Zidar. 2019.
  "State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation." The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1):333­376.

Fort, Teresa and Shawn Klimek. 2018. "The Effects of Industry Classification Changes on
  US Employment Composition." US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No.
  CES-WP-18-28 .

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger. 2016. "Reallocation in the Great Reces-
  sion: Cleansing or Not?" Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1):S293­S331.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Cornell John Krizan. 2001. "Aggregate Productivity
  Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence." In New Developments in Productivity
  Analysis. University of Chicago Press, 303­372.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2016. "The Slow Growth of New
  Plants: Learning about Demand?" Economica 83 (329):91­129.

Gabaix, Xavier. 1999a. "Zipf's Law and the Growth of Cities." American Economic Review
 89 (2):129­132.

------. 1999b. "Zipf's Law for Cities: an Explanation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  114 (3):739­767.



                                           39
Gaubert, Cecile. 2018. "Firm Sorting and Agglomeration." American Economic Review
 108 (11):3117­53.

Gaubert, Cecile and Oleg Itskhoki. forthcoming. "Granular Comparative Advantage."
 Journal of Political Economy .

Gerard, François, Lorenzo Lagos, Edson Severnini, and David Card. 2018. "Assortative
 Matching or Exclusionary Hiring? The Impact of Firm Policies on Racial Wage Differ-
 ences in Brazil." NBER Working Paper .

Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1992. "Growth in
  Cities." Journal of Political Economy 100 (6):1126­1152.

Glaeser, Edward and David Mare. 2001. "Cities and Skills." Journal of Labor Economics
  19 (2):316­342.

Gopinath, Gita, ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-
 Sanchez. 2017. "Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 132 (4):1915­1967.

Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. "Identifying Agglom-
  eration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings." Journal
  of Political Economy 118 (3):536­598.

Haltiwanger, John, Robert Kulick, and Chad Syverson. 2018. "Misallocation Measures:
 The Distortion that Ate the Residual." NBER Working Paper .

Henderson, Vernon. 1994. "Where Does an Industry Locate?" Journal of Urban Economics
 35 (1):83­104.

Hornbeck, Richard and Enrico Moretti. 2018. "Who Benefits from Productivity Growth?
 Direct and Indirect Effects of Local TFP Growth on Wages, Rents, and Inequality." NBER
 Working Paper .

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
 China and India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4):1403­1448.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti. 2019. "Housing Constraints and Spatial Misalloca-
 tion." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2):1­39.

Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, and Jörg Heining. 2019. "Labor in the Boardroom." NBER
  Working Paper w26519 .

Kehrig, Matthias. 2015. "The Cyclical Nature of the Productivity Distribution." US Census
  Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-11-15 .

Kehrig, Matthias and Nicolas Vincent. 2020. "Good Dispersion, Bad Dispersion." NBER
  Working Paper .



                                           40
Kline, Patrick, Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2020. "Leave-out Estimation of Vari-
  ance Components." Econometrica 88 (5):1859­1898.

Melitz, Marc. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity." Econometrica 71 (6):1695­1725.

Moretti, Enrico. 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Pugsley, Benjamin, Petr Sedlacek, and Vincent Sterk. forthcoming. "The Nature of Firm
  Growth." American Economic Review .

Rotemberg, Martin and Kirk White. 2020. "Measuring cross-country Differences in Misal-
  location." NYU Working Paper .

Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Daniel Wilson. 2004. "Quantifying Embodied Technological
  Change." Review of Economic Dynamics 7 (1):1­26.

Silver, David. 2020. "Haste or Waste? Peer Pressure and Productivity in the Emergency
   Department." Working Paper .

Sveikauskas, Leo. 1975. "The Productivity of Cities." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  89 (3):393­413.

Syverson, Chad. 2004. "Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion." Review of
  Economics and Statistics 86 (2):534­550.

------. 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2):326­65.




                                            41
                   Online Appendix of
Productivity, Place, and Plants: Revisiting the Measurement
               Benjamin Schoefer and Oren Ziv




                             42
A                          Supplementary Facts: Distributions of Plants and Em-
                           ployment

Figure A.1: Plant Counts in U.S. MSAs and MSA-Industry Cells in Manufacturing (Public-
Use Data)

                                          (a) MSA                                                                                               (b) MSA-Industry

                      1                                                                                                      1



                                                                                                                             .8




                                                                                          Fraction of Cells (Cond. on > 0)
                      .8
  Fraction of Cells




                      .6                                                                                                     .6



                      .4                                                                                                     .4



                      .2                                                                                                     .2


                                                                                                                                  Fraction 0 = 0.37
                      0                                                                                                      0
                           25   50   100   200           500    1000   2000   5000                                                                      5         10         20      40   60 80 100
                                       Number of Plants (Log Scale)                                                                                   Number of Plants (Log Scale)

Note: The figure presents data from the 2012 US County Business Patterns (CBP) files on the plant counts in manufacturing at the MSA
and MSA-industry level. Panels (a) and (b) present the cumulative distribution of plant counts for US MSAs and MSA x 4-digit NAICS
cells, respectively. 37% of location-industry cells have zero plants.




                                                                                     43
Figure A.2: Concentration of Employment in U.S. MSAs and MSA-Industry Cells in
Manufacturing (Public-Use Data)
                            (a) MSA                                                       (b) MSA-Industry




Note: The figure presents data from the 2012 US County Business Patterns (CBP) files on employment concentration in manufacturing
at the MSA and MSA-industry level. Both panels restrict samples to cells with at least 10 plants, which drops zero MSAs and 75% of
MSA-industry cells, and thereby zooms into MSA-industry cells less likely to be concentrated and less likely to be subject to granularity
bias. Panels (a) and (b) report Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients for, respectively MSAs and MSA-industries with Gini coefficients at
the 90th, 75th, 50th, 25th, and 10th percentiles of their respective distributions. For these panels, plant-level employment is imputed
as follows. The CBP reports plant counts by employment size bins (sizes range from plants with 1-5 employees to the top bin, plants
with 5000 or more employees) for all MSA-industry cells. The CBP also reports total MSA-industry employment, which is censored for
some MSA-industries to avoid disclosing data for individual companies or for data quality reasons. In addition, some numbers include
noise. First, focusing only on MSA-industries where employment is not censored and where there are no plants in the top bin, we
impute employment for each plant. For a plant in a bin ranging from employment size EB to ET , we impute plants' employment as
EB + R  (ET - EB ), where R is an economy-wide constant between 0 and 1 chosen such that, in a regression of log actual MSA-industry
total employment on log imputed MSA-industry total employment, the coefficient is closest to 1 and the intercept is closest to zero. Next,
we use R (which we estimate to be 0.35) to impute plants' employment in MSA-industries with censored employment according to the
same formula for all plants except plants in the top bin. For the remaining plants, those in the top bin, where MSA-industry employment
is censored, we set their employment to 5,000. Where MSA-industry total employment is not censored, we estimate employment as
the maximum of 5,000 and the difference between actual total employment and imputed employment outside of the top bin, divided
by the number of top-bin plants. Because we impute all plants in the same bin to have equal employment, we likely understate the
concentration of employment in an MSA or MSA-industry.




                                                                   44
B       Replication of Main Results with Value Added Per Worker

Table A.1: Spatial Dispersion of Labor Productivity in the United States (Value Added Per
Worker) (x100 For All Dispersion Statistics)
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)             (6)             (7)       (8)      (9)
                                            Main      10 Plants   6-Digit Ind.   Unwins. 2.5% Wins. Plant Weights          New & Old   New       Old
                                                                                    Panel A: Location Effects
 Empirical:
    Raw Var(  l)
                                              6.32       5.16         7.30          6.92       5.26           1.76            8.45     15.11    10.05
    90th - 10th Percentile                   85.20      72.55        87.70         87.69       79.50          42.74          100.3     138.3    108.3
 Permutations: Var(   l)
    Mean                                     4.62       3.79         5.09          5.34         3.85           0.76          6.77      16.49     8.55
    Standard Deviation                       0.61       0.57         0.68          0.79         0.48           0.11          0.93       1.94     1.24
    p-value                                  0.009      0.021        0.004         0.042       0.010          0.001          0.048     0.755    0.113
 Bias-Corrected: Cov(  A , B ) = Var(l )
                         l l
    Mean                                     1.58       1.80         2.61           1.73        1.39           1.02           1.98      1.64     1.58
    97.5th Percentile                        1.97       2.41         3.00           2.19        1.74           1.19           2.77      2.94     2.67
    2.5th Percentile                         1.17       1.11         2.16           1.22        1.02           0.84           1.08      0.23     0.43

                                                                             Panel B: Industry-Specific Location Effects
 Empirical:
    Raw Var( l,i )                           28.96      11.29        28.78         32.82       24.40          13.17          16.33     32.21    18.21
    90th - 10th Percentile                   188.9      105.8        187.2         198.9       175.9          127.3          135.8     205.0    142.9
 Permutations: Var(  l,i )
    Mean                                     26.75      9.22         25.90         31.03       22.64          10.97          13.84     33.80    16.39
    Standard Deviation                        1.12      0.69         1.14          1.59         0.84           0.30          1.13       2.21     1.42
    p-value                                  0.029      0.004        0.008         0.132       0.021          0.001          0.029     0.755    0.092
 Bias-Corrected: Cov(    A, 
                       l,i  B ) = Var( )
                            l,i       l,i
    Mean                                     4.05       3.00         5.39           4.64        3.43           2.60           3.60      3.64     2.42
    97.5th Percentile                        4.84       3.85         5.97           5.56        4.06           2.88           4.58      5.26     3.65
    2.5th Percentile                         3.24       2.11         4.77           3.72        2.77           2.30           2.48      2.00     1.03

 Number of MSAs                               400        250          400           400         400            400             300       300      300
 Number of MSA-Industries                    11,500     2,800        18,000        11,500      11,500         11,500          2,800     2,800    2,800
 Number of Plants                           120,000    86,000       105,000       120,000     120,000        120,000         78,000    14,000   64,000

Note: The table repeats the analysis in Table 1 but uses log value added per worker rather than TFP (and skips Column (7) there, which
is identical to Column (1) of the table at hand).




                                                                            45
                                                       Figure A.3: Varying Cell Thresholds of Plant Counts (Value Added per Worker)
                                                                                              (a) Location Effects
                                                0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                   Empirical: Raw Var(l)
                                                0.06                                                                                               Permutations: Var(l)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                   Bias-Corrected: Cov(A
                                                                                                                                                                       l ,l ) = Var(l)
                                                                                                                                                                          B


                                                                                                                                                   Number of Locations
                                                0.05                                                                                                                                             300




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Number of Locations (rounded)
 Variance: Location Effects




                                                                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                0.04


                                                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                0.03

                                                                                                                                                                                                 150

                                                0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                 100


                                                0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50



                                                0.00                                                                                                                                             0




                                                       2   10   20   30   40     50          60        70         80        90        100    110         120       130           140         150
                                                                                      Minimum Number of Plants in Location-Industry Cell

                                                                               (b) Industry-Specific Location Effects

                                                                                                                                                                                             11000
                                                0.30
                                                                                                                                              Empirical: Raw Var(l,i)
                                                                                                                                                                                             10000
                                                                                                                                              Permutations: Var(l,i)
                                                                                                                                              Bias-Corrected:    Cov(A
                                                                                                                                                                     l,i,l,i)
                                                                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                = Var(l,i)   9000
 Variance: Industry-Specific Location Effects




                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                              Number of Industry-Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                             8000




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of Industry-Locations
                                                0.20                                                                                                                                         7000


                                                                                                                                                                                             6000

                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                             5000


                                                                                                                                                                                             4000
                                                0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                             3000


                                                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                0.05

                                                                                                                                                                                             1000


                                                0.00                                                                                                                                         0


                                                       2   10   20   30   40     50         60        70        80         90       100     110        120       130        140          150
                                                                                 Minimum Number of Plants in Industry-Location Cell
Note: The figure replicates Figure 4 but uses log value added per worker rather than TFP.




                                                                                                            46
     C       Spatial Dispersion of Productivity Within 15 European Countries (Bureau van
             Dk Data)

                          Table A.2: Spatial Dispersion of TFP in 15 European Countries (x100 For All Dispersion Statistics)
                                                  Austria   Bulgaria   Czech Rep.   Denmark   France   Germany    Hungary      Italy    Norway    Poland   Portugal   Romania   Spain    Sweden    UK
                                                                                                                 Panel A: Location Effects
      Empirical:
         Raw Var(   l)                             0.53      0.99        0.66        0.64     0.86      5.27        0.50       3.74      2.36      1.22     1.23       0.75     1.69      0.24    2.93
         90th - 10th Percentile                    21.73     29.05       22.33       22.23    27.35     51.09       21.50      41.51     46.26     32.10    33.55      25.85    36.02     15.09   39.83
      Permutations: Var(    l)
         Mean                                      0.42       0.22        0.23       1.06     1.90      2.23        0.47       0.95      0.61      0.64      0.44       0.19    1.63      0.38    4.32
         Standard Deviation                        0.23       0.14        0.12       0.73     1.13      0.88        0.24       0.98      0.41      0.32      0.38       0.10    2.07      0.26    1.40
         p-value                                   0.263     0.001       0.002       0.663    0.930     0.002       0.376      0.012     0.005     0.058    0.053      0.001    0.321     0.656   0.863
      Bias-Corrected: Cov(   A , B ) = Var(l )
                               l l
         Mean                                      0.12       0.92        0.39        0.26     0.25      2.14        0.24      2.96       1.80      0.56     0.96       0.58     1.23     0.16     0.82
          97.5th Percentile                        0.59       1.14        0.61        0.99     0.45      2.69        0.69      3.73       2.38      0.84     1.21       0.85     1.54     0.34     1.47
          2.5th Percentile                         -0.56      0.65        0.11       -0.73     0.02      1.55       -0.27      1.86       1.15      0.24     0.56       0.30     0.81     -0.09    0.14
                                                                                                        Panel B: Industry-Specific Location Effects
      Empirical:
47




         Raw Var(  l,i )                           3.98      3.72        2.86        4.31     4.97      9.55        4.48       7.92      5.70      8.57     3.07       3.81     5.11      5.16    14.66
         90th - 10th Percentile                    37.99     26.13       45.01       54.82    34.53     56.01       35.85      45.26     33.94     53.86    36.84      31.58    42.84     25.75   49.00
      Permutations: Var(   l,i )
         Mean                                      4.56       3.33        2.48       5.57      7.44      7.61       4.81       6.61      7.16       7.64     3.98       2.77    6.38      4.68    16.77
         Standard Deviation                        0.78       0.53        0.36       1.49      1.72      1.09       0.76       2.06      2.86       1.63     1.31       0.55    2.94      1.24     2.67
         p-value                                   0.779     0.239       0.140       0.825    0.989     0.042       0.644      0.182     0.625     0.238    0.746      0.050    0.608     0.222   0.777
      Bias-Corrected: Cov(     A, 
                             l,i  B ) = Var( )
                                  l,i       l,i
         Mean                                      0.15       0.42        0.35       -0.42     1.49      1.99       0.42       3.31      1.07      0.83      1.04       1.03     1.82     0.07    2.26
          97.5th Percentile                        1.14       1.14       0.92         0.93     2.08      2.93       1.72       4.73      2.48      1.52      1.81       1.68     2.53     1.03    4.54
          2.5th Percentile                         -1.17     -0.36       -0.26       -2.19     0.91      1.05       -1.10      1.01      -0.60     0.06      0.22       0.29     1.09     -0.91   -0.19
      Number of NUTS-2 Regions                       9          6           8          5        27        38          8          21        7         17        7          8       19        8       42
      Number of NUTS-2 Region-Industries            148       132         170         107      491       717         162        455       135       330      126        176      362      174      731
      Number of Firms                              1,678     14,625      13,091      5,829    32,050    13,244      2,768     116,918    5,189     6,650    26,019     21,279   60,375   13,916   10,125

     Note: The table reports, for 15 European countries, dispersion measures for location effects (NUTS-2, Panel A) and industry-specific location effects (NUTS-2 x NACE 2-digit, Panel B),
     using Bureau van Dk firm-level data. Each column otherwise replicates our main specification in Column (1) of Table 1 for one European country. It reports results for TFP.
     Table A.3: Spatial Dispersion of Labor Productivity (Value Added per Worker) in 15 European Countries (x100 For All
     Dispersion Statistics)
                                                 Austria   Bulgaria   Czech Rep.   Denmark   France   Germany    Hungary      Italy    Norway    Poland   Portugal   Romania   Spain    Sweden    UK
                                                                                                                Panel A: Location Effects
      Empirical:
         Raw Var(  l)
                                                  1.26      0.70        1.05        1.08     1.54      9.19        1.65       5.58      3.90      2.61     3.13       1.38     3.27      0.12    5.10
         90th - 10th Percentile                   39.46     23.79       32.87       26.93    31.55     73.61       41.51      56.90     64.44     37.22    49.51      41.21    51.61     10.10   55.45
      Permutations: Var(   l)
         Mean                                     0.56       0.27        0.45       2.33     2.48      5.44        1.55       1.03      0.93      0.90      0.66       0.42    1.93      0.32    5.22
         Standard Deviation                       0.29       0.17        0.22       1.65     1.12      1.46        0.74       1.34      0.48      0.37      0.52       0.21    1.36      0.20    1.42
         p-value                                  0.031     0.029       0.015       0.744    0.863     0.012       0.390      0.008     0.001     0.003    0.005      0.002    0.126     0.915   0.497
      Bias-Corrected: Cov(  A , B ) = Var(l )
                              l l
         Mean                                     0.60       0.64        0.51       -0.12     0.68      3.69        0.79      5.13       2.68      1.86     2.78       1.09     2.53     -0.06    2.52
         97.5th Percentile                        1.03       0.90        0.89        1.12     1.00      5.43        1.87      5.70       3.80      2.25     3.13       1.54     3.04     0.10     3.20
         2.5th Percentile                         0.12       0.29       -0.05       -1.87     0.29      1.65       -0.47      4.41       1.45      1.40     2.24       0.52     1.91     -0.44    1.76
                                                                                                       Panel B: Industry-Specific Location Effects
      Empirical:
         Raw Var( l,i )                           4.91      5.64        5.20        5.79     7.17      16.32       14.74      10.88     8.67      11.89    5.37       6.51     8.11      5.57    20.34
         90th - 10th Percentile                   47.22     41.87       87.94       66.51    52.44     68.46       58.19      86.85     66.63     72.20    50.99      35.24    55.82     55.16   69.80
      Permutations: Var(  l,i )
         Mean                                     5.22       4.82        5.13       9.72      9.11     14.12       13.32      6.83      7.68      10.07     4.74       4.71    7.53      4.28    19.46
         Standard Deviation                       0.75       0.79        0.72       3.08      1.60      1.62        1.61      2.47      1.38       1.36     1.30       0.79    2.24      0.82     2.02
         p-value                                  0.626     0.156       0.453       0.942    0.943     0.098       0.184      0.047     0.210     0.096    0.263      0.015    0.307     0.065   0.304
48




      Bias-Corrected: Cov(    A, 
                            l,i  B ) = Var( )
                                 l,i       l,i
         Mean                                     -0.14      1.32         0.69      -1.40     2.52      3.85       1.87       5.99      3.55       2.88     3.50       1.76     3.49     1.57     6.47
         97.5th Percentile                        0.88       2.38         1.88       1.20     3.28      6.21       4.57       6.90      5.38       3.95     4.18       3.07     4.46     2.58     8.12
         2.5th Percentile                         -1.23      0.16        -0.73      -5.21     1.69      1.16       -1.46      4.17      1.51       1.69     2.64       0.41     2.47     0.38     4.70
      Number of NUTS-2 Regions                      9          6           8           5       27        38          8          21        7         17        7          8       19        8       42
      Number of NUTS-2 Region-Industries           148       132          170        107      491       717         162        455       135       330      126        176      362      174      731
      Number of Firms                             1,678     14,625      13,091      5,829    32,050    13,244      2,768     116,918    5,189     6,650    26,019     21,279   60,375   13,916   10,125

     Note: The table replicates Table A.2 but uses log value added per worker rather than TFP.
Figure A.4: Spatial Dispersion of Labor Productivity (Value Added per Worker): United
States and European Countries
                                                                                                                         (a) Location Effects

                                                      .1
                                                                    Empirical: Raw Var(l )
                                                                    Permutations: Var(l )
                                                  .08
                                                                    Bias-Corrected: Cov(l A,l B) = Var(l)
   Variance: Location Effects




                                                  .06

                                                  .04

                                                  .02

                                                      0

                                                  -.02

                                                  -.04
                                                            es



                                                                        a


                                                                                   ria



                                                                                               ic



                                                                                                           k


                                                                                                                    ce



                                                                                                                               y



                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                  ly


                                                                                                                                                           ay



                                                                                                                                                                       d



                                                                                                                                                                                  l


                                                                                                                                                                                            a



                                                                                                                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                                                                                                                              en



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                           an



                                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                   tri




                                                                                                                                                                  an




                                                                                                                                                                                             i


                                                                                                                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                                l




                                                                                                                                               Ita




                                                                                                                                                                                          an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       do
                                                                                             ub
                                                           at




                                                                                                               an




                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                              ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ed
                                                                                                                                                                             tu




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sp
                                                                    s




                                                                                                       m




                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                       or
                                                           St


                                                                 Au




                                                                                                                                                                Po




                                                                                                                                                                                      om
                                                                                                                                   un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                          ep




                                                                                                               Fr




                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                               l




                                                                                                    en




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sw
                                                                            Bu




                                                                                                                          er




                                                                                                                                                                           Po
                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                   H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ki
                                                       d




                                                                                         R




                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                    D




                                                                                                                         G
                                                      te




                                                                                     ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                  ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                    ze
                                                  U




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                               C




                                                                                                                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                        (b) Industry-Specific Location Effects

                                                      .3
   Variance: Industry-Specific Location Effects




                                                                                                                                                                                   Empirical: Raw Var(l,i)
                                                                                                                                                                                   Permutations: Var(l,i)
                                                  .25
                                                                                                                                                                                   Bias-Corrected: Cov(l,iA,l,iB) = Var(l,i)

                                                      .2

                                                  .15

                                                      .1

                                                  .05

                                                      0

                                                  -.05
                                                            es



                                                                        a


                                                                                   ria



                                                                                               ic



                                                                                                           k


                                                                                                                    ce



                                                                                                                               y



                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                  ly


                                                                                                                                                           ay



                                                                                                                                                                       d



                                                                                                                                                                                  l


                                                                                                                                                                                            a



                                                                                                                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                                                                                                                              en



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                           an



                                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                   tri




                                                                                                                                                                  an




                                                                                                                                                                                             i


                                                                                                                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                                l




                                                                                                                                               Ita




                                                                                                                                                                                          an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       do
                                                                                             ub
                                                           at




                                                                                                               an




                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                              ga




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ed
                                                                                                                                                                             tu




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sp
                                                                    s




                                                                                                       m




                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                          m




                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                       or
                                                           St


                                                                 Au




                                                                                                                                                                Po




                                                                                                                                                                                      om
                                                                                                                                   un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                          ep




                                                                                                               Fr




                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                               l




                                                                                                    en




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sw
                                                                            Bu




                                                                                                                          er




                                                                                                                                                                           Po
                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                   H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ki
                                                       d




                                                                                         R




                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                    D




                                                                                                                         G
                                                      te




                                                                                     ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                  ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                    ze
                                                  U




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                               C




                                                                                                                                                                                                              U




Note: The figure replicates Figure 6 but uses log value added per worker rather than TFP.




                                                                                                                                          49
