                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SHOULD THERE BE VERTICAL CHOICE IN HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETS?

                                      Victoria R. Marone
                                       Adrienne Sabety

                                      Working Paper 28779
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28779


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We are grateful to Vivek Bhattacharya, David Cutler, Leemore Dafny, David Dranove, Liran
Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Tal Gross, Igal Hendel, Gaston Illanes, Matthew Leisten, Matt
Notowidigdo, Chris Ody, Rob Porter, Elena Prager, Mar Reguant, Bill Rogerson, Mark Shepard,
Amanda Starc, Bob Town, Tom Wiseman, and Gabriel Ziegler for advice and suggestions that
greatly benefited this research. We also thank many participants in seminars at Northwestern,
Kellogg, BI Norwegian Business School, University of Chicago, Princeton, MIT, Washington
University in St. Louis, Yale SOM, Rochester Simon, NYU, MIT Sloan, Chicago Booth,
Wisconsin, UT Austin, NBER Summer Institute, and the 2018 ASHEcon Conference for helpful
comments. Finally, we thank Jason Abaluck and Jon Gruber for access to the data and for their
support of this research project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Victoria R. Marone and Adrienne Sabety. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Should There Be Vertical Choice in Health Insurance Markets?
Victoria R. Marone and Adrienne Sabety
NBER Working Paper No. 28779
May 2021
JEL No. D82,G22,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the welfare effects of offering choice over financial coverage levels­­"vertical
choice''­­in regulated health insurance markets. Though the efficient level of coverage, which
trades off the value of risk protection and the social cost from moral hazard, likely varies across
consumers, we emphasize that this variation alone is not sufficient to motivate choice. When
premiums cannot reflect individual costs, consumers may not select their efficient coverage level.
We show that vertical choice is efficient only if consumers with higher willingness to pay for
insurance have a higher efficient level of coverage. Using administrative data from a large public
employer, we investigate this condition empirically and find that the welfare gains from vertical
choice are either zero or economically small.


Victoria R. Marone
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
marone@utexas.edu

Adrienne Sabety
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
asabety@nd.edu
I        Introduction

Choice over financial vertically differentiated coverage levels--which we term "vertical choice"--
is widely available in U.S. health insurance markets.1 A leading example is the tiered plans
(e.g., Gold, Silver, Bronze) offered on Affordable Care Act exchanges. In contrast, national
health insurance schemes typically offer a single level of coverage. In both contexts, regulation
plays a central role in determining the extent of vertical choice, but the economics literature
has provided limited guidance to regulators on this topic. This paper develops a theoretical
and empirical framework for evaluating whether, and when, it is optimal to offer a vertical
choice.

     The basic argument in favor of vertical choice is the standard value of product variety:
with more options, consumers can more closely match with their socially efficient product by
revealed preference (Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977). This argument relies critically, however, on the
condition that privately optimal choices align with socially optimal choices. In competitive
markets in which costs are independent of consumers' private valuations, this alignment is
standard. But in markets with selection, such as health insurance markets, this alignment
may not be possible. In these markets, costs are inextricably related to private valuations, and
asymmetric information (or regulation) prevents prices from reflecting marginal costs (Akerlof,
1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). We show that even if health insurance markets are
competitive, regulated, and populated by informed consumers, whether choice can increase
welfare is theoretically ambiguous.

     Our welfare metric derives from the seminal literature on optimal insurance, which holds that
the efficient level of coverage equates the marginal benefit of risk protection and the marginal
social cost of utilization induced by insurance (Arrow, 1965; Pauly, 1968, 1974; Zeckhauser,
1970). We focus attention on how this central tradeoff between the "value of risk protection"
and the "social cost of moral hazard" plays out on a consumer-by-consumer basis. Socially,
the aim is to design a plan menu that induces consumers to self-select into their efficient
level of coverage. Privately, incentives are such that consumers with higher willingness to pay
for insurance select higher levels of coverage. The challenge is that consumers with higher
willingness to pay are not necessarily the consumers with a higher efficient level of coverage.
It is precisely this statement that captures the theoretical ambiguity of whether it is optimal
to offer a vertical choice.

1
    We use the term financial coverage level, or just coverage level, to summarize the set of plan features, such as
    deductibles or out-of-pocket maximums, that determine insurer liability.

                                                          1
     We consider the menu design problem of a market regulator that can offer vertically dif-
ferentiated plans and can set premiums.2 The regulator's objective is to maximize allocative
efficiency with respect to consumers and plans. As is standard in employer-sponsored insurance
and national health insurance schemes, the regulator need not break even plan by plan, nor
in aggregate. If the regulator sets premiums such that more than one plan is demanded, we
say it has offered vertical choice. Extending the widely used graphical framework of Einav,
Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), we show that the key condition determining whether the opti-
mal menu features vertical choice is whether consumers with higher willingness to pay have a
higher efficient level of coverage. The principal empirical focus of this paper is to determine
whether this is likely to be true.

     We begin by presenting a model of consumer demand for health insurance, building on
Cardon and Hendel (2001) and Einav et al. (2013). The model has two stages. In the first,
consumers make a discrete choice over plans under uncertainty about their health. In the sec-
ond, upon realizing their health, consumers make a continuous choice of healthcare utilization.
We use the model to show that willingness to pay for insurance can be partitioned into two
parts: one that is both privately and socially relevant (the value of risk protection), and one
that is only privately relevant (the expected reduction in out-of-pocket spending). Because
a portion of a consumer's private valuation of insurance is a transfer, higher willingness to
pay does not necessarily imply higher social surplus. For example, allocating higher coverage
to a risk-neutral consumer delivers her a private benefit, but generates no social benefit; her
expected healthcare spending is simply shifted to others. If she consumes more healthcare than
she values in response to higher coverage, the regulator would prefer she had lower coverage.

     We estimate the model using data from the population of public school employees in Oregon.
The data contain health insurance plan menus, plan choices, and the subsequent healthcare
utilization of nearly 45,000 households over the period 2008 to 2013. Crucially for identification,
we observe plausibly exogenous variation in the plan menus offered to employees. The variation
is driven by the fact that plan menus are set independently by each of 187 school districts,
which in turn select plans from a common superset determined at the state level. In addition,
we observe several coverage levels offered by the same insurer with the same provider network,
providing isolated variation along our focal dimension.

     Our empirical model incorporates observed and unobserved heterogeneity across households

2
    By market regulator, we mean the entity that administers a particular health insurance market: in employer-
    sponsored insurance, this is the employer; in Medicare, this is the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services;
    under a national health insurance scheme, this is the government.

                                                          2
along three key dimensions: health status, propensity for moral hazard, and risk aversion. We
use the model to recover the joint distribution of household types in our population. Given
these estimates, we then construct each household's willingness to pay for different levels of
coverage and the social surplus generated by allocating each household to different levels of
coverage. We focus on contracts that are characterized by a deductible, a coinsurance rate,
and an out-of-pocket maximum.

     Our estimates imply that the efficient level of coverage for every household in our popula-
tion is between that provided by a high-deductible contract (with a $10,000 deductible and
full coverage thereafter) and full insurance. Within this range, we find that households with
higher willingness to pay for higher coverage are primarily motivated by a greater expected
reduction in out-of-pocket spending, rather than by a greater value of risk protection. Because
these households are highly likely to spend past $10,000, they face little uncertainty under any
contract in the relevant range. Overall, we do not find that households with higher willingness
to pay have a higher efficient level of coverage. The optimal menu therefore consists of a single
contract, which has a deductible of $1,125 and out-of-pocket maximum of $2,500.3 Introduc-
ing any other contract, at any price, leads to over- or under-insurance (on average) among
households that would choose the alternative.

     We investigate the robustness of our findings with respect to both the consumers and the
contracts under consideration. Beginning with consumers, we evaluate various perturbations
of the parameter estimates that define our distribution of household types. We find that in a
broad neighborhood of our estimates, the optimal menu remains a single contract. A persistent
driver of this finding is the fact that with a modest out-of-pocket maximum, the majority of the
variation in marginal willingness to pay for higher coverage is driven by expected reductions in
out-of-pocket spending, and not by the value of risk protection. Asking consumers to make a
choice therefore consistently reveals more about their health information than it reveals about
their preferences. At larger deviations from our estimates (for example, doubling average risk
aversion), we do find optimal menus that feature vertical choice. Choice is more likely to
be efficient when risk protection is responsible for a larger part of the variation in marginal
willingness to pay between relevant contracts.

3
    Contracts in our focal contract space are placed at $2,500 out-of-pocket maximum intervals. We also consider
    the implications of a denser contract space, in which contracts are instead placed at $250 out-of-pocket maxi-
    mum intervals. We find that when more closely-spaced contracts are available, the optimal menu does feature
    a vertical choice. It offers four adjacent contracts, one of which is the original single contract. The welfare
    gains delivered by this outcome, relative to those achieved by the coarser contract space, are economically
    small ($14 per household per year). Factors we do not model, such as administrative costs of offering each
    contract, or of offering a choice at all, may become first order in this case.

                                                          3
     We then consider alternative contract designs. We consider removing the deductible, remov-
ing the coinsurance region, and extending the coinsurance region. Across all contract designs,
we consistently find that a relatively low out-of-pocket maximum is efficient for all consumers.
When considering all contract designs simultaneously, we find that the optimal menu again fea-
tures a single contract. The contract has no coinsurance region and a deductible/out-of-pocket
maximum of $2,500.4 As before, the minimal uncertainty facing the sickest households over the
relevant contracts limits the extent to which it is efficient to allocate high willingness-to-pay
households higher coverage. Our results suggest that if a modest out-of-pocket maximum can
be imposed on everyone in a market, offering a higher coverage option is unlikely to deliver
meaningful welfare gains.

     Finally, we compare welfare outcomes and distributional implications under various pricing
policies, including competitive pricing and full vertical choice. Under competitive pricing, all
contracts must break even, and we find that the market unravels due to adverse selection.
Though choice is permitted, the market cannot deliver it. Under full vertical choice, we im-
plement subsidies to support an allocation in which all contracts are traded. Relative to this
benchmark, the optimal menu (the single contract) increases welfare by $315 per household per
year. These gains are not shared evenly: the sicker (and larger) households fare best under the
single contract, while healthier households fare best under full vertical choice. Our results sug-
gest that one reason for the persistence of vertical choice in settings such as employer-sponsored
health insurance could be to limit redistribution across these groups.

     Beyond the work noted above, our theoretical approach is most closely related to Azevedo
and Gottlieb (2017), who also model demand for health insurance in a setting with vertically
differentiated contracts and multiple dimensions of consumer heterogeneity. While their focus
is on competitive equilibria, their numerical simulations also consider optimal pricing. They
document that under certain distributions of consumer types, offering choice is optimal, while
under others it is not.5 Our paper focuses directly on why this is the case, and brings to bear an
empirical approach that permits substantially more flexibility in the distribution of consumer
types.

     Our paper also closely relates to work that evaluates allocational efficiency in health insurance
markets (Cutler and Reber, 1998; Lustig, 2008; Carlin and Town, 2008; Dafny, Ho and Varela,
4
    We find that contracts with a shorter coinsurance region are consistently more efficient than contracts with
    a longer coinsurance region (holding the out-of-pocket maximum fixed). Consistent with Arrow (1963), a
    "straight deductible" with no coinsurance region is the most efficient contract design for most households.
5
    Their simulated population of consumers is characterized by lognormal distributions of types with moments
    set to match those estimated empirically by Einav et al. (2013).

                                                        4
2013; Kowalski, 2015; Tilipman, 2018), and more specifically to the growing literature on menu
design in these markets.6 In the context of insurer choice, Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2012)
investigate the optimal allocation of consumers to insurers, and find that it cannot be achieved
by uniform pricing. Our paper is similar in spirit (and in findings), but focuses instead on
the financial coverage dimension of insurance. In this context, Ericson and Sydnor (2017) also
consider the question of whether choice is welfare-improving. A key difference of our work
is that we consider a setting in which contract characteristics are endogenous and premiums
are exogenous, as opposed to the reverse. In similar and concurrent work, Ho and Lee (2021)
study optimal menu design from the perspective of an employer. Like us, they find that the
potential gains from offering a choice over coverage levels are small. Our contribution relative
to these papers is to provide a conceptual characterization of when choice along the dimension
of financial coverage level is and is not valuable. We view this characterization as a tool that
can be directly used to reexamine existing policies through a new lens.7 Our empirical analysis
demonstrates the relevance of the prediction that vertical choice may not be valuable, and
links it to the distribution of fundamentals­­risk aversion, propensity for moral hazard, and
distributions of health outcomes­­in a population.

     Finally, we view our work as complementary to the large literature documenting the fact that
consumers have difficultly optimizing over health insurance plans (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011,
2016; Ketcham et al., 2012; Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Bhargava, Loewenstein and Sydnor,
2017), which has recently also focused on ways in which consumers can be nudged into doing
so (Abaluck and Gruber, 2016, 2017; Gruber et al., 2019; Bundorf et al., 2019; Samek and
Sydnor, 2020). Importantly, if privately and socially optimal allocations do not align, more
diligent consumers may just as well lead to less desirable outcomes (as is found by Handel,
2013). A central aim of the present paper is to inform the design of health insurance markets
in such a way that better-informed consumers always lead to better allocations.

     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our theoretical model and derives the
objects relevant to describe private and social incentives. Section 3 describes our data and the
variation it provides. Section 4 presents the empirical implementation of our model. Section 5
presents the model estimates and main results. Section 6 evaluates welfare and distributional

6
    We also note the close relationship between our paper and recent work by Landais et al. (2021) on unemploy-
    ment insurance and Hendren, Landais and Spinnewijn (2021) on social insurance more broadly. Like us, these
    papers consider the value of offering a choice from the perspective of a social planner.
7
    For example, vertical choice is currently the status quo in the Affordable Care Act exchanges, in Medicare
    (through the availability of Medigap policies), and in some national health insurance systems (for example,
    Switzerland and the Netherlands).

                                                        5
outcomes. Section 7 concludes.



II         Theoretical Framework

II.A         Model

We consider a model of a health insurance market in which consumers are heterogeneous along
multiple dimensions and the set of traded contracts is endogenous. We assume that premiums
may not vary with consumer characteristics, that claims may be contingent only on healthcare
utilization, and that each consumer will select a single contract.8

     We denote a set of potential contracts by X = {x0 , x1 , ..., xn }, where x0 is a null contract that
provides no insurance. Within X , contracts are differentiated by the financial level of coverage
provided. Consumers are characterized by type  = {F, ,  }, where F is a distribution over
potential health states,   R++ is a risk aversion parameter, and  is a parameter that
governs consumer preferences over healthcare utilization (and ultimately captures the degree
of moral hazard). A population is defined by a distribution G().

Demand for Health Insurance and Healthcare Utilization. Consumers are subject to a
stochastic health state l, drawn from their distribution F . Given their health state, consumers
decide the money amount m  R+ of healthcare utilization ("spending") to consume, a decision
which in part depends on their insurance contract. Contracts are characterized by an increasing
and concave out-of-pocket cost schedule cx : R+  R+ , where cx (m)  m  m.

     Consumers value healthcare spending m and residual income y according to u (y +b(m; l,  )),
where b is a money-metric valuation of healthcare utilization, and u and b(· ; l,  ) are each
strictly increasing and concave. Upon realizing their health state, consumers choose their
healthcare utilization by trading off its benefit with its out-of-pocket cost: m (l, , x) =
argmaxm (b(m; l,  ) - cx (m)). Privately optimal utilization implies indirect benefit b (l, , x) =
b(m (l, , x); l,  ) and indirect out-of-pocket cost c                  
                                                     x (l, , x) = cx (m (l, , x)). Before the health
state is realized, expected utility is given by

                                        ^ - p - c
                       U (x, p, ) = E u y                      
                                                 x (l, , x) + b (l, , x) | l  F ,                               (1)
8
    It may not be possible to condition premiums on consumer attributes if consumers have private information
    (Cardon and Hendel, 2001), or it may not be desirable to do so to prevent exposing consumers to reclassification
    risk (Handel, Hendel and Whinston, 2015). Otherwise, the market could be partitioned according to observable
    characteristics, and each submarket could be considered separately.

                                                          6
where p is the contract premium and y
                                    ^ is initial income.

Private vs. Social Incentives. Absent insurance, consumers pay the full cost of healthcare
utilization, m. Socially optimal healthcare utilization therefore coincides with privately optimal
utilization absent insurance.9 To reach an expression for the social cost of insurance, it is useful
to keep track of any difference between privately optimal spending m (l, , x) and socially
optimal spending m (l, , x0 ). Since insurance reduces the price consumers pay for healthcare,
m (l, , x) typically exceeds m (l, , x0 ). We refer to this induced utilization as "moral hazard
spending."10 A consumer's net payoff from moral hazard spending is given by

                    v (l, , x) = b (l, , x) - b (l, , x0 ) - c              
                                                              x (l, , x) - cx (l, , x0 ) ,
                                         Benef it of moral                Out-of -pocket cost of
                                         hazard spending                  moral hazard spending



where b (l, , x0 ) is the indirect benefit of uninsured behavior, and cx (l, , x0 ) is the out-of-
pocket cost of uninsured behavior at insured prices. Note that since any change in behavior is
voluntary, v (l, , x) is weakly positive.

     Calculations in Appendix A.1 show that if u features constant absolute risk aversion, will-
ingness to pay for contract x relative to the null contract x0 can be expressed as11

      W T P (x, ) = El [ c                 
                          x0 (l, , x0 ) - cx (l, , x0 )]         +      El [ v (l, , x)]     +       (x, )          .   (2)
                            M ean reduced out-of -pocket              M ean payof f f rom          V alue of risk
                            cost holding behavior f ixed             moral hazard spending           protection




     Willingness to pay is composed of three terms: mean reduced out-of-pocket cost holding
behavior fixed (at uninsured behavior), the mean payoff from moral hazard spending, and
the value of risk protection.12 The first term captures the transfer from the consumer to the

9
    Importantly, this is true only if m represents the true cost of healthcare provision and if there are not exter-
    nalities associated with healthcare utilization, as we assume here.
10
     Following convention, we use the term "moral hazard" to describe the present scenario, in which there is
     elastic demand for the insured good and a state that is not contractible. Note that this is not a problem
     of hidden action, but rather of hidden information. A fuller discussion of this (ab)use of terminology in the
     health insurance literature can be found in Section I.B of Einav et al. (2013), as well as in Pauly (1968) and
     Arrow (1968).
11
     The single role of constant absolute risk aversion is to ensure that the value of risk protection, and thereby
     social surplus, is invariant to the contract premium.
12
     Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017) also discuss how willingness to pay in this setting can be decomposed into
     these three terms. Our formulation generalizes the decomposition in that it does not depend on particular
     functional forms for u, b, c, or F .

                                                             7
insurer of the expected healthcare spending liability that exists even absent moral hazard. It
represents an equal and opposite cost to the insurer. In contrast, the second and third terms
depend on consumer preferences and are relevant to social welfare. Consumers partially value
the additional healthcare they consume when they have higher coverage, as well as the ability
to smooth consumption across health states. Our accounting of social welfare takes both into
consideration.

     Insurer costs are given by kx (m), where m = kx (m) + cx (m). A reduction in out-of-pocket
cost is an increase in insurer cost, so c                                 
                                         x0 (l, , x0 ) - cx (l, , x0 ) = kx (l, , x0 ).
                                                                                       13
                                                                                          The social
surplus generated by allocating a consumer of type  to contract x (relative to allocating the
same consumer to the null contract) is the difference between W T P (x, ) and expected insured
            
cost E lF [kx (l, , x)]:

                                                                            
                SS (x, ) =         (x, )         -    E lF [ kx (l, , x) - kx (l, , x0 ) - v (l, , x) ] .        (3)
                                V alue of risk                              Social cost
                                  protection                             of moral hazard



Because the insurer is risk neutral, it bears no extra cost from uncertain payoffs. If there is
moral hazard, the consumer's value of her expected healthcare spending falls below its cost,
generating a welfare loss from insurance. The welfare loss equals the portion of the expected
increase in healthcare spending that is not valued.14

     The socially optimal contract for each type of consumer optimally trades off the value of risk
protection and the social cost of moral hazard: xef f () = argmaxxX SS (x, ). Given premium
vector p = {px }xX , the privately optimal contract optimally trades off private utility and
premium: x (, p) = argmaxxX (W T P (x, ) - px ).

Supply and Regulation. We suppose contracts are supplied by a regulator, which can
observe the distribution of consumer types and can set premiums on all contracts except x0 .
The null contract has zero premium. The regulator need not break even on any given contract
nor in aggregate. It can effectively remove any non-null contract from the set of contracts on
offer by setting a premium of infinity. It can effectively remove x0 from offer by setting the
premium of any non-null contract to zero. This simple model of supply is isomorphic to a

13
     To see this, note that c                                                      
                             x0 (l, , x0 ) = m (l, , x0 ) and cx (l, , x0 ) = cx (m (l, , x0 )).
14
     The social cost of moral hazard can also be expressed as El [m (l, , x)-m (l, , x0 )-(b (l, , x)-b (l, , x0 ))].
     We can bound it using a revealed preference argument: v (l, x,  ) must be weakly lower than the insured cost
                                                  
     of moral hazard spending El [kx (l, , x) - kx (l, , x0 )] (or else that level of spending would have been chosen
     even absent insurance), and it must be weakly positive (since any change in behavior is voluntary). The social
     cost of moral hazard is therefore positive and at most the expected insured cost of moral hazard spending.

                                                              8
more complicated model involving perfect competition among private insurers and a market
regulator that can strategically tax or subsidize contracts. Precisely such a model is formalized
in Section 6 of Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017).

     The regulator sets premiums p in order to maximize social welfare, given by

                                      W (p) =       SS x (, p),  dG().

Our question is whether, or when, the regulator's solution will involve vertical choice. In other
words, we ask whether there will be enrollment in more than one contract at the optimal
feasible allocation.15


II.B         Graphical Analysis

We characterize the answer graphically for the case of a market with only two potential con-
tracts. This case conveys the basic intuition and can be depicted easily using the graphical
framework introduced by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010).

     First, it is useful to recognize that moral hazard and consumer heterogeneity are necessary
conditions for vertical choice to be efficient. If there were not moral hazard, the higher coverage
contract would be socially optimal for all consumers, and the optimal menu would involve
offering only this contract. If there were not consumer heterogeneity, all consumers would
again have the same socially optimal contract, and the optimal menu would again feature only
a single contract. In the following, we explore the more interesting (and more realistic) cases
in which consumers do not all have the same socially optimal contract.

Two Contract Example. Suppose there are two potential contracts, xH and xL , where xH
provides higher coverage than xL .16 Figure 1 depicts the market for xH in two populations. If a
consumer does not choose xH , they receive xL ; x0 is excluded by setting pL to zero. As xH pro-
vides higher coverage, the contracts are vertically differentiated: W T P (xH , )  W T P (xL , )
for all consumers. Each panel shows the demand curve D for contract xH , representing
marginal willingness to pay for xH relative to xL . The vertical axis plots the marginal premium
p = pH - pL at which the contracts are offered. The horizontal axis plots the fraction q of
consumers that choose xH .

15
     If all consumers choose the same contract, we say that the regulator has not offered vertical choice. This is
     to avoid discussion of, for example, whether an option with a premium of infinity is in fact an option at all.
16
     See Appendix A.2 for a formal definition of coverage level ordering.

                                                          9
              Figure 1. Examples in which Vertical Choice (a) Is and (b) Is Not Efficient
                   (a) Population GA ()                                    (b) Population GB ()

       $                                                        $
                                                                      MC
              D                                                 p
                                                                      D
           
       p                                      MC
              SS
                                                                0                                            q
       0                                               q                                                 1
                                                   1                  SS

      Notes : The figure shows two health insurance markets in which there are two contracts available: xH
      and xL , where xH provides higher coverage than xL . Each panel shows the demand curve D, the
      marginal cost curve M C , and the social surplus curve SS for xH relative to xL . In the left panel, the
      regulator optimally offers vertical choice, and there is enrollment in both contracts. In the right panel,
      the regulator optimally does not offer vertical choice, and all consumers choose xL .


     Each panel also shows the marginal cost curve M C and the marginal social surplus curve SS .
The marginal cost curve measures the expected cost of insuring consumers under xH relative
                                 
to xL : E lF [kx H
                   (l, , xH ) - kx L
                                     (l, , xL )]. Because consumers with the same willingness to pay
can have different costs, M C represents the average marginal cost among all consumers at
a particular point on the horizontal axis (a particular level of marginal willingness to pay).
The social surplus curve SS plots the vertical difference between D and M C , or equivalently,
the average value of SS (xH , ) - SS (xL , ) among all consumers at a particular point on the
horizontal axis.

     Though vertical differentiation implies D and M C must be weakly positive, the presence
of moral hazard means that SS need not be. It is possible for consumers to be over-insured.
Moreover, our precondition that all consumers do not have the same optimal contract guar-
antees that in both populations, marginal social surplus will be positive for some consumers
and negative for others.17 The key difference between populations GA () and GB () is whether
consumers with high or low willingness to pay have a higher efficient level of coverage. In popu-
lation GA (), marginal social surplus is increasing in marginal willingness to pay. The optimal
marginal premium p can therefore sort consumers with on-average positive SS into xH , and
on-average negative SS into xL . In population GB (), marginal social surplus is decreasing in

17
     Note that since SS represents an average, this condition does not itself guarantee that the social surplus curve
     will cross zero. Since it is necessary for SS to cross zero for vertical choice to be optimal, we focus our two
     examples on cases in which that occurs. If SS did not cross zero, a single plan would be on-average optimal
     at every level of willingness to pay, and the optimal menu would feature a single contract. For example, if
     SS were everywhere above zero, the regulator would optimally offer only xH .

                                                           10
marginal willingness to pay, and any premium-based screening is counter-productive.

     In population GB (), any interior allocation results in some amount of "backward sorting,"
meaning that there are consumers enrolled in xH who would be more efficiently enrolled in xL ,
and vice versa. Consequently, any allocation with enrollment in both contracts is dominated
by an allocation with enrollment in only one. No sorting dominates backward sorting because
it is always possible to prevent "one side" of the backward sort.18 In the example shown, the
integral of SS is negative, meaning that the population would on average be over-insured in
xH . p is therefore anything high enough to induce all consumers to choose xL .

Remarks. The limitation of choice as a screening mechanism is directly related to the idea
that a single (community-rated) price may not be able to efficiently sort consumers that vary
in cost (Einav, Finkelstein and Levin, 2010; Glazer and McGuire, 2011; Bundorf, Levin and
Mahoney, 2012; Geruso, 2017). Consumers select a contract based on the available consumer
surplus, CS = W T P - p, while efficiency relies on a comparison with cost, SS = W T P - M C .
When CS and SS diverge (when p = M C ), the efficiency of choice turns on whether they are
at least positively related. If they are not, choice can only result in some degree of "backward
sorting."19

     In the simple case of two contracts and a social surplus curve that crosses zero at most
once, vertical choice is efficient if and only if it crosses from above. In a more general case
with multiple potential contracts, this necessary and sufficient condition still directly informs
the means of evaluating whether the optimal menu will feature vertical choice. If consumers
all have the same socially optimal contract, or more plausibly, if the same contract is socially
optimal at all levels of willingness to pay, there will be no crossing in the upper envelope of
social surplus curves, and the optimal menu will feature this single contract. If instead there
is crossing in the upper envelope of social surplus curves, one must assess whether the higher-
coverage contracts cross from above, or in other words, whether or not choice would lead to
backward sorting.

     Taken together, the procedure for evaluating the efficiency of vertical choice, among any
number of contracts, can be summarized by a test for the condition of whether consumers


18
     To see this, consider the (worst possible) allocation q
                                                           ~ at the point where SS intersects zero. A slightly higher
     allocation q
                ~ strictly dominates, as more consumers with positive marginal social surplus now enroll in xH .
     The same logic applies to the left of q~. The only allocations that cannot easily be ruled out as suboptimal
     are the endpoints, at which all consumers enroll in the same contract.
19
     Though not by this name, the idea of backward sorting has appeared previously in related literature, in the
     setting of insurer choice (Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney, 2012) and provider network choice (Shepard, 2016).

                                                          11
with higher willingness to pay have a higher efficient coverage level, where we emphasize that
higher, in both instances, is to be evaluated strictly. This condition itself is complex. It is both
theoretically ambiguous and, by our own assessment, not obvious. If healthy consumers change
their behavior more in response to insurance, as is suggested by findings in Brot-Goldberg et al.
(2017), this would tend toward positively aligning willingness to pay and efficient coverage
level. If healthy consumers are more risk averse, as is suggested by findings in Finkelstein and
McGarry (2006), this would tend toward negatively aligning them.

     There is a question of what characteristics drive variation in willingness to pay, and in turn
how those characteristics determine the efficient level of coverage. The net result depends on
the joint distribution of expected health spending, uncertainty in health spending, risk aversion,
and moral hazard in the population. Moreover, it depends on how these primitives map into
marginal willingness to pay and marginal insurer cost across nonlinear insurance contracts, as
are common in U.S. health insurance markets and present in the empirical setting we study.
Ultimately, whether consumers with higher private valuations of higher coverage also generate
a higher social value from higher coverage is an open empirical question.



III         Empirical Setting

III.A         Data

Our data are derived from the employer-sponsored health insurance market for public school
employees in Oregon between 2008 and 2013. The market is operated by the Oregon Educators
Benefit Board (OEBB), which administers benefits for the employees of Oregon's 187 school
districts. Each year, OEBB contracts with insurers to create a state-level "master list" of
plans and associated premiums that school districts can offer to their employees. During our
time period, OEBB contracted with three insurers, each of which offered a selection of plans.
School districts then independently select a subset of plans from the state-level menu and set
an "employer contribution" toward plan premiums.20

     The data contain employees' plan menus, realized plan choices, plan characteristics, and med-
ical and pharmaceutical claims for all insured individuals. We observe detailed demographic
information about employees and their families, including age, gender, zip code, health risk


20
     Between 2008 and 2010, school districts could offer at most four plans; after 2010, there was no restriction
     on the number of plans a district could offer, but many still offered only a subset.

                                                        12
score, family type, and employee occupation type.21 , 22 An employee's plan menu consists of
a plan choice set and plan prices. Plan prices consist of the subsidized premium, potential
contributions to a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) or a Health Savings Account
(HSA), and potential contributions toward a vision or dental insurance plan.23

     The decentralized determination of plan menus provides a plausibly exogenous source of
variation in both prices and choice sets. While all plan menus we observe are quite generous,
in that the plans are generally high-coverage and are highly subsidized, there is substantial
variation across districts in the range of coverage levels offered and in the exact nature of the
subsidies.24 Moreover, school districts can vary plan menus by family type and occupation
type, resulting in variation both within and across districts. Plan menu decisions are made by
benefits committees consisting of district administrators and employees, and subsidy designs
are influenced by bargaining agreements with local teachers' unions. Between 2008 and 2013,
we observe 13,661 unique combinations of year, school district, family type, and occupation
type, resulting in 7,835 unique plan menus.

Plan Characteristics. During our sample period, OEBB contracted with three insurers:
Kaiser, Moda, and Providence. Kaiser offered HMO plans that require enrollees to use only
Kaiser healthcare providers and obtain referrals for specialist care. Moda and Providence
offered PPO plans with broad provider networks. Each insurer used a single provider network
and offered multiple plans. Within insurer, plans were differentiated only by financial coverage

21
     Individual risk scores are calculated based on prior-year medical diagnoses and demographics using Johns
     Hopkins ACG Case-Mix software. This software uses diagnostic information contained in past claims data
     as well as demographic information to predict future healthcare spending. See, for example, Brot-Goldberg
     et al. (2017); Carlin and Town (2008); or Handel and Kolstad (2015) for more in-depth explanation of the
     software and examples of its use in economic research.
22
     Possible employee occupation types are licensed administrator, non-licensed administrator, classified, commu-
     nity college non-instructional, community college faculty, confidential, licensed, substitute, and superinten-
     dent. Within each type, an employee can be either full-time or part-time. Possible family types are employee
     only; employee and spouse; employee and child(ren); and employee, spouse, and child(ren).
23
     Decisions about HSA/HRA and vision/dental contributions are also made independently by school districts.
     An HRA is a notional account that employers can use to reimburse employees' uninsured medical expenses
     on a pre-tax basis; balances expire at the end of the year or when the employee leaves the employer. An
     HSA is a financial account maintained by an external broker to which employers or employees can make
     pre-tax contributions. Data on employer premium contributions and savings account contributions were
     hand-collected via surveys of each school district. Additional details on the data collection process can be
     found in Abaluck and Gruber (2016).
24
     The majority of school districts used either a fixed dollar contribution or a percentage contribution, but the
     levels of the contribution varied widely. Other districts used a fixed employee contribution. In addition, the
     districts' policies for how "excess" contributions were treated varied; in some cases, contribution amounts in
     excess of the full plan premium could be "banked" by the employee in a HSA or HRA, or else put toward
     the purchase of a vision or dental insurance plan.

                                                         13
level.

     Table 1 summarizes the state-level master list of plans made available by OEBB in 2009.
The average employee premium represents the average annual premium employees would have
had to pay for each plan. The full premium reflects the per-employee premium that would
need to be paid to the insurer.25 The difference is the contribution by the school district. Plan
cost-sharing features vary by whether the household is an individual (the employee alone) or
a family (anything else). The deductible and out-of-pocket maximum shown are for a family
household.26
                                      Table 1. Plan Characteristics, 2009

                             Actuarial Avg. Employee     Full         Deductible OOP Max.       Market
                 Plan
                              Value     Premium ($)  Premium ($)         ($)       ($)          Share
            Kaiser - 1         0.97           688            10,971          0       1,200        0.07
            Kaiser - 2         0.96           554            10,485          0       2,000        0.11
            Kaiser - 3         0.95           473            10,163          0       3,000      < 0.01
            Moda - 1           0.92         1,594            12,421        300         500        0.27
            Moda - 2           0.89         1,223            11,839        300       1,000        0.05
            Moda - 3           0.88           809            11,174        600       1,000        0.11
            Moda - 4           0.86           621            10,702        900       1,500        0.10
            Moda - 5           0.82           428             9,912      1,500       2,000        0.13
            Moda - 6           0.78           271             8,959      3,000       3,000        0.04
            Moda - 7           0.68            92             6,841      3,000      10,000        0.01
            Providence - 1     0.96         2,264            13,217        900       1,200        0.07
            Providence - 2     0.95         1,995            12,895        900       2,000        0.02
            Providence - 3     0.94         1,825            12,683        900       3,000        0.01
        Notes : The table shows the state-level master list of plans offered in 2009. Actuarial value is the
        ratio of the sum of insured spending across all households to the sum of total spending across all
        households. The average employee premium is taken across all employees, even those who did not
        choose a particular plan. The full premium reflects the premium negotiated by OEBB and the
        insurer; the one shown is for an employee plus spouse. The deductible and out-of-pocket maximum
        shown are for in-network services for a family household.


     As a way to summarize and compare plan coverage levels, we construct each plan's actuarial
value. This measure reflects the share of total population spending that would be insured
under a given plan.27 Full insurance would have an actuarial value of one; less generous plans
have lower actuarial values. In later years, the distribution of coverage levels looks qualitatively
25
     This full premium varies formulaically by family type; the premium shown is for an employee plus spouse.
26
     Many other cost-sharing details determine plan coverage level. For the purposes of our empirical model,
     we estimate the deductible, coinsurance rate, and out-of-pocket maximum that best fit the relationship
     between out-of-pocket spending and total spending observed in the claims data; this procedure is described
     in Appendix B.1.
27
     We evaluate out-of-pocket spending for each household in each plan, and then divide average insured spending
     by average total spending across all households for each plan. We evaluate counterfactual out-of-pocket
     spending using the "claims calculator" developed for this setting by Abaluck and Gruber (2016).

                                                        14
similar, with the notable exception that Providence was no longer available in 2012 and 2013.28

Household Characteristics. We restrict our analysis sample to households in which the
oldest member is not older than 65, the employee is not retired, and all members are enrolled
in the same plan for the entire year. Further, because a prior year of claims data is required
to estimate an individual's prospective health risk score, we require that households have one
year of data prior to inclusion; this means our sample begins in 2009. These restrictions leave
us with 44,562 households, representing 117,934 individuals.29

     There is a clear bifurcation of our sample between Kaiser and non-Kaiser households. That
is, 78 percent of households always chose either Moda or Providence, 19 percent always chose
Kaiser, and only 3 percent at some point switched between. This pattern is not necessarily
surprising. Kaiser offers a substantially different type of insurance product, and persistent
consumer preference heterogeneity along this dimension would be a reasonable expectation.
However, modeling this choice over insurer type somewhat distracts from the focus on choice
over financial coverage level. We therefore take advantage of the division in the data and
conduct our primary analysis on the set of households that never enrolled with Kaiser. We
consider the full sample in robustness analyses in Section V.C.30

     Table 2 provides summary statistics on our panel of households. The first column describes
the full sample, while the second column describes the subset of households that never enrolled
in a Kaiser plan. Focusing on the non-Kaiser sample, 49 percent of households have children,
and 74 percent of households are "families" (anything other than the employee alone). The
average employee is age 47.9, and the average enrollee (employees and their covered dependents)
is age 40.4. Households on average have 2.6 enrollees.

     Employees received large subsidies toward the purchase of health insurance. The average
household paid only $843 per year for their chosen plan; the median household paid nothing.
Meanwhile, the average full premium paid to insurers was $11,582, meaning that the average
household received an employer contribution of $10,739. Households had average out-of-pocket
spending of $2,054 and average total healthcare spending of $11,689.

     Households were highly likely to remain in the same plan and with the same insurer they
chose the previous year. OEBB can, however, adjust the state-level master list of available
plans, and school districts can adjust choice sets over time. Such adjustments forced 21 percent

28
     Corresponding information for the plans offered between 2010 and 2013 are provided in Table A.2.
29
     Table A.1 provides additional details on sample construction.
30
     As discussed in that section, using the full sample leaves our results are qualitatively unchanged.

                                                         15
                                  Table 2. Household Summary Statistics

                           Sample demographics                Full Sample       Excluding Kaiser
                    Number of households                      44,562              34,606
                    Number of enrollees                       117,934             92,244
                    Pct. of households with children          0.49                0.49
                    Enrollees per household, mean (med.)      2.57 (2)            2.60 (2)
                    Enrollee age, mean (med.)                 39.8 (37.8)         40.4 (38.7)
                   Premiums
                    Employee premium ($), mean (med.)         880 (0)             843 (0)
                    Full premium ($), mean (med.)             11,500 (11,801)     11,582 (11,801)
                   Household healthcare spending
                    Total spending ($), mean (med.)           10,754 (4,620)      11,689 (5,173)
                    Out-of-pocket ($), mean (med.)            1,694 (1,093)       2,054 (1,540)
                   Switching (pct. of household-years)
                    Forced to switch plan                     0.20                0.21
                                      insurer                 0.01                0.02
                    Unforced, switched plan                   0.17                0.20
                                        insurer               0.03                0.03
                  Notes : Enrollees are employees plus their covered dependents. Sample statis-
                  tics are calculated across all years, 2009­2013. Premiums statistics are for
                  households' chosen plans, as opposed to for all possible plans. Sample medi-
                  ans are shown in parentheses.


of household-years to switch plans, and 2 percent to switch insurers, because their prior choice
was no longer available. When the prior choice was available, 20 percent of household-years
voluntarily switched plans and only 3 percent voluntarily switched insurers. The presence of
both forced and unforced switching is important in our empirical model for identifying the
extent of "inertia" in households' plan and insurer choices.

     To allow for geographic variation in tastes for each insurer, we divide the state into three
regions, based on groups of adjacent Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs): the Portland and
Salem HRRs in northwest Oregon (containing 55 percent of households); the Eugene and
Medford HRRs in southwest Oregon (32 percent of households); and the Bend, Spokane, and
Boise HRRs in eastern Oregon (13 percent of households).31


III.B        Variation in Plan Menus

For the purposes of the present research, the two most important features of our setting are
the isolated variation along the dimension of coverage level and the plausibly exogenous vari-
ation in plan menus. Variation in coverage level exists primarily among the plans offered by

31
     For more information and HRR maps, see http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/data/region.

                                                         16
Moda. Variation in plan menus stems from the decentralized determination of employee health
benefits. Both are central to identification of our empirical model.

                          To provide a sense of this variation, Figure 2 shows the relationship between healthcare
spending and plan actuarial value (AV) for households that chose Moda in 2009. In the left
panel, households are grouped by their chosen plan. The plot shows average spending among
households in each of the seven Moda plans, weighting each plan by enrollment. Unsurpris-
ingly, households that enrolled in more generous plans had higher spending, reflecting adverse
selection, moral hazard, or both.

                                                            Figure 2. Average Spending by Plan Coverage Level
                                                   (a) Selection and/or Moral Hazard                             (b) Moral Hazard

                                         7,000                                                   7,000
 Average Per-Person Total Spending ($)




                                         6,000                                                   6,000


                                         5,000                                                   5,000


                                         4,000                                                   4,000


                                         3,000                                                   3,000


                                         2,000                                                   2,000


                                                  0.70     0.75    0.80     0.85     0.90                0.70     0.75     0.80     0.85      0.90
                                                              Plan AV Chosen                                    Plan AV Likely To Be Chosen

                                         Notes : The figure shows the relationship between average per-person total spending and plan actuarial
                                         value (AV) for households that selected Moda in 2009. In the left panel, households are grouped by
                                         their chosen plan, and each dot represents one of the seven Moda plans. In the right panel, households
                                         are grouped by the plan menu they were offered, and each dot represents a set of plan menus with
                                         the same predicted actuarial value. Predicted actuarial value is the AV most likely to be chosen if an
                                         average household was presented with that plan menu. The size of each dot indicates the number of
                                         households represented. Lines of best fit are weighted accordingly.


                          The right panel groups households by their plan menu. It plots the actuarial value that an
average household would be most likely to choose if offered a given plan menu, against the
average spending of the households presented with that menu. This measure of plan menu
generosity captures both the facts that a level of coverage can only be chosen if it is offered,
and is more likely to be chosen if it is cheaper.32 Each point on the plot represents the set of
32
             We construct this measure using a conditional logit model of household plan choice. This model and the
             resulting measure of plan menu generosity are described in detail in Appendix B.2.

                                                                                            17
plan menus that share the same predicted actuarial value. Points are then weighted by the
number of households represented.33 The resulting pattern indicates that households that were
offered a more generous plan menu had higher spending. The patterns in both panels persist
when we control for observables, suggesting the presence of adverse selection on unobservables,
and of moral hazard.

     Identification of our structural model proceeds in much the same way as the above arguments.
A key identifying assumption is that plan menus are independent of household unobservables,
conditional on household observables. An important threat to identification is that school
districts chose plan menu generosity in response to unobservable information about employees
that would also drive healthcare spending. To the extent that districts with unobservably
sicker households provided more generous health benefits, this would lead us to overstate the
extent of moral hazard.34

     We investigate this possibility by attempting to explain plan menu generosity with observable
household characteristics, in particular health. We argue that if plan menus were not respond-
ing to observable information about household health, it is unlikely that they were responding
to unobservable information. We find this argument compelling because we almost certainly
have better information on household health (through health risk scores) than school districts
did at the time they made plan menu decisions. Table A.4 presents this exercise. Conditional
on family type, we find no correlation between plan menu generosity and household risk score.
Appendix B.2 describes these results in greater detail. It also presents additional tests for
what does explain variation in plan menus. We find that, among other things, plan menu
generosity is higher for certain union affiliations, lower for substitute teachers and part-time
employees, decreasing in district average house price index, and decreasing in the percentage
of registered Republicans in a school district. None of these relationships are inconsistent with
our understanding of the process by which district benefits decisions are made.

     We exploit this identifying variation within our structural model, but can also use it in a
more isolated way to produce reduced-form estimates of moral hazard. Appendix B.3 presents
an instrumental variables analysis using two-stage least squares. The estimates yield a moral
hazard "elasticity" that can be directly compared with others in the literature. We estimate
that the elasticity of demand for healthcare spending with respect to its average end-of-year
33
     To improve readability, very close values of predicted actuarial value are bucketed together.
34
     The relationship could also run the other way: households could move across school districts, or select a
     district initially, based on the available health benefits. Such selection could again result in sicker households
     obtaining more generous health benefits. To the extent that observable health factors are correlated with
     unobservable factors that would drive this relationship, the analysis that follows is relevant to this concern.

                                                           18
out-of-pocket cost is -0.27, broadly similar to the benchmark estimate of -0.2 from the RAND
experiment (Manning et al., 1987; Newhouse, 1993). We also find suggestive evidence of het-
erogeneity in moral hazard effects, which is an important aspect of our structural model and
of our research question.



IV          Empirical Model

IV.A          Parameterization

We parameterize household utility and the distribution of health states, allowing us to represent
our theoretical model fully in terms of data and parameters to estimate. We extend the
theoretical model to account for the fact that in our empirical setting, there are multiple
insurers, consumers are households consisting of individuals, consumers may value a dollar of
premiums and a dollar of out-of-pocket cost differently, and consumers make repeated plan
choices over time.

Household Utility. Following Cardon and Hendel (2001) and Einav et al. (2013), we param-
eterize the value of healthcare spending to be quadratic in its distance from the health state.
Household k 's valuation of spending level m given health state realization l is given by

                                                                 1
                                     b(m; l, k ) = (m - l) -       (m - l)2 ,                                 (4)
                                                                2k

where k governs the curvature of the benefit of spending and, ultimately, the degree to which
optimal spending varies across coverage levels. Given out-of-pocket cost function cjt (m) for plan
j in year t, privately optimal healthcare spending is mjt (l, k ) = argmaxm (b(m; l, k ) - cjt (m)).
                                                                                                    35


     This parameterization is attractive because it produces reasonable predicted behavior under
nonlinear insurance contracts, and it is tractable enough to be used inside an optimization
routine.36 Additionally, k can be usefully interpreted as the incremental spending induced by


35
     Note that cjt is indexed by t because cost-sharing parameters vary within a plan across years. It also varies
     by household type (individual versus family), but we omit an additional index to save on notation. With a
     linear out-of-pocket cost function with coinsurance rate c and nonnegative health states: m =  (1 - c) + l
     and b =           2
               2 (1 - c ). Appendix C.2 provides solutions when contracts are piecewise linear and negative health
     states are permitted. In this case, b is amended such that nonpositive spending yields zero benefit.
36
     The model predicts, for example, that if a consumer realizes a health state just under the deductible, she
     will take advantage of the proximity to cheaper healthcare and consume a bit more (putting her into the
     coinsurance region). Figure A.2 provides a depiction of optimal spending behavior predicted by this model.

                                                         19
moving a household from no insurance to full insurance. Substituting for m , we denote the
benefit of optimal utilization as b                                                     
                                   jt (l, k ) and the associated out-of-pocket cost as cjt (l, k ).
Households face uncertainty in payoffs only through uncertainty in b              
                                                                    jt (l, k ) - cjt (l, k ).

     Household k in year t derives the following expected utility from plan choice j :

                                   Ukjt =      - exp - k zkjt (l) dFkf t (l),                              (5)

where k is a coefficient of absolute risk aversion, zkjt is the payoff associated with realization
of health state l, and Fkf t is the distribution of health states faced if the plan belongs to insurer
f (j ). The payoff associated with health state realization l is given by

                                                                   f (j )
            zkjt (l) = -pkjt + OOP b                                inertia
                                    jt (l, k ) - cjt (l, k ) + kj + kjt     +  Xkjt +             kjt ,    (6)

where pkjt is the household's plan premium (net of the employer contribution); bjt (l, k ) -
cjt (l, k ) is the payoff from optimal utilization measured in units of out-of-pocket dollars;
 f (j )                                                                                       inertia
kj        are insurer fixed effects that control for brand and other insurer characteristics, kjt
are a set of fixed effects for both the plan and the insurer a household was enrolled in the
previous year; and Xkjt is a set of additional covariates that can affect household utility.37
The payoff xkjt is measured in units of premium dollars. Out-of-pocket costs can be valued
differently from premiums through parameter OOP .38 Finally,                    kjt   represents a household-
plan-year idiosyncratic shock, with magnitude  to be estimated. We assume these shocks
are independently and identically distributed Type 1 Extreme Value. In each year, households
choose the plan that maximizes expected utility from among the set of plans Jkt available to
       
them: jkt = argmaxj Jkt Ukjt .

Distribution of Health States. We assume that individuals face a lognormal distribution
of health states, and that households face the sum of health state draws across all individu-
als in the household. Because there is no closed-form expression for the distribution of the
sum of draws from lognormal distributions, we represent a household's distribution of health
states using a lognormal that approximates. We derive the parameters of the approximating


37
     Xkjt includes HRA or HSA contributions, HAkjt ; vision and dental plan contributions, V Dkjt ; and a fixed
             N arrowN et
     effect jt           for one plan (Moda - 2) that had a narrow provider network in 2011 and 2012. The
     associated parameters for health account and vision/dental contributions are HA and V D , respectively.
38
     We cannot distinguish between potential reasons why premiums may be valued differently from out-of-pocket
     costs. We expect the tax deductibility of premiums would push OOP up, while systematic underestimation
     of out-of-pocket spending would push OOP down.

                                                       20
distribution using the Fenton-Wilkinson method.39 This novel means of modeling the house-
hold distribution of health states allows us to fully exploit the large amount of heterogeneity
in household composition that exists in our data. Importantly given the size of our data, it
also allows us to closely fit observed spending distributions using a smaller number of parame-
ters than would be required if demographic covariates were aggregated to the household level.
Our method is to estimate the parameters of individuals' health state distributions, allowing
parameters to vary with individual-level demographics.

     An individual i faces uncertain health state ~
                                                  li , which has a shifted lognormal distribution
with support (-it , ):
                                           log(~
                                               li + it )  N (µit , it
                                                                   2
                                                                      ).

The shift is included to capture the mass of individuals with zero spending observed in the
data. If it is positive, negative health states are permitted, which may imply zero spending.40
Parameters µit , it , and it are in turn projected on individual demographics (such as health
risk score), which can vary over time.

  A household k faces uncertain health state ~
                                             l, which has a shifted lognormal distribution
with support (-kt , ): log(~                    2
                            l + kt )  N (µkt , kt ). Under the approximation, household-
level parameters µkt , kt , and kt are a function of individual-level parameters µit , it , and
it . Variation in µkt , kt , and kt across households, as well as within households over time,
arises from variation in household composition: the number of individuals and each individ-
ual's demographics. In addition to this observable heterogeneity, we incorporate unobserved
heterogeneity in household health though parameter µkt . In this way, adverse selection (on
unobservables) is permitted, since households can hold private information about their health
that can drive both plan choices and spending outcomes.

     Finally, we introduce an additional set of parameters f to serve as "exchange rates" for
monetary health states across insurers. These parameters are intended to capture differences
in total healthcare spending that are driven by differences in provider prices across insurers,
conditional on health state.41 For example, the same physician office visit might lead to differ-
ent amounts of total spending across insurers simply because each insurer paid the physician


39
     Additional details can be found in Appendix C.1
40
     A negative health state implies zero spending as long as k is not so large that mjt (l, k ) becomes positive.
41
     Provider prices are a well-documented source of heterogeneity in total healthcare spending across insurers
     (Cooper et al., 2018), and these differences are often modeled to be linear in utilization (Gowrisankaran,
     Nevo and Town, 2015; Ghili, 2016; Ho and Lee, 2017; Liebman, 2018). Of course, f may also capture other
     differences across insurers, such as care management protocols or provider practice patterns.

                                                         21
a different price. We do not want such variation to be attributed to differences in underlying
health. Our approach is to estimate insurer-level parameters that multiply realized health
states, transforming them from underlying "quantities" of healthcare utilization into the mon-
etary spending amounts we observe in the claims data. Namely, we say that a household's
money-metric health state l is the product of an insurer-level "price" multiplier f and the
underlying "quantity" health state ~
                                   l, where ~
                                            l is lognormally distributed depending only on
household characteristics. Taken together, the distribution Fkf t is defined by

                                                      l = f ~
                                                            l,
                                          log(~                  2
                                              l + kt )  N (µkt , kt ).


IV.B          Identification

We aim to recover the joint distribution across households of willingness to pay, risk protec-
tion, and the social cost of moral hazard associated with different levels of coverage. Variation
in these objects arises from variation in either household preferences (the risk-aversion and
moral-hazard parameters) or in households' distributions of health states. Our primary iden-
tification concerns are (i) distinguishing preferences from private information about health,
(ii) distinguishing taste for out-of-pocket spending (OOP ) from risk aversion, and (iii) iden-
tifying heterogeneity in the risk-aversion and moral-hazard parameters. We provide informal
identification arguments addressing each concern.

     We first explain how  , which captures moral hazard, is distinguished from unobserved
variation in µkt , which captures adverse selection. In the data, there is a strong positive
correlation between plan generosity and total healthcare spending (see Figure 2a). A large
part of this relationship can be explained by observable household characteristics, but even
conditional on observables, there is still residual positive correlation. This residual correlation
could be attributable to either the effect of lower out-of-pocket prices driving utilization (moral
hazard) or private information about health affecting both utilization and coverage choice
(adverse selection). The key to distinguishing between these explanations is the variation in
plan menus.

     Both within and across school districts, we observe similar households facing different menus
of plans.42 As a result, some households are more likely to choose higher coverage only because
of their plan menu. The amount of moral hazard is identified by the extent to which households

42
     Our identification argument for moral hazard is similar to that of Cardon and Hendel (2001).

                                                       22
facing more generous plan menus also have higher healthcare spending. On the other hand,
we also observe similar households facing similar menus of plans, but still making different
plan choices. This variation identifies the degree of private information about health, as well
as the magnitude of the idiosyncratic shock  . Conditional on observables and the predicted
effects of moral hazard, if households that inexplicably choose more generous coverage also
inexplicably realize higher healthcare spending, this variation in plan choice will be attributed
to private information about health. Otherwise, any residual unexplained variation in plan
choice will be attributed to the idiosyncratic shock.

  Both risk aversion ( ) and the relative valuation of premiums and out-of-pocket spending
(OOP ) affect households' preference for more- or less-generous insurance, but do not affect
healthcare spending. To distinguish between them, we use cases in which observably dif-
ferent households face similar plan menus. Risk aversion is identified by the degree to which
households' taste for higher coverage is positively related to uncertainty in out-of-pocket spend-
ing, holding expected out-of-pocket spending fixed. OOP is identified by the rate at which
households trade off premiums with expected out-of-pocket spending, holding uncertainty in
out-of-pocket spending fixed.

  Unlike the preceding arguments, identification of unobserved heterogeneity in risk aversion
and the moral hazard parameter relies on the panel nature of our data. Plan menus, house-
hold characteristics, and plan characteristics change over time. We therefore observe the same
households making choices under different circumstances. If we had a large number of obser-
vations for each household and sufficient variation in circumstances, the preceding arguments
could be applied household by household, and we could nonparametrically identify the distri-
bution of  and  in the population. In reality, we have at most five observations for each
household. We ask less of this data by assuming that the distribution of unobserved hetero-
geneity is multivariate normal. The variance and covariance of the unobserved components
of household types are identified by the extent to which different households consistently act
in different ways. For example, if some households consistently make choices that reflect high
risk aversion and other (observationally equivalent) households consistently make choices that
reflect low risk aversion, this will manifest as variance in the unobserved component of the
risk-aversion parameter.




                                               23
IV.C          Estimation

We project the parameters of the individual health state distributions µit , it , and it onto
time-varying individual demographics:
                                                     µit =  µ Xµ
                                                               it ,

                                                     it =   Xit ,                                            (7)
                                                     it =   Xit .

Covariate vectors Xµ               
                   it , Xit , and Xit contain indicators for the 0­30th, 30­60th, 60­90th, and
90­100th percentiles of individual health risk scores each year.43 Xµ       
                                                                    it and Xit also contain a
linear term in risk score, separately for each percentile group. Xµ
                                                                  it also contains an indicator for
whether the individual is a female between the ages of 18 and 35 and for whether the individual
is under 18 years old.

     Using the derivations shown in Appendix C.1, the parameters of households' health state
distributions are a function of individual-level parameters:
                                                             -2
                                                    2
                 2
                 kt   = log[1 +            exp(µit + it )                      2
                                                                          (exp(it                   2
                                                                                  ) - 1) exp(2µit + it )],
                                     iIk
                                                     2              iIk
                          2                              2
                          kt                             it
                ¯kt = -
                µ               + log[       exp(µit +        )],                                            (8)
                           2           iIk
                                                         2

                kt =          it ,
                        iIk

where Ik represents the set of individuals in household k . Private information about health
is reflected in normally distributed unobservable heterogeneity in µkt . The household-specific
                                                           2           2
mean of µkt is given by µ
                        ¯kt , and its variance is given by µ . A large µ means that households
have substantially more information about their health than can be explained by observables.

     We assume that µkt , k , and log(k ) are jointly normally distributed:
                                                                                             
                                                                              2
                               µkt                       µ
                                                         ¯kt                  µ
                                                        
                               k    N     X  ,   2  2    .                                                   (9)
                                           k   ,µ       
                                                 2 2  2
                           log(k )       Xk     ,µ , 

There is both observed (through the mean vector) and unobserved (through the covariance
                                                            
matrix) heterogeneity in each parameter. Covariates Xk and Xk include an indicator for

43
     The distributions of risk scores are highly right-skewed, so these groupings fit the data better than true
     quartiles.

                                                             24
whether the household has children and a constant.44
                                                          inertia   plan                 ins
     We model inertia at both the plan and insurer level: kjt     = k    1kt,j =j (t-1) +k   1kt,f =f (t-1) .
         plan
We allow k    to vary by whether a household has children. To capture whether sicker house-
                                                                                             ins
holds face higher barriers to switching insurers (and therefore provider networks), we allow k
                                                                                f (j )
to vary linearly with household risk score.45 Insurer fixed effects k                    can vary by household age
and whether a household has children, and we allow the intercepts to vary by geographic region
in order to capture the relative attractiveness of insurer provider networks across different parts
of the state (as well as other sources of geographical heterogeneity in insurer preferences).46
We normalize the fixed effect for Moda to be zero. As the parameters of individual health state
distributions can vary freely, the "provider price" parameters require normalization: M oda is
normalized to one.

     We estimate the model via maximum likelihood. Our estimation approach follows Revelt and
Train (1998) and Train (2009), with the important distinction that we model a discrete/contin-
uous choice. Our construction of the discrete/continuous likelihood function follows Dubin and
McFadden (1984). The likelihood function for a given household is the conditional density of
its observed sequence of total healthcare spending, given its observed sequence of plan choices.
We use Gaussian quadrature to approximate the jointly normal distribution of unobserved het-
erogeneity, as well as to approximate the lognormal distributions of household health states.
Additional details on the estimation procedure are provided in Appendix C.2.



V          Results

V.A          Model Estimates

Table 3 presents our parameter estimates. Column 3 presents our primary specification, as
described in Section IV. Columns 1 and 2 present simpler specifications that are useful in
understanding and validating the model. The table excludes insurer fixed effects and health
state distribution parameters; these can be found in Table A.10.

     Column 1 presents a version of the model in which there is no moral hazard and no observable
heterogeneity in individuals' health. That is,  is fixed at zero, and we do not allow µit , it ,

44
     If a household has children in some years but not others, we assign it to its modal status.
45
     Household risk score is calculated as the mean risk score of all individuals in a household across all years.
46
     Household age is calculated as the mean age of all adults in a household across all years.

                                                          25
                                        Table 3. Parameter Estimates

                                                 (1)                           (2)                        (3)
              Variable                  Parameter      Std. Err.   Parameter         Std. Err.   Parameter Std. Err.
                                                                            
 Employee Premium ($000s)               -1.000                     -1.000                        -1.000
 Out-of-pocket spending, -OOP           -1.628          0.023      -1.661             0.024      -1.469          0.019
 HRA/HSA contributions, HA               0.255          0.021       0.259             0.020       0.259          0.020
 Vision/dental contributions, V D        1.341          0.024       1.302             0.022       1.209          0.021
 Plan inertia intercept,  plan           4.763          0.060       4.431             0.056       4.630          0.063
 Plan inertia * 1[Children],  plan      -0.129          0.039      -0.102             0.037      -0.138          0.038
 Insurer inertia intercept, ins          2.605          0.107       2.509             0.102       2.413          0.097
 Insurer inertia * Risk score,  ins     -0.074          0.083      -0.120             0.078      -0.037          0.080
 Narrow net. plan,  N arrowN et         -2.440          0.155      -2.286             0.145      -2.334          0.151
 Providence provider prices, P           1.022          0.018       1.072             0.017       1.063          0.002
 Risk aversion intercept,               -0.706          0.046      -1.018             0.059      -0.251          0.052
 Risk aversion * 1[Children],            0.005          0.031      -0.367             0.083      -0.361          0.050
 Moral hazard intercept,                                                                          1.028          0.038
 Moral hazard * 1[Children],                                                                      0.671          0.008
 Std. dev. of private health info., µ    0.683          0.002       0.331             0.064       0.225          0.005
 Std. dev. of log risk aversion,         0.701          0.062       1.140             0.012       0.833          0.021
 Std. dev. of moral hazard,                                                                       0.281          0.013
 Corr(µ,  ), µ,                          0.130          0.018      -0.365             0.049       0.227          0.005
 Corr( ,  ), ,                                                                                   -0.137          0.042
 Corr(µ,  ), µ,                                                                                   0.062          0.017
 Scale of idiosyncratic shock,           2.313          0.025       2.160             0.023       2.116          0.024
 Insurer * {Region, Age, 1[Child.]}              Yes                       Yes                           Yes
 Observable heterogeneity in health                                        Yes                           Yes
 Number of observations                       451,268                    451,268                       451,268
Notes : The table presents estimates for selected parameters; Table A.10 presents estimates for the remaining
parameters. Standard errors are derived from the analytical Hessian of the likelihood function. Column 3
presents our primary estimates, while columns 1 and 2 present alternative specifications. All models are
estimated on an unbalanced panel of 34,606 households, 11 plans, and 5 years.  By normalization.


or it to vary with individual demographics. Unobservable heterogeneity in household health
(through µ ) is still permitted. In column 2, we introduce observable heterogeneity in health.
A key difference across columns 1 and 2 is the magnitude of the adverse selection parameter
µ , which falls by more than half. When rich observable heterogeneity in health is introduced
to the model, the estimated amount of unobservable heterogeneity in health falls substantially.
In column 3, we introduced moral hazard. Here, an important difference is the increase in
the estimated amount of risk aversion. With moral hazard as an available explanation, the
model can explain a larger part of the dispersion in spending for observably similar households.
This implies that households are facing less uncertainty in their health state than previously
thought, and that more risk aversion is necessary to explain the same plan choices. Because
estimated risk aversion increases, the relative valuation of premiums and out-of-pocket costs
(OOP ) falls.



                                                           26
     Using column 3, we estimate an average moral hazard parameter  of $1,001 among indi-
vidual households and $1,478 among families.47 Recall that  represents the additional total
spending induced by lowering marginal out-of-pocket cost from one to zero. Our estimates
imply that moving a household from a plan where their health state was below the deductible
to a plan where their health state would put them past the out-of-pocket maximum would
increase total spending by 15.8 percent of mean spending for individuals and 11.4 percent for
families.

     We estimate a large degree of risk aversion. Our estimates imply a mean (median) coefficient
of absolute risk aversion of 0.92 (0.85).48 Put differently, to make households indifferent between
(i) a payoff of zero and (ii) an equal-odds gamble between gaining $100 and losing $X, the
mean (median) value of $X in our population is $91.7 ($92.1).49 We note, however, that our
estimates of risk aversion are with respect to both financial risk and risk in the value derived
from healthcare utilization (through bjt ), so they are not directly comparable to estimates that
consider only financial risk. The standard deviation of the uncertain portion of payoffs (b      
                                                                                           jt - cjt )
with respect to the distribution of health states is $1,152 on average across household-plan-
years. The average standard deviation of out-of-pocket costs alone (cjt ) is $1,280. To avoid
a normally distributed lottery with mean zero and standard deviation $1,152 ($1,280), the
median household would be willing to pay $489 ($544).

     The importance of unobserved heterogeneity varies for health, risk aversion, and moral haz-
ard.50 The estimated amount of private information about health is fairly small once we account
for the full set of household observables and moral hazard: Unobserved heterogeneity in µkt
accounts for only 11 percent of the total variation in µkt across household-years. On the other
hand, unobserved heterogeneity in risk aversion accounts for 93 percent of its total variation
across households. Unobserved heterogeneity in the moral hazard parameter accounts for 18


47
     For comparison, the average  estimated by Einav et al. (2013) is $1,330, in a sample of households with
     average total healthcare spending of $5,283. In our sample, average total spending is $6,339 for individuals
     and $12,954 for families.
48
     We measure monetary variables in thousands of dollars; dividing our estimated coefficients of absolute risk
     aversion by 1,000 makes them comparable to estimates that use risk measured in dollars.
49
     A risk-neutral household would have $X equal to $100, and an infinitely risk-averse household would have $X
     equal to $0. Using the same example, Handel (2013) reports a mean $X of $91.0; Einav et al. (2013) report
     a mean $X of $84.0; and Cohen and Einav (2007) report a mean $X of $76.5.
50
     Following Revelt and Train (2001), we derive each household's posterior type distribution using Bayes' rule,
     conditioning on their observed choices and the population distribution. For the purposes of examining total
     variation in types across households (accounting for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity), we assign
     each household the expectation of their type with respect to their posterior distribution. This procedure is
     described in detail in Appendix C.3.

                                                        27
percent of its total variation.

     Conditional on observables, we find that households that are idiosyncratically risk averse
are also idiosyncratically less prone to moral hazard (, < 0) and also tend to have private
information that they are unhealthy (µ, > 0). We find that households with private informa-
tion that they are unhealthy are also idiosyncratically more prone to moral hazard (µ, > 0).
Accounting for both unobservable and observable variation, our estimates imply that house-
holds' expected health state E[ ~
                                l ] has a correlation of 0.22 with risk aversion, and a correlation
of 0.25 with the moral hazard parameter. The risk aversion and moral hazard parameters have
a correlation of 0.01. Figure A.3 plots the full joint distribution of these three key dimensions
of household type.

     Our estimates imply substantial disutility from switching insurer or plan. The average
disutility from switching insurer is $2,408, and from switching plans (but not insurers) is $4,562.
We estimate that insurer inertia is decreasing in household risk score, and that plan inertia
is on average $138 lower for households with children.51 The exceptionally large magnitudes
of our inertia coefficients reflect, in large part, the infrequency with which households switch
plan or insurer, as shown in Table 2. Only 3 percent of household-years ever voluntarily switch
insurer, and only 20 percent of household-years ever voluntarily switch plan.

     Finally, the estimates in column 3 indicate that households weight out-of-pocket expenditures
46.9 percent more than plan premiums. We believe this could be driven by a variety of factors,
including (i) household premiums are tax deductible, while out-of-pocket expenditures are not,
and (ii) employee premiums are very low (at the median, zero), perhaps rendering potential
out-of-pocket costs in the thousands of dollars relatively more salient.52 We also find that
households value a dollar in HSA/HRA contributions on average 75 percent less than a dollar
of premiums. This is consistent with substantial hassle costs associated with these types of
accounts, as documented by Reed et al. (2009) and McManus et al. (2006).

Model Fit. We conduct two procedures to evaluate model fit, corresponding to the two stages
of the model. First, we compare households' predicted plan choices with those observed in the
data. Figure 3 displays the predicted and observed market shares for each plan, pooled across



51
     We do not investigate the micro-foundations of our estimates of household disutility from switching; see
     Handel (2013) for a full treatment of inertia in health insurance.
52
     A single household in Oregon with an income of $80,000 paid an effective state plus federal income tax rate
     of 28.9 percent in 2013. At this tax rate, a dollar of out-of-pocket spending (after tax) would be equivalent
     to 1.41 dollars of premiums (pre-tax).

                                                         28
all years in our sample.53 Shares are matched exactly at the insurer level due to the presence of
insurer fixed effects, but are not matched exactly plan by plan. Predicted choice probabilities
over plans within an insurer are driven by plan prices, inertia, and households' valuation of
different levels of coverage through their expectation of out-of-pocket spending, their value of
risk protection, and their value of healthcare utilization. Given the relative inflexibility of the
model with respect to household plan choice within an insurer, the fit is quite good.

                                       Figure 3. Model Fit: Plan Choices

                    0.25
                                                                                 Observed share
                                                                                 Predicted share
                    0.20


                    0.15


                    0.10


                    0.05


                    0.00
                             1     2     3    4     5      6    7     8           1     2      3
                                             Moda plans                          Providence plans
                   Notes : The figure shows predicted and observed market shares at the plan
                   level. All years are pooled, so an observation is a household-year. Predicted
                   shares are calculated using the estimates in column 3 of Tables 3 and A.10.


     Second, we compare the predicted distributions of households' total healthcare spending
to the distributions of total healthcare spending observed in the data. In a given year, each
household faces a predicted distribution over health states and, due to moral hazard, a cor-
responding plan-specific distribution of total healthcare spending. To construct the predicted
distribution of total spending in a population of households, we take a random draw from
each household's predicted spending distribution corresponding to their chosen plan. Figure
4 presents kernel density plots of the predicted and observed distributions of total healthcare
spending. We assess fit separately by tertile of household risk score (the average risk score of
individuals in the household). Vertical lines in each plot represent the mean of the respective
distribution. Overall, average total healthcare spending is observed to be $11,689 and pre-
dicted to be $11,632. The standard deviation of total healthcare spending is observed to be
53
     The model predicts 67.5 percent of household plan choices correctly (i.e., assigns the highest predicted prob-
     ability to the correct plan). If households were modeled to be choosing randomly, 25.2 percent of plan choices
     would be predicted correctly.

                                                          29
$20,803 and predicted to be $20,174. The spending distributions fit well both overall and in
subsamples of households, reflecting our flexible approach to modeling household health state
distributions.

           Figure 4. Model Fit: Healthcare Spending, by Tertile of Households by Risk Score
                  Healthiest Third                      Middle Third                         Sickest Third
     0.4                                   0.4                                  0.4
                  Observed
                  Predicted
     0.3                                   0.3                                  0.3


     0.2                                   0.2                                  0.2


     0.1                                   0.1                                  0.1


     0.0                                   0.0                                  0.0
           0.03       0.60    12     243         0.03     0.60    12      243         0.03    0.60    12     243

                                                  Total spending ($000)
Notes : The figure shows kernel density plots of the predicted and observed distributions of total healthcare
spending on a log scale, separately by tertile of household health risk score, conditional on predicted/observed
spending greater than $10. All years are pooled, so an observation is a household-year. Vertical lines represent
the mean of the respective distribution. Predicted distributions are based on estimates from column 3 in
Tables 3 and A.10. Overall, the observed probability of household spending less than $10 is 2.9 percent, and
the predicted probability is 2.8 percent.




V.B           Evaluating Vertical Choice

We now construct the ingredients needed to evaluate the optimal plan menu: each house-
hold's willingness to pay for different levels of coverage, and the social surplus generated by
allocating each household to different levels of coverage. We first specify the contracts under
consideration.

Potential Contracts. We consider contracts that are vertically differentiated and have a
deductible, coinsurance rate, and out-of-pocket maximum design.54 While our numerical sim-
ulations consider all coverage levels between the null contract and full insurance, we limit
attention in our graphical analysis to the (relatively-high) range of coverage levels that are
ultimately relevant given our parameter estimates. The lowest level of coverage we consider
graphically is a contract with a deductible and out-of-pocket maximum of $10,000. The highest

54
     In addition to being vertically differentiated, the contracts we consider are also well-ordered in the amount
     of risk protection provided. Appendix A.2 provides the conditions on contracts that imply this ordering.

                                                            30
level of coverage remains full insurance. We begin by considering five contracts spanning this
range, and refer to them as Catastrophic, Bronze, Silver, Gold, and full insurance. The con-
tracts' actuarial values are 0.53, 0.61, 0.72, 0.86, and 1.00. Their out-of-pocket cost functions
are depicted in Figure A.4a.55 We revisit the specification of potential contracts in Section
V.C.

Willingness to Pay. We make several simplifications to our empirical model in order to map
it from the setting in Oregon back to our theoretical model, maintaining parameterizations and
the estimated distribution of consumer types. To start, we put aside intertemporal variation
in household health and focus on the first year each household appears in the data. We also
use the provider price parameter  = 1 (corresponding to that of Moda). This leaves each
household with a single type k = {Fk , k , k }, where Fk is a shifted lognormal distribution
described by parameters {µk , k , k }.56 With respect to payoffs (equation 6), we (i) hold all
non-financial features fixed, so any insurer fixed effects cancel; (ii) suppose households choose
from the new menu of contracts for the first time, removing any effects of inertia; (iii) assume
the idiosyncratic shock is not welfare-relevant;57 and (iv) set OOP to one so that premiums
and out-of-pocket costs are valued one-for-one.58

     With attention restricted to the dimension of coverage level, we can use equation 2 to express
willingness to pay under our parameterization:59

     W T P (x, k ) =     E lFk[cx0 (l) - cx (l)]       + E lFk[ 2
                                                                  (1 - cx (m (l, , x)))2 ] +     (x, k )         .
                        M ean reduced out-of -pocket            P ayof f f rom moral            V alue of risk
                        cost holding behavior f ixed              hazard spending                 protection



As before, willingness to pay is composed of three parts: the "transfer" of expected out-of-

55
     The deductibles, coinsurance rates, and out-of-pocket maximums are $10,000, ­, $10,000 for Catastrophic;
     $5,846, 40%, $7,500 for Bronze; $3,182, 27%, $5,000 for Silver; and $1,125, 15%, $2,500 for Gold.
56
     We assign household types by integrating over each household's posterior distribution of types. We likewise
     calculate household-specific willingness to pay and social surplus using this procedure. We omit these steps
     in this section because the notation is cumbersome, but it is provided in Appendix C.3.
57
     As our model allows for rich heterogeneity in preferences over financially differentiated contracts, we are
     comfortable with the interpretation that any remaining choice determinants contained in can be considered
     "mistake-making" (e.g., Handel and Kolstad, 2015) or "monkey-on-the-shoulder tastes" (Akerlof and Shiller,
     2015), and so can be omitted from the social welfare calculation. The counterfactual thought experiment
     becomes one of supposing consumers had access to a tool that would perfectly aid them in expressing their
     true preferences. The question is whether, for this dimension of choice, such a tool is needed.
58
     Otherwise, welfare could be created by moving a dollar of spending between premiums and out-of-pocket
     cost, which we find undesirable. If OOP is left as estimated, efficient levels of coverage increase.
59
     See Appendix A.2 for the expression of the value of risk protection.

                                                          31
pocket costs holding behavior fixed (at uninsured behavior), the expected payoff from moral
hazard spending, and the value of risk protection. Recall that only the latter two components
are relevant to social welfare.

     Figure 5 presents the distribution of willingness to pay among family households.60 Whereas
our point of reference in the two-contract example was xL , our reference contract now is the
Catastrophic contract. We hereinafter refer to "willingness to pay" for a given contract, but
emphasize that this is marginal willingness to pay with respect to this particular reference
point. Figure 5, as well as the figures that follow, is composed of connected binned scatter
plots: Households are ordered on the horizontal axis according to their willingness to pay,
those at each percentile are binned together, and the average value of the vertical axis vari-
able is plotted for each bin.61 These 100 points are then connected with a line. The left
panel shows the willingness to pay curves for our candidate contracts. As contracts are ver-
tically differentiated, all households are willing to pay more for higher coverage. The highest
willingness-to-pay households are willing to pay $10,000 more for full insurance than for the
Catastrophic contract.62

     The right panel shows, for one contract, the decomposition of willingness to pay. We find
that the transfer represents the majority of willingness to pay for most households, but that
this varies across the distribution of willingness to pay. For households with low willingness
to pay, about half is made up by the transfer; for households with high willingness to pay,
nearly all is made up by the transfer. The highest willingness-to-pay households are willing to
pay $7,500 more for Gold than for Catastrophic only in order to avoid paying an additional
$7,500 in out-of-pocket costs. Importantly, this means that allocating them to higher coverage
generates almost no additional social surplus.

Social Surplus. As in equation 3, the social surplus generated by allocating a household to
a given contract is the difference between willingness to pay and expected insurer cost, which


60
     We focus on family households because families make up 75 percent of the sample and because our set of
     potential contracts is chosen to mimic the coverage levels typically offered to families. Our results among
     individual households are qualitatively unchanged.
61
     Households are in fact ordered by willingness to pay for full insurance, but the ordering is nearly identical
     across contracts. The consistent willingness-to-pay ordering of households across contracts is what permits a
     graphical analysis of multiple contracts analogous to the two-contract example in Figure 1. See Geruso et al.
     (2019) for a detailed discussion of this point.
62
     Figure A.5 provides demographic information about households across the distribution of willingness to pay.
     Higher willingness-to-pay households tend to be older, have more family members, be more risk averse, and
     most strikingly, have higher expected healthcare spending.

                                                         32
                                             Figure 5. Willingness to Pay
                 (a) Willingness to Pay ($)                                         (b) Decomposition ($)
 10,000          Full insurance                                 10,000


  8,000                                                             8,000
             Gold                                                                Gold
                                                                                                              Payoff from moral
  6,000                                                             6,000                                      hazard spending
                                                                                                              /
            Silver

  4,000                                                             4,000                      Transfer

            Bronze
  2,000                                                             2,000
                                                                                                  Value of risk
                                                                                                   protection
      0                                                                0
          0.00       0.20    0.40     0.60     0.80     1.00                0.00        0.20   0.40       0.60        0.80   1.00
          High                                                                                                               Low
          WTP                                                                                                                WTP
                                    Percentile of households by willingness to pay

 Notes : The figure shows the distribution across households of (a) willingness to pay for each contract
 and (b) the decomposition of willingness to pay for the Gold contract. The left panel consists of four
 connected binned scatter plots, with respect to 100 bins of households ordered by willingness to pay. The
 right panel consists of three connected binned scatter plots, with the area between each line shaded to
 indicate the component represented. Both willingness to pay and its components are measured relative to
 the Catastrophic contract.


under our parameterization is equal to:

                                                                                                          2
                     SS (x, k ) =        (x, k )        -      E lFk        2
                                                                            
                                                                                1 - cx (m (l, , x))               .               (10)
                                       V alue of risk
                                         protection                                Social cost
                                                                                of moral hazard


The value of risk protection varies in the population to the extent there is variation in risk
aversion and in the amount of uncertainty about out-of-pocket costs. The social cost of moral
hazard varies in the population to the extent there is variation in the moral hazard parameter
and in consumers' expected marginal out-of-pocket cost.

  To understand the contribution of each of these components to the overall relationship be-
tween willingness to pay and social surplus, we first plot them separately. Figure 6a shows
the distribution across households of the marginal value of risk protection generated by each
contract, relative to the Catastrophic contract. We find that the majority of the social wel-
fare gains from more generous coverage are driven by households with intermediate levels of
willingness to pay. This key pattern is driven by the concavity of the contracts we consider.

                                                               33
High willingness-to-pay households are likely to realize health states that put them above the
out-of-pocket maximum of every contract, leaving them little uncertainty about out-of-pocket
costs. Among the top fifth of households by willingness to pay, the probability of spending more
than $10,000, even without moral hazard, is 65 percent. Variation in uncertainty only becomes
meaningful for households for whom much of the density of their spending distribution lies in
the range $0­$10,000, in which marginal out-of-pocket cost varies across contracts. Figure A.6
shows the full spending distributions faced by households at different levels of willingness to
pay.

                                      Figure 6. Components of Social Surplus

                    (a) Value of Risk Protection ($)                     (b) Social Cost of Moral Hazard ($)
                                                                 800
     2,500


     2,000                                                       600

     1,500
                                                                 400
     1,000

                                                                 200
      500


         0                                                        0
             0.00      0.20    0.40    0.60     0.80     1.00          0.00    0.20    0.40   0.60    0.80     1.00
             High                                                                                              Low
             WTP                      Percentile of households by willingness to pay                           WTP


                                        Full insurance    Gold    Silver      Bronze

 Notes : The figure shows the distribution across households of (a) the value of risk protection and (b) the
 social cost of moral hazard, for each contract. Both are measured relative to the Catastrophic contract.
 Each panel is composed of four connected binned scatter plots, with respect to 50 (to reduced noise) bins
 of households ordered by willingness to pay.


     Figure 6b then shows the distribution of the marginal social cost of moral hazard. It provides
two important insights. First, high willingness-to-pay households on average barely change
their behavior across this range of coverage levels.63 For similar reasons as with risk protection,

63
     We note that this finding is closely related to the embedded assumption that moral hazard will not be
     expressed as long as end-of-year marginal out-of-pocket cost does not vary across contracts. While there is
     substantial empirical evidence that consumers do respond to spot prices (e.g. Aron-Dine et al., 2015; Dalton,
     Gowrisankaran and Town, 2015), here we do not find evidence of moral hazard among high-risk households
     (see Table A.7). If the data did suggest a moral hazard response among these households, the model would

                                                            34
the majority of the social cost of more generous coverage comes from households with lower
willingness to pay. The second insight is that the Gold contract recovers about half of the
social cost of moral hazard induced by full insurance. The $1,125 deductible is high enough to
deter excess spending, but low enough to sacrifice only a small amount of risk protection.

     Finally, Figure 7 shows the resulting social surplus curves, equal to the vertical differences
between the curves in Figures 6a and 6b. The social surplus curves represent the average
social surplus delivered by allocating all households at a given percentile of willingness to pay
to a given contract, relative to allocating them to the Catastrophic contract. Since households
can be screened only by their willingness to pay, the figure permits a direct assessment of the
optimal menu.

                                          Figure 7. Social Surplus ($)

                       2,000


                       1,500


                       1,000


                        500


                           0
                               0.00      0.20          0.40          0.60      0.80     1.00
                               High                                                     Low
                               WTP    Percentile of households by willingness to pay    WTP


                                      Full insurance          Gold    Silver   Bronze
                   Notes : The figure shows the distribution across households of social surplus
                   relative to the Catastrophic contract. The figure is composed of four con-
                   nected binned scatter plots, with respect to 50 (to reduce noise) quantiles of
                   households by willingness to pay.


     First, note that all curves lay everywhere above zero, meaning the Catastrophic contract
(and any lower level of coverage) should be unambiguously excluded from the optimal menu.64
Among the remaining contracts, the social surplus curves of Bronze, Silver, and full insurance

     load the effect onto the moral hazard parameter  , compensating a weak treatment with a strong treatment
     effect.
64
     Any lower level of coverage can be ruled out because its social surplus curve will lay everywhere below that
     of the Catastrophic contract (c.f. Proposition 3 in Appendix A.2).

                                                               35
similarly lay everywhere below that of the Gold contract, which delivers higher average social
surplus at every level of willingness to pay.65 Households with higher willingness to pay should
therefore not have a higher level of coverage than households with lower willingness to pay:
they should, on average, have the same level of coverage. It follows that choice over these
contracts is not efficient in this population. Numerical simulations confirm this result. The
optimal menu consists of only the Gold contract, and this allocation achieves social surplus
(relative to allocating all households to Catastrophic) equal to the integral of the Gold social
surplus curve: $1,514 per household.


V.C          Robustness and Extensions

More Contracts. A natural question is how the optimal menu would change if more contracts
were available. Figure 7 indicates that the Silver contract is everywhere too little coverage, and
that full insurance is everywhere too much coverage, but it says nothing about the potential
gains of offering additional contracts within this range. We explore this question by expanding
the number of contracts in the Silver-to-full insurance range from one (the Gold contract) to
20. The out-of-pocket cost functions for this denser set of potential contracts are depicted in
Figure A.4b.

     We find that when efficient coverage level can be measured more finely, high willingness-to-
pay households do have a slightly higher efficient level of coverage. In a small neighborhood
of the Gold contract, it is therefore efficient to offer a choice. The optimal menu features four
contracts.66 This allocation achieves social surplus, relative to allocating all households to
the Catastrophic contract, of $1,528 per household. This represents a gain of $14 over what is
achieved by the Gold contract alone, and of only $5 over what is achieved by the optimal single
contract in the denser set.67 Because social surplus is so flat in this range of coverage levels,
the welfare gains from a denser contract space are economically small. Other considerations,
such as any fixed costs of offering each contract, or of offering a choice at all, could quickly
become first order.


65
     Although Gold is the efficient contract at every level of willingness to pay, it is not the efficient contract for
     every household. Figure A.7 shows the heterogeneity in households' efficient contracts.
66
     The four contracts are the Gold contract (actuarial value 0.86) and the three next-less-generous contracts
     (actuarial values 0.84, 0.83, and 0.81). At the optimal feasible allocation, 28 percent of households choose
     Gold, and 34 percent, 37 percent, and 1 percent of households choose the next three contracts respectively.
67
     The optimal single contract in the dense set is the 0.83 actuarial value contract.

                                                           36
Different Contracts. We next explore how the optimal menu would change if different
types of contracts were available. We have so far considered one particular contract design,
as depicted in panels (a) and (b) of Figure A.4. We now consider three alternative contract
designs, as depicted in panels (c)­(e) of Figure A.4. These are: (c) removing deductibles, (d)
removing the coinsurance region, and (e) removing deductibles and extending the coinsurance
region. We consider five contracts in each set.

     We first solve for the optimal menu separately within each of the three alternative sets
of contracts. These results are presented in panel A of Table A.11. We find that among
contracts without deductibles and without a coinsurance region, the optimal menu features
a single contract. For much the same reasons this was true among the original metal-tier
contracts, high willingness-to-pay consumers do not have a higher efficient level of coverage.
Among contracts with an extended coinsurance region, however, the optimal menu features
vertical choice. Because it takes longer to reach the out-of-pocket maximum, households are
less likely to hit it. Choice becomes optimal because high willingness-to-pay households face
much more variation in risk across contracts. Interestingly, our estimates also imply that the
extended coinsurance region is not an efficient contract design: For every household, there is a
contract without a coinsurance region that is more efficient than any contract with an extended
coinsurance region.

     We next consider all four contract designs simultaneously, and evaluate the optimal menu
from among all contracts.            Panel B of Table A.11 presents these results.              We find that
the optimal menu features a single contract: a contract with no coinsurance region and a
deductible/out-of-pocket maximum of $2,500.68 Allocating all households to this contract in-
creases social surplus by $145 per household relative to allocating all households to the Gold
contract. Welfare gains are driven by a $123 reduction in the average social cost of moral
hazard, achieved by front-loading a higher marginal out-of-pocket cost. In addition, the aver-
age value of risk protection increases by $22. Without a coinsurance region, the out-of-pocket
maximum now arrives faster, resulting in most households facing less uncertainty in out-of-
pocket spending. Despite the availability of other contract designs that could have served
some households better, isolating these households remained impossible. Taken together, our
analyses suggest that in a population like the one we consider, offering a choice over financially
differentiated contracts is unlikely to yield economically meaningful welfare gains.


68
     This finding echos a classic result that when there is proportional loading, the optimal insurance contract
     features only a deductible (Arrow, 1963; Gollier and Schlesinger, 1996). In our case, in the neighborhood of
     the optimal contract, moral hazard operates approximately like a proportional loading factor.

                                                        37
Different Consumers. We next explore the robustness of our findings to different populations
of consumers. We do this in two ways: (i) by re-estimating our model in the full sample of
households that includes Kaiser enrollees, and (ii) by adjusting individual parameter estimates
to establish their isolated effects on results.

     As discussed in section III.A, we exclude Kaiser enrollees from our primary analysis sample
in order to focus on the vertical choice across coverage levels, as opposed to the horizontal
choice across plan types (HMO vs. PPO). Kaiser enrollees are slightly younger and healthier
on average, and moreover, 3 percent of households did at one point switch between a Kaiser
and non-Kaiser plan. We investigate how these factors impact our results by re-estimating our
model using the full sample of households. Table A.12 presents these parameter estimates.69
Figure A.8 presents the corresponding willingness to pay and social surplus curves. Though
the shapes and levels of the resulting social surplus curves are slightly different than under our
original estimates, our qualitative results and the underlying mechanisms are unchanged. The
optimal menu remains the Gold contract alone.

     Second, we explore how specific perturbations of our parameter estimates affect our results.
We explore nine cases, including raising and lowering the moral hazard parameter, raising
and lowering risk aversion, and increasing heterogeneity in risk aversion and the moral hazard
parameter.70 We also present three cases in which households vary only in their preferences:
risk aversion and/or the moral hazard parameter. Our findings are summarized in Table A.13.
For each case, the table shows the percent of households enrolled in each of the metal-tier
contracts under the optimal menu. Intuitively, we find that the optimal menu is more likely to
feature a choice when risk aversion plays a larger role in driving variation in willingness to pay.
At the extreme, when households vary only in their risk aversion, nearly perfect screening is
possible as private and social incentives are directly aligned. The table also shows the welfare
gains available from a denser contract space, and whether a choice would be efficient in that
context. We find that while choice is almost always efficient in the dense contract space, the
welfare gains available are consistently small, not exceeding $16 per household per year. In
the extreme case in which households vary only in their moral hazard parameter, private and

69
     We make two changes from the original specification. First, we estimate insurer inertia terms separately for
     Kaiser and for Moda/Providence. Kaiser enrollees are therefore represented in the underlying distribution
     of health types in the population, but are effectively limited to choosing Kaiser plans. Second, we assume
     there is not moral hazard in Kaiser plans. Moral hazard estimates are therefore derived, as before, only from
     coverage level variation within Moda and Providence.
70
     We present fairly large perturbations, changing our estimates by a factor of 2, in order to show cases in which
     our results do vary. Smaller changes to our parameter estimates, e.g., raising and lowering mean risk aversion
     by up to 30 percent, do not affect our results

                                                          38
social incentives are directly misaligned, and choice is not efficient even among the dense set
of contracts. Across all nine cases, the welfare gains from choice relative to what can be
achieved by a single contract do not exceed $10 per household. In a broad neighborhood of our
parameter estimates, the efficiency loss from forgoing vertical choice is therefore either zero or
economically small.



VI          Counterfactual Pricing Policies

Returning to our focal set of contracts and the estimated distribution of consumer types, we
compare outcomes under five pricing policies: (i) regulated pricing with community rating,
(ii) regulated pricing with type-specific prices, (iii) competitive pricing with community rat-
ing and a mandate, (iv) competitive pricing with type-specific prices and a mandate, and (v)
premiums to support vertical choice. Under regulated pricing, premiums are set to maximize
social surplus. Under competitive pricing, premiums are endogenous, and must equal average
costs on a plan-by-plan basis. A mandate enforces a minimum level of coverage at the Catas-
trophic contract. Under premiums to support vertical choice, premiums are set to support the
availability of (read: enrollment in) every contract.

     We consider two pricing policies, (ii) and (iv), in which premiums can vary by consumer
attributes. If observable dimensions of household type are predictive of efficient coverage level,
tailoring plan menus to observables may improve allocations. We divide households into four
groups: childless households under age 45, childless households over age 45, households under
age 45 with children, and households over age 45 with children.71 We use age and whether
the household has children because these are used in practice on ACA exchanges and are also
important observables with which the parameters of our model may vary.


VI.A          Welfare Outcomes

Table 4 summarizes outcomes under each of these five pricing policies. It shows the percent
of households Q enrolled in each contract at the optimal feasible allocation, the percent of
first-best social surplus achieved, and the expected per-household insurer cost AC among
households in each contract (in thousands of dollars). We benchmark outcomes against the
first best allocation of households to contracts (as depicted in Figure A.7), which cannot be
71
     Among family households, 6 percent are childless and under age 45, 27 percent are childless and over age 45,
     52 percent have children and are under age 40, and 15 percent have children and are over age 45.

                                                        39
supported by prices unless premiums can vary by all aspects of consumer type. This allocation
generates $1,542 in social surplus per household relative to the counterfactual of allocating all
households to the Catastrophic contract. Expected total healthcare spending per household at
the first best allocation is $12,400, and expected insurer cost per household is $10,351.

                             Table 4. Outcomes Under Alternative Pricing Policies

                                              % of First                         Potential Contracts
                       Policy                Best Surplus              Full    Gold     Silver   Bronze    Ctstr.

                                                                 Q:   0.06      0.75     0.19    < 0.01       ­
         *      First best                        1.000
                                                                AC:   18.35     9.43    11.48     39.18       ­
        (i)     Regulated pricing                                Q:     ­      1.00        ­        ­         ­
                                                  0.982
                 with community rating                          AC:     ­     10.62        ­        ­         ­
        (ii)    Regulated pricing                                Q:     ­      0.98      0.02       ­         ­
                                                  0.989
                 with type-specific prices                      AC:     ­     10.71      0.75       ­         ­
        (iii)   Competitive pricing                              Q:     ­        ­         ­        ­       1.00
                                                  0.000
                 with community rating                          AC:     ­        ­         ­        ­       6.30
        (iv)    Competitive pricing                              Q:     ­        ­       0.05       ­       0.95
                                                  0.075
                 with type-specific prices                      AC:     ­        ­       4.95       ­       6.41
        (v)     Premiums to support                              Q:    0.01    0.07      0.63      0.28     0.01
                                                  0.796
                 vertical choice                                AC:   61.04   31.91      8.47      1.75     0.28

 Notes : The table summarizes outcomes under five pricing policies as well as the first best allocation, among
 the 25,636 family households. Q represents the percent of households enrolled in each contract. AC represents
 average expected insurer cost (in thousands of dollars) among households enrolled in each contract. Social
 surplus is measured relative to the Catastrophic contract. At the first best allocation, social surplus is $1,542
 per household and expected insurer cost is $10,351 per household.


     Policy (i) is the baseline policy considered in this paper, in which the regulator can set
premiums but is restricted to community rating. As indicated by Figure 7, it is welfare max-
imizing to offer only the Gold contract.72 Interestingly, although 25 percent of households
are misallocated, this policy is almost equally as efficient as the first best allocation. That is,
the ability to perfectly discriminate among consumers would increase welfare by only $28 per
household per year.73 Driving this result is the fact that social welfare is quite flat across the
72
     This allocation is implementable because the regulator need not break even in aggregate. We assume the
     Gold contract can be provided for free, and the deficit of $10,619 per household can be funded by taxing
     incomes at zero cost of public funds. We note that if the regulator did need to break even in aggregate,
     vertical choice would likely be efficient. The focus would shift to ensuring low-W T P consumers were not
     left out of the market entirely, even if that induced some high-W T P consumers to select lower-than-efficient
     coverage. See Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017) and Geruso et al. (2019) for a full treatment of a setting in which
     the regulator must break even in aggregate.
73
     Interestingly, using a different parameterization of preferences and estimates from a different empirical setting,

                                                           40
top contracts, and particularly so among the households who are misallocated under policy (i).
Among these households, the social surplus at stake between the Silver and Gold contracts is
on average only $26; among all households, it is $112.

     Because pricing policy (i) is almost as efficient as the first best outcome, there is little scope
for improvement by varying prices by consumer type. Even so, under policy (ii) we do find that
allowing the regulator to discriminate can improve allocational efficiency by a small amount.
To young households under with children, it is efficient to offer a choice between Gold and
Silver. To the other three sets of households, it is still efficient to offer only Gold. It becomes
possible to productively offer lower coverage to young households with children because the
other households, to whom it is not efficient to provide such low coverage, can now be excluded.

     Policy (iii) considers competitive pricing with community rating and a mandated minimum
level of coverage at the Catastrophic contract. We calculate the competitive equilibrium pro-
posed by Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017).74 We find that a separating equilibrium above min-
imum coverage cannot be supported in this population, and the market unravels. Though
choice is permitted, the market cannot deliver it. Policy (iv) considers which allocations could
be supported if the market could be segmented. We find that among the young households
with children, a separating equilibrium between the Silver and Catastrophic contracts can be
supported. The other three market segments unravel.

     The first four policies are natural benchmarks, but none turn out to feature the same degree
of vertical choice that is observed in many U.S. health insurance markets, including the market
we study. A major difference between these real markets and our benchmark policies is that
the former feature a complex set of taxes and subsidies that affect consumer premiums in
ways not replicated by our benchmark policies. To mimic this status quo outcome, policy (v)
implements premiums that can support enrollment in every contract. We target enrollment
shares that match the true metal-tier shares observed on ACA exchanges in 2018.75 Because
households with intermediate willingness to pay (for whom social surplus increases steeply at
low coverage levels; see Figure 7) now choose Silver instead of Bronze or Catastrophic, this
allocation substantially increases welfare relative to the competitive outcome.

     Ho and Lee (2021) find similarly that the ability to perfectly discriminate among consumers would increase
     welfare by only $33 per household per year relative to what can be achieved by a single contract.
74
     Like the authors, we use a mass of behavioral consumers equal to 1 percent of the population of households;
     see Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017) for additional details.
75
     Shares are from Kaiser Family Foundation and are available at https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-
     indicator/marketplace-plan-selections-by-metal-level. We map Platinum coverage to full insurance. Premi-
     ums that can support these shares are $7,059 for full insurance, $4,594 for Gold, $2,173 for Silver, $375 for
     Bronze, and $0 for Catastrophic, resulting in an aggregate deficit of $6,856 per household.

                                                         41
VI.B          Distributional Outcomes

The population faces an unavoidable healthcare spending bill of $11,723 per household. It
is unavoidable because it arises even if all households have the minimum allowed coverage
(Catastrophic). While full insurance provides the benefit of additional risk protection, it also
raises the population's healthcare spending bill by 8 percent due to moral hazard, to $12,695
per household.

     The spending bill is funded by a combination of out-of-pocket costs and insured costs. In-
sured costs are in turn funded by premiums and, to the extent optimal premiums imply an
aggregate deficit, by taxes. For simplicity, we assess taxes equally across households, just as
premiums. Because different coverage levels imply different divisions between out-of-pocket
and insured costs, there are large differences across policies in the source of funding for the
population healthcare spending bill, and thereby in how evenly the spending bill is shared
across households.76

     Figure 8 shows distributional outcomes under three of our candidate policies: (i) regulated
pricing ("All Gold"), (iii) competitive pricing ("All Catastrophic"), and (v) premiums to sup-
port vertical choice ("Vertical Choice"). The left panel shows the distribution across households
of population healthcare spending bill liability. Each household's liability equals the premium
plus expected out-of-pocket cost associated with their chosen contract, plus any tax assessed
on all consumers. Households are ordered on the horizontal axis according to their willingness
to pay.77 Under "All Catastrophic," there is a premium of $6,298. The highest willingness-to-
pay households have expected out-of-pocket costs of $9,708, implying a healthcare spending
bill of $16,006. The lowest willingness-to-pay households have expected out-of-pocket costs of
only $1,500, implying a healthcare spending bill of $7,798. When the population has higher
coverage, as under the other two policies, the healthcare spending bill is shared more evenly
in the population.

     The right panel evaluates the distribution of consumer surplus, incorporating consumer pref-
erences over risk and healthcare utilization in addition to just spending outcomes. Typically,
consumer surplus is measured relative to the absence of a product. In this case, because we

76
     If all households had Catastrophic coverage, in expectation 47 percent of the spending bill would be paid
     out-of-pocket, and 53 percent would be insured. If all households had full insurance, 100 percent of the
     spending bill would be insured.
77
     All households at the same level of willingness to pay choose the same contract, and thus pay the same
     premium plus tax, but there may still be variation in their expected out-of-pocket costs. The plot is therefore
     composed of connected binned scatter plots, as in the previous figures.

                                                          42
                                             Figure 8. Distributional Outcomes
                (a) Healthcare Spending Bill ($)                                                      (b) Consumer Surplus ($)
16,000                                                                           4,000

                All Catastrophic
                  Policy (iii)                                                                                     All Gold
                                                                                                                    Policy (i)
14,000                                                                           2,000
                                                                                                Vertical choice
                                                                                                      Policy (v)
                                                 All Gold
                                                  Policy (i)
12,000                                                                              0     All Catastrophic
                                                                                                Policy (iii)

                                                          Vertical choice
                                                               Policy (v)
10,000                                                                       -2,000



 8,000                                                                       -4,000
         0.00       0.20         0.40     0.60         0.80          1.00                0.00          0.20        0.40          0.60   0.80   1.00
         High                                                                                                                                  Low
         WTP                            Percentile of households by willingness to pay                                                         WTP

Notes : The figure shows the distribution across households of (a) expected healthcare spending bill (premium
plus tax plus expected out-of-pocket cost), and (b) consumer surplus, under three of the policies considered
in Table 4. Households are arranged on the horizontal axis according to their willingness to pay. Consumer
surplus equals marginal willingness to pay less marginal premium-plus-tax, relative to the allocation of all
households to Catastrophic coverage. The premium/tax that supports the single contract is $6,298 under "All
Catastrophic" and $10,619 under "All Gold." Premiums under "Vertical choice" are $7,059 for full insurance,
$4,594 for Gold, $2,173 for Silver, $375 for Bronze, $0 for Catastrophic, and a tax of $6,856.


enforce a minimum coverage level, we measure consumer surplus gains relative to the absence
of a better product. Under each policy, consumer surplus is the difference between a house-
hold's marginal willingness to pay for their chosen plan, and the marginal premium-plus-tax
associated with that choice. The integral of each consumer surplus curve equals the welfare
generated by that policy, relative to the "All Catastrophic" outcome. The difference between
the "All Gold" consumer surplus curve in Figure 8b and the Gold contract's social surplus
curve in Figure 7 is that the former shows who receives the surplus, while the latter shows who
generates it; the integrals of the two curves are the same.

  The right panel depicts a classic feature of insurance markets with adverse selection. That is,
the optimal allocation ("All Gold") results in higher coverage and greater social welfare gains,
while the competitive outcome ("All Catastrophic") results in lower coverage but a more even
distribution of gains. At the competitive outcome, no one is made worse off than they were
absent the market. Regulatory intervention can offer substantial efficiency gains, at the cost
of making some households worse off.


                                                                            43
Dynamic Considerations. These static gains from trade, and the distribution thereof, are
evaluated at a point in time at which households are already aware of their endowed type, .
In the spirit of Hendren (2020) and Ghili et al. (2020), we can also consider welfare from the
perspective of an "unborn" consumer, who, prior to participating in our spot insurance market,
faces a lottery over types.78 A consumer's type  uniquely determines their willingness to pay.
Instead of considering a lottery over types, we can therefore directly consider the lottery over
levels of willingness to pay. Under a given pricing policy, a consumer's willingness to pay in
turn uniquely determines their consumer surplus, as depicted in Figure 8b. In that panel,
consumers are uniformly distributed on the horizontal axis, in 100 equally sized bins. Under
each policy, the "lottery over types" faced by an unborn consumer is therefore equivalent to
the uniformly distributed lottery over consumer surplus outcomes shown in Figure 8b.

     The question then becomes where to normalize utility across consumers. In Figure 8b, we
have assumed consumers are equally well off absent the market. However, from "behind the
veil of ignorance," it may be more natural to assume consumers are equally well off when fully
insured. Such a renormalization would be reflected in Figure 8b by rotating the consumer
surplus curves counter-clockwise, until an "All full insurance" consumer surplus curve were
horizontal; this is depicted in Figure A.9. In this case, it becomes clear that the "All Gold"
policy delivers the least-risky distribution of consumer surplus, consistent with the intuition
that higher coverage provides greater dynamic risk protection (Handel, Hendel and Whinston,
2015). From the perspective of an unborn consumer, the "All Gold" policy delivers the most
efficiency and the most equity in the spot market.



VII           Conclusion

This paper presents a framework for evaluating optimal menus of coverage levels in health insur-
ance markets. Our framework incorporates consumer heterogeneity along multiple dimensions,
endogenous healthcare utilization, and menus of nonlinear insurance contracts among which
traded contracts are endogenous. We emphasize the importance of distinguishing between the
component of the private value of insurance that is a transfer, and the components that give
insurance value beyond being a redistributive tool. We also emphasize that the redistribu-
tive component plays a large role in determining feasible allocations. Health is persistent,

78
     The interpretation that consumers face a lottery over all elements of type, including preferences, is consistent
     with Harsanyi (1953, 1955). We take this approach because it permits a simple informal analysis, but refer
     the reader to Eden (2020) for an alternative potential approach.

                                                          44
but insurance contracts often span only a short time. The implication is that a large part of
insurable spending can be foreseen, and it may not be possible to align the private incentive
to maximize one's own transfer with the social incentive to mitigate residual uncertainty. The
presence of moral hazard means that the problem is more complicated than simply mandating
full insurance for all.

  We show that the efficiency of choice over financial coverage levels hinges on whether con-
sumers with higher willingness to pay have higher efficient levels of coverage. In reverse, this
condition implies that a lowest-coverage plan should only be offered if the lowest willingness-to-
pay consumers should have it. In the setting we study, we find that lowest willingness-to-pay
consumers are sufficiently risk averse and facing sufficient risk to warrant coverage as least as
high as the Silver contract. We therefore conclude that such low coverage should not be offered
in this market. On the other hand, a highest-coverage plan should only be offered if the highest
willingness-to-pay consumers should have it. The highest coverage we consider is full insurance,
and we find that it would be more efficient for the highest willingness-to-pay consumers to have
lower coverage. Between these bounds, we find that private values for higher coverage are not
strongly positively correlated with social values, and thus that offering a choice cannot provide
economically meaningful welfare gains. Reassuringly from a policy perspective, we also find
that the welfare stakes of misallocation are low in the neighborhood of the optimal contract.

  An important limitation of this paper is that we assume the socially optimal level of health-
care utilization is the level a consumer would choose absent insurance. If healthcare providers
charge supracompetitive prices, or if there are positive externalities of healthcare utilization, it
may well be the case that using insurance to induce additional utilization is desirable. In addi-
tion, important considerations our model does not address arise when consumers face liquidity
constraints (Ericson and Sydnor, 2018) or are protected from large losses by limited liability
in addition to by insurance (Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011; Mahoney, 2015). Finally, a central
simplification in our model is that healthcare is a homogenous good over which consumers
choose only the quantity to consume. In reality, healthcare is multidimensional, and the time
and space over which utilization decisions are made is complex. We see the extension of our
model to capture other dimensions of healthcare utilization as an important direction for future
research.


References
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. "Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Ev-
 idence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." American Economic Review,

                                                45
  101(4): 1180­1210.
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2016. "Evolving Choice Inconsistencies in Choice of
 Prescription Drug Insurance." American Economic Review, 106(8): 2145­84.
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2017. "Improving the Quality of Choices in Health
 Insurance Markets." NBER Working Paper 22917.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. "The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market
  Mechanism." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488­500.
Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Ma-
  nipulation and Deception. Princeton University Press.
Apesteguia, Jose, and Miguel A. Ballester. 2018. "Monotone Stochastic Choice Models: The
 Case of Risk and Time Preferences." Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 74­106.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen. 2015. "Moral Hazard in
  Health Insurance: Do Dynamic Incentives Matter?" The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  97(4): 725­741.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care." The
  American Economic Review, 53(5): 941­973.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1965. "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care: Reply
  (The Implications of Transaction Costs and Adjustment Lags)." The American Economic
  Review, 55(1/2): 154­158.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1968. "The Economics of Moral Hazard: Further Comment." The American
  Economic Review, 58(3): 537­539.
Azevedo, Eduardo M., and Daniel Gottlieb. 2017. "Perfect Competition in Markets With
  Adverse Selection." Econometrica, 85(1): 67­105.
Bhargava, Saurabh, George Loewenstein, and Justin Sydnor. 2017. "Choose to Lose: Health
  Plan Choices from a Menu with Dominated Option*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  132(3): 1319­1372.
Bogin, Alexander, William Doerner, and William Larson. 2019. "Local House Price Dynamics:
  New Indices and Stylized Facts." Real Estate Economics, 47(2): 365­398.
Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C., Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R. Handel, and Jonathan T. Kolstad.
  2017. "What does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care Prices,
  Quantities, and Spending Dynamics*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3): 1261­
  1318.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. "Pricing and welfare in health
  plan choice." American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214­3248.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Maria Polyakova, Cheryl Stults, Amy Meehan, Roman Klimke, Ting Pun,
  Albert Solomon Chan, and Ming Tai-Seale. 2019. "Machine-Based Expert Recommendations
  And Insurance Choices Among Medicare Part D Enrollees." Health Affairs, 38(3): 482­490.
  PMID: 30830808.


                                           46
Cardon, James H., and Igal Hendel. 2001. "Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance:
  Evidence from the National Medical Expenditure Survey." The RAND Journal of Economics,
  32(3): 408­427.
Carlin, Caroline, and Robert Town. 2008. "Sponsored Health Plans." ReVision, 0­67.
Cobb, Barry, Rafael Rum´  i, and Antonio Salmer´
                                               on. 2012. "Approximating the Distribution of
  a Sum of Log-normal Random Variables." Proceedings of the 6th European Workshop on
  Probabilistic Graphical Models, PGM 2012.
Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. "Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice."
  American Economic Review, 97(3): 745­788.
Cooper, Zack, Stuart V Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2018. "The Price Ain't
  Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured*." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 134(1): 51­107.
Cutler, David M, and Sarah J Reber. 1998. "Paying For Health Insurance: The Trade-
 off Between Competition and Adverse Selection." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 113(2): 433­466.
Dafny, Leemore, Kate Ho, and Mauricio Varela. 2013. "Let Them Have Choice: Gains from
 Shifting Away from Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and toward an Individual Ex-
 change." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 32­58.
Dalton, Christina M, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town. 2015. "Salience, Myopia,
 and Complex Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D." National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 21104.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
  Product Diversity." The American Economic Review, 67(3): 297­308.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. "An Econometric Analysis of Residential
 Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption." Econometrica, 52(2): 345­362.
Eden, Maya. 2020. "Welfare Analysis with Heterogeneous Risk Preferences." Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 128(12): 000­000.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. "Beyond Testing: Empirical Models
  of Insurance Markets." Annual Review of Economics, 2(1): 311­336.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen. 2013.
  "Selection on moral hazard in health insurance." American Economic Review, 103(1): 178­
  219.
Einav, Liran, Amy N. Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen. 2010. "Estimating Welfare in Insurance
  Markets Using Variation in Prices." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV(3).
Ericson, Keith Marzilli, and Justin R Sydnor. 2018. "Liquidity Constraints and the Value of
  Insurance." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24993.
Ericson, Keith Marzilli, and Justin Sydnor. 2017. "The Questionable Value of Having a Choice
  of Levels of Health Insurance Coverage." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4): 51­72.


                                            47
Fenton, L. F. 1960. "The sum of log-normal probability distributions in scatter transmission
  systems." IRE Transactions on Communication Systems, 8: 57­67.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry. 2006. "Multiple Dimensions of Private Informa-
  tion: Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market." American Economic Review,
  96(4): 938­958.
Geruso, Michael. 2017. "Demand heterogeneity in insurance markets: Implications for equity
 and efficiency." Quantitative Economics, 8(3): 929­975.
Geruso, Michael, Timothy J Layton, Grace McCormack, and Mark Shepard. 2019. "The Two
 Margin Problem in Insurance Markets." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 26288.
Ghili, Soheil. 2016. "Network Formation and Bargaining in Vertical Markets: The Case of
 Narrow Networks in Health Insurance."
Ghili, Soheil, Benjamin R Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D Whinston. 2020. "The Welfare
 Effects of Long-Term Health Insurance Contracts." National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 23624.
Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2011. "Gold and Silver health plans: Accommodating
  demand heterogeneity in managed competition." Journal of Health Economics, 30(5): 1011­
  1019.
Gollier, Christian, and Harris Schlesinger. 1996. "Arrow's theorem on the optimality of de-
 ductibles: A stochastic dominance approach (*)." Economic Theory, 7(2): 359­363.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. 2015. "Mergers When Prices Are
 Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry." American Economic Review, 105(1): 172­
 203.
Gross, Tal, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2011. "Health insurance and the consumer
  bankruptcy decision: Evidence from expansions of Medicaid." Journal of Public Economics,
  95(7): 767 ­ 778.
Gruber, Jonathan, Ben Handel, Jonathan Kolstad, and Sam Kina. 2019. "Managing Intelli-
  gence: Skilled Experts and AI in Markets for Complex Products."
Handel, Benjamin, Igal Hendel, and Michael Whinston. 2015. "Equilibria in Health Exchanges
  : Adverse Selection vs . Reclassification Risk." Econometrica, 83(4): 1261­1313.
Handel, Benjamin R. 2013. "Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
  Nudging Hurts." American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643­2682.
Handel, Benjamin R., and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2015. "Health Insurance for "Humans": In-
  formation Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare." American Economic Review,
  105(8): 2449­2500.
Harsanyi, John. 1953. "Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-
  taking." Journal of Political Economy, 61.
Harsanyi, John C. 1955. "Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Compar-
  isons of Utility." Journal of Political Economy, 63(4): 309­321.

                                            48
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2020. "Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets." Review of
  Economic Studies.
Hendren, Nathaniel, Camille Landais, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2021. "Choice in Insurance
  Markets: A Pigouvian Approach to Social Insurance Design." National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 27842.
Ho, Kate, and Robin Lee. 2017. "Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets." Econometrica,
  85(2): 379­417.
Ho, Kate, and Robin Lee. 2021. "Health Insurance Menu Design for Large Employers."
Ketcham, Jonathan D., Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J. Miravete, and M. Christopher Roebuck.
  2012. "Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D." American Economic
  Review, 102(6): 2639­73.
Kowalski, Amanda E. 2015. "Estimating the tradeoff between risk protection and moral hazard
 with a nonlinear budget set model of health insurance." International Journal of Industrial
 Organization, 43: 122 ­ 135.
Landais, Camille, Arash Nekoei, Peter Nilsson, David Seim, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2021.
  "Risk-Based Selection in Unemployment Insurance: Evidence and Implications." American
  Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Liebman, Eli. 2018. "Bargaining in Markets with Exclusion: An Analysis of Health Insurance
  Networks."
Lustig, Joshua. 2008. "The Welfare Effects of Adverse Selection in Privatized Medicare." De-
  partment of Economics, Institute for Business and Economic Research, UC Berkeley, De-
  partment of Economics, Working Paper Series.
Mahoney, Neale. 2015. "Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance." American Economic Re-
 view, 105(2): 710­46.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and Arleen
 Leibowitz. 1987. "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
 Randomized Experiment." The American Economic Review, 77(3): 251­277.
McManus, Margaret A., Stephen Berman, Thomas McInerny, and Suk-fong Tang.
 2006. "Weighing the Risks of Consumer-Driven Health Plans for Families." Pediatrics,
 117(4): 1420­1424.
Miranda, Mario J., and Paul L. Fackler. 2002. Applied Computational Economics and Finance.
 MIT Press.
Newhouse, Joseph. 1993. "Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experi-
  ment." Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press.
Pauly, Mark V. 1968. "The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment." American Economic
  Review, 58(3): 531­537.
Pauly, Mark V. 1974. "Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance : The Roles of Moral
  Hazard and Adverse Selection." The Quaterly Journal of Economics, 88(1): 44­62.


                                            49
Reed, Mary, Vicki Fung, Mary Price, Richard Brand, Nancy Benedetti, Stephen F. Derose,
  Joseph P. Newhouse, and John Hsu. 2009. "High-Deductible Health Insurance Plans: Efforts
  To Sharpen A Blunt Instrument." Health Affairs, 28(4): 1145­1154. PMID: 19597214.
Revelt, David, and Kenneth Train. 1998. "Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices: Households'
  Choices of Appliance Efficiency Level." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4): 647­
  657.
Revelt, David, and Kenneth Train. 2001. "Customer-Specific Taste Parameters and Mixed
  Logit: Households' Choice of Electricity Supplier." , (0012001).
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Mar-
  kets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 90(4): 629­649.
Samek, Anya, and Justin R Sydnor. 2020. "Impact of Consequence Information on Insurance
  Choice." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 28003.
Shepard, Mark. 2016. "Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from
  the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange." National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 22600.
Tilipman, Nicholas. 2018. "Narrow Physician Networks, Switching Costs, and Product Variety
  in Employer Markets."
Train, Kenneth. 2009. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation: Second Edition. Cambridge
  University Press.
Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk
  Spreading and Appropriate Incentives." Journal of Economic Theory, 2(1): 10­26.



Appendix A              Derivations and Proofs

A.1     Derivation of Willingness to Pay

The expected utility of a type- consumer with initial income y
                                                             ^ for contract x at premium p is
given by U (x, p, ), as defined in equation 1 and repeated here:

                                          y - p - c
                     U (x, p, ) = El [ u (^                      
                                                   x (l, , x) + b (l, , x))].

The corresponding certainty equivalent CE (x, p, ) solves u(CE (x, p, )) = U (x, p, ). It can
be expressed as:
            CE (x, p, ) = u- 1
                            (U (x, p,  ))

                                     ^ - p + u-
                        = EV (x, ) + y          1
                                               (U (x, p,  )) - EV (x,  ) - y
                                                                           ^+p
                                     ^ - p - RP (x, p, ),
                        = EV (x, ) + y

                                               50
                 ^ - p is the expected payoff and RP (x, p, ) is the risk premium associated
where EV (x, ) + y
with the lottery. In particular,
                         EV (x, ) = El [ b (l, , x) - cx (l, , x) ]

                                    = El [ b (l, , x0 ) - cx (l, , x0 ) + v (l, , x) ], and

                                                ^ - p - u-
                       RP (x, p, ) = EV (x, ) + y          1
                                                          (U (x, p,  )),                               (11)

where as before v (l, , x) = b (l, , x) - b (l, , x0 ) - c              
                                                          x (l, , x) - cx (l, , x0 ) . A consumer's
willingness to pay for contract x relative to the null contract x0 is equal to p
                                                                               ~ that solves:

                               CE (x, p
                                      ~, ) = CE (x0 , 0, )
                   ^-p
        EV (x, ) + y ~ - RP (x, p                   ^ - RP (x0 , 0, )
                                ~, ) = EV (x0 , ) + y
                                          ~ = EV (x, ) - EV (x0 , ) + RP (x0 , 0, ) - RP (x, p
                                          p                                                  ~, ).

To obtain a closed-form expression for willingness to pay, we assume constant absolute risk
aversion, and thus that the risk premium RP does not depend on residual income.79 In this
case, marginal willingness to pay for contract x relative to the null contract is given by:

                   W T P (x, ) = EV (x, ) - EV (x0 , ) + RP (x0 , ) - RP (x, )
                                 = El [ c                 
                                         x0 (l, , x0 ) - cx (l, , x0 ) + v (l, , x) ] + (x,  ),


where (x, ) = RP (x0 , ) - RP (x, ). If the null contract provides a riskier distribution of
payoffs than contract x, (x, ) will be positive.


A.2         Definitions and Proofs

Assumptions. Consider the model in Section II.A. Suppose contracts x  X are characterized
by increasing, continuous, and concave out-of-pocket cost functions cx : R+  R+ , where
cx (m)  m  m and which are differentiable almost everywhere with cx  [0, 1], where cx
denotes the derivative wherever it exists. Suppose consumers have type  = (F, ,  ) 
c (R) × R++ × R++ =: .80 Given health state realization l  R, contract premium p,
                   ^, suppose consumers value healthcare spending m  R+ according to
and initial income y
                                                                            1
   y - p + b(m; l,  ) - cx (m)), where b(m; l,  ) = (m - l) -
u (^                                                                       2
                                                                              (m   - l)2 and where u (x) =
- exp(-x).


79
                     ^ - p cancels out completely. This assumption is most reasonable when marginal premiums
     In equation 11, y
     between relevant plans are small relative to initial income.
80
     c (R) denotes the the set of continuous probability measures on the Borel  -algebra of R.

                                                       51
  Under these assumptions, social surplus is given by SS (x, ) = (x, ) - SCM H (x, ), where

           (x, ) = RP (x0 , ) - RP (x, )

                            where RP (x, ) =  -1 log           E    exp -  (zx (l, ) - z
                                                                                       ¯x ())       ,
                                                               lF
                                                       2
       SCM H (x,  )   = E    
                             2
                                 1 - cx (m (l, , x))       ,
                       lF


                     ^ - p + b(m (l, , x); l,  ) - cx (m (l, , x)) and z
and where zx (l, ) = y                                                 ¯x () = E lF [zx (l, )].
Appendix C.2 solves for privately optimal spending m (l, , x) = argmaxm (b(m; l,  ) - cx (m))
when contracts are piecewise linear with a deductible, coinsurance rate, and out-of-pocket
maximum. As m never falls on a kink, cx (m ) always exists. The indirect benefit from
privately optimal spending is given by b(m (l, , x); l,  ) =        
                                                                    2
                                                                        (1 - cx (m (l, , x))2 ). Willingness
                                 ¯x () - z
to pay is given by W T P (x, ) = z       ¯x0 () + (x, ).

Definitions. We say that a given contract is "higher coverage" than another if it provides
both a higher certainty equivalent payoff W T P (x, ) as well as greater risk protection (x, ).
This notion of coverage level is slightly stronger that what is implied by vertical differentiation
alone. We use it because it allows our model to have the following desirable properties:

                (i) the value of risk protection is increasing in coverage level;
               (ii) the social cost of moral hazard is increasing in coverage level;
               (iii) efficient coverage level is increasing in risk aversion;
               (iv) efficient coverage level is decreasing in the moral hazard parameter.

Definitions 1 and 2 formalize the distinction between vertical differentiation and coverage level
ordering. Propositions 1 and 2 provide the conditions on contracts that yield each ordering.
Briefly, vertical differentiation requires only a relation on contracts' level of out-of-pocket costs,
while coverage level ordering (as defined) also requires a relation on contracts' marginal out-
of-pocket costs. A higher-coverage contract must have an out-of-pocket cost function that is
everywhere below and everywhere flatter than a lower-coverage contract.

Implications. The most important reason we use this notion of coverage level is that it allows
extrapolation of social surplus across coverage levels. Namely, it implies that social surplus is
single peaked in coverage level. Proposition 3 states this formally. Single-peakedness allows
one to infer, for example, that if a given contract is less-than-socially-optimal coverage for all
households, the same would be true of any lower level of coverage.

  Proofs are provided below. Of the four stated properties of the model, property (i) is true

                                                   52
by definition, property (ii) is established in the proof of Proposition 3, and properties (iii) and
(iv) are proved in Lemmas 2 and 3, respectively.

Definition 1. Contracts x , x  X are vertically differentiated (with x preferred) if and only
if W T P (x , )  W T P (x, )    .

Definition 2. Given x , x  X , contract x is higher coverage than contract x if and only if
W T P (x , )  W T P (x, )     and (x , )  (x, )    . We denote this relationship
by writing x  x.

Proposition 1. Contracts x , x  X are vertically differentiated (with x preferred) if and only
if cx (m)  cx (m)  m.

Proposition 2. Given x , x  X , contract x is higher coverage than contract x if and only if
cx (m)  cx (m)  m and cx (m)  cx (m) almost everywhere.

Proposition 3. Social surplus is single peaked in coverage level. That is, fixing    and
x, x , x  X where x  x  x : if SS (x , )  SS (x , ), then SS (x , )  SS (x, ).

Proof of Proposition 1: Contracts x , x  X are vertically differentiated (with x preferred) if
and only if cx (m)  cx (m)  m.

  Fix   . Let Zx =: zx (l, ) be the random payoff induced by health state distribution F .
At any health state l, lower out-of-pocket costs deliver higher payoffs:
                        ^ - p + b(m (l, , x); l,  ) - cx (m (l, , x))
        Zx = zx (l, ) = y
                      ^ - p + b(m (l, , x); l,  ) - cx (m (l, , x))
                      y
                      ^ - p + b(m (l, , x ); l,  ) - cx (m (l, , x )) = zx (l, ) = Zx ,
                      y

where the second inequality holds by the optimality of m (l, , x ). [] Zx therefore first-
order stochastically dominates Zx , and the result follows because u is increasing. [] If
cx (m
    ~ ) > c x (m
               ~ ) for some m~ , the first inequality fails to hold for consumer type  ~ at health
state realization ~l at which m (~ l, ~ , x) = m
                                               ~ . Such a consumer type exists for any m
                                                                                       ~ we might
choose because as  approaches zero, privately optimal utilization approaches the health state,
meaning any m can be approached arbitrarily closely. As cx is continuous, if cx (m
                                                                                 ~ ) > c x (m
                                                                                            ~ ),
the same will be true in a neighborhood of m
                                           ~ . A consumer with health state distribution F    ~
degenerate on ~l would strictly prefer contract x. By continuity, a consumer with a health state
distribution that is sufficiently concentrated at ~
                                                  l would also prefer contract x.



                                                53
Proof of Proposition 2: Contract x is higher coverage than contract x if and only if cx (m) 
cx (m)  m and cx (m)  cx (m) almost everywhere.

     By Proposition 1, cx (m)  cx (m)  m is necessary and sufficient for the contracts to be ver-
tically differentiated. It remains to show that cx (m)  cx (m) almost everywhere is necessary
and sufficient for (x , )  (x, ). Fix   . Let Z         x =: zx (l, ) - z
                                                                        ¯x () be the mean-zero
random payoff induced by health state distribution F . Differentiating Z   x with respect to the
health state realization l:
                                      dZx  b
                                          = (m (l, , x); l,  )
                                       dl  l
                                           b                     dZx
                                           (m (l, , x ); l,  ) =
                                           l                      dl
                                           0.
That is, the payoff is weakly decreasing in the health state, and is doing so faster for contract x
                                                                                                   2b
than for contract x . The first equality holds by the envelope theorem. Because                    lm
                                                                                                         =  -1 
0, the first inequality holds as long as m (l, , x) is increasing in x. The second inequality
holds because        b
                     l
                         =  -1 (m (l, , x) - l) - 1  0, or in other words, because moral hazard
spending never exceeds  .81 [] Lemma 1 shows that m (l, , x) is increasing in x as long as
c (m)  cx (m). Z  x is therefore a mean preserving spread of Z
                                                              x , and would be preferred by
 x
                                                      x )]  E lF [u (Z
any risk-averse expected utility maximizer: E lF [u (Z                x )]. The result follows
because - -1 log(-x) is increasing. [] If cx (m  ~ ) > cx (m~ ) for some m~ , the first inequality
fails to hold for consumer type ~ at health state realization ~l at which m (~ l, ~ , x) = m
                                                                                           ~ . Such
a consumer type exists for any m
                               ~ we might choose because as  approaches zero, privately
optimal utilization approaches the health state, meaning any m can be approached arbitrarily
closely. As cx is continuous, if cx (m
                                     ~ ) > cx (m
                                               ~ ), the same will be true in a neighborhood of m
                                                                                               ~.
At ~
   l, the payoff would therefore be decreasing faster in the health state under contract x than
under contract x, and x would provide strictly more risk protection to a consumer with health
                   ~ sufficiently concentrated around ~
state distribution F                                  l.


Proof of Proposition 3. Social surplus is single peaked in coverage level. That is, fixing   
and x, x , x  X where x  x  x : if SS (x , )  SS (x , ), then SS (x , )  SS (x, ).

         ~x (l) = cx (m (l, , x)) be the indirect out-of-pocket cost function for consumer type
     Let c

81
     Note that this statement would not be true under the "multiplicative" specification of preferences proposed
     by Einav et al. (2013) and used in Ho and Lee (2021). In that case, b    l becomes positive at a certain health
     state level, and the payoff zx (l, ) begins increasing in the health state. The conditions given in Proposition
     2 would therefore not be sufficient to guarantee coverage level ordering in that context.

                                                          54
 under contract x.82 As  is fixed throughout the proof, we omit  as an argument in
c                      ~x (l) = cx (m (l, , x)) be the indirect marginal out-of-pocket cost function.
~x (l). Similarly, let c
Note that because m (l, , x) is increasing in x (see Lemma 1) and contracts are concave,
~x (l)  c
c       ~x (l)  c
                ~x (l) wherever these derivatives exist.

     Next, for each contract x  {x, x , x }, calculate the cutoff values of the health state l that
determine which segment of the piecewise linear out-of-pocket cost function the consumer of
type  will choose. Appendix C.2 describes this procedure and provides formulas for the cutoffs.
As the contracts we consider have at most three segments, each contract has at most three
cutoffs: one at which positive healthcare utilization begins and two separating the segments of
the out-of-pocket cost function.83 Considering the three cutoff values of our three candidate
contracts simultaneously, the space of health states (the real line) is divided into at most 10
regions. Denote these regions by {Rr }10                 lb ub         ub   lb
                                      r=1 , where Rr = (lr , lr ) and lr = lr+1 .
                                                                                  84
                                                                                     The lower
bound of the first region is - and the upper bound of the final region is . For each contract
x in each region Rr , out-of-pocket costs are linear in the health state, and so can be written
c
~x,r (l) = x,r + l c
                   ~x,r , with intercept x,r and slope c
                                                       ~x,r . As before, higher coverage contracts are
flatter: cx    ,r    cx ,r  cx,r  r.

     Extend this notation to the consumer's payoff zx (l, ). Omitting , the payoff in region r
under contract x can now be written:
                                      ^ - px + 
                             zx (l) = y        2
                                                      ~x (l)2 ) - c
                                                 (1 - c           ~x (l)
                                                     2
                                    ^ - px + 
                                   =y        2
                                              (1 - c
                                                   ~x,r ) - x,r - c
                                                                  ~x,r l, l  Rr .
The payoff is linear in the health state with slope and intercept determined by the relevant
segment of the indirect out-of-pocket cost function. To isolate the effects of level from the
effects of slope, it is useful to express the payoff in terms of differences from its mean in a given
region. To this end, write:
                                                       ~x,r (l - ¯
                                                ¯x,r - c
                                       zx (l) = z                lr ), l  Rr

where ¯lr = E l|Rr [ l ] is the conditional expectation of the health state in region r with respect
to the consumer's health state distribution F , and z    ¯x,r = zx (¯
                                                                    lr ) is the conditional expectation
of the payoff. Note that because higher coverage contracts deliver everywhere higher payoffs
(see proof of Proposition 1): z
                              ¯x         ,r   z
                                              ¯x ,r  z
                                                     ¯x,r  r. Each contract is now fully characterized
by the payoff function it generates, which in turn is fully described by its mean and slope in

82
     The line labelled c in Figure A.2 represents the function c
                                                               ~x (l) in that example.
83
     The proof extends trivially to piece-wise linear out-of-pocket functions with a different number of segments.
84
     As we have assumed F is continuously distributed, there is zero mass on region boundaries.

                                                         55
each region: {z      ~x,r }10
              ¯x,r , c     r=1 . Higher coverage contracts generate both higher and flatter payoffs
in every region. Expressing the payoff function in this way allows us think about changing a
contract's slope while holding its expected payoff fixed, and vice versa.

     We now proceed in two steps. We first show that the social cost of moral hazard SCM H (x, ) is
increasing and "convex" in coverage level. As coverage level itself has no cardinal interpretation,
the idea of convexity is applicable with respect to the slope of contracts' indirect out-of-pocket
               ~x,r . We then show that the value of risk protection (x, ) is increasing and
cost functions c
"concave" in coverage level, where the idea of concavity is again applicable with respect to c
                                                                                             ~x,r .
Note that the tradeoff between risk protection and moral hazard operates entirely through
the slope of the out-of-pocket cost function. The level of out-of-pocket costs impacts only the
value of risk protection, and does so monotonically. As SS (x, ) = (x, ) - SCM H (x, ), these
two steps imply SS (x, ) is itself concave in the slope of the out-of-pocket function. Single-
peakedness in coverage level follows from the fact that this slope is monotonic in coverage
level.

1.   SCM H (x,  )   is increasing and "convex" in coverage level.

     First, split the expectation between the defined regions, omitting  as an argument:

                                   SCM H (x)   = E      
                                                        2
                                                          (1    ~x (l))2
                                                               -c
                                                   lF
                                                     10    
                                               =     r=1 r 2 (1     ~x,r )2 ,
                                                                   -c

where r = P r(l  Rr | l  F ) is the probability of realizing a health state in region Rr . Taking
the derivative with respect to the slope of the indirect out-of-pocket cost function in a given
region:
                                    dSCM H (x)
                                               = -r  (1 - c
                                                          ~x,r )  0.
                                      dc
                                       ~x,r

As    SCM H (x)   is decreasing in c
                                   ~x,r in any region, it is increasing in coverage level. Taking the
second derivative:

                                         d 2 SCM H (x)
                                                       = r   0.
                                              ~x,r 2
                                             dc

The social cost of moral hazard is therefore increasing in the slope of the indirect out-of-pocket
cost function c
              ~x,r at an increasing rate. It is unaffected by changes in z
                                                                         ¯x,r .

2. (x, ) is increasing and "concave" in coverage level.


                                                        56
  First, split the expectation between the defined regions, omitting  as an argument:

                (x) = RP (x0 ) -  -1 log E l exp -  (zx (l) - z
                                                              ¯x )
                                                 10
                       = RP (x0 ) -  -1 log      r=1 r E l|Rr       exp -  (zx (l) - z
                                                                                     ¯x )     ,

where r = P r(l  Rr | l  F ) is the probability of realizing a health state in region Rr . Taking
the derivative with respect to the slope of the indirect out-of-pocket cost function in a given
region:
                d(x)                             -1
                       = E l [exp(-zx (l))]           r E l|Rr [exp(-zx (l))(¯
                                                                             lr - l)]  0.
                 dc
                  ~x,r
Because the function exp(-x) is convex and the payoffs zx (l) are decreasing in the health
state, worse-than-average health states (l  ¯
                                            lr ) receive more weight than better-than-average
health states (l  ¯
                  lr ), and the expression is nonpositive. Taking the second derivative:
                                                           2
  d 2 (x)            r E l|Rr [exp(-zx (l))(¯lr - l)]              r E l|Rr [exp(-zx (l))(¯
                                                                                          lr - l)2 ]
            =                                                  -                                        0.
   dc~x,r 2                 E l [exp(-zx (l))]                            E l [exp(-zx (l))]

The first term is the squared conditional expectation of (¯ lr - l). The second term is the
conditional expectation of (¯
                            lr - l)2 . Because x2 is convex, the expression is nonpositive by
Jensen's inequality.

Lemma 1. Healthcare utilization is increasing in coverage level.

Proof. Fix l  R,   R++ , and x, x  X where x  x . Optimal utilization m (l, , x) =
argmaxm (b(m; l,  ) - cx (m)). Consider m, m  R+ where m  m :

    b(m ; l,  ) - cx (m ) - [b(m ; l,  ) - cx (m )] = cx (m ) - cx (m )
                                                        cx (m) - cx (m)
                                                       = b(m; l,  ) - cx (m) - [b(m; l,  ) - cx (m)] ,

where the inequality holds because cx (m)  cx (m) and cx (m)  cx (m) guarantees c is sub-
modular in m and x. The objective b(m; l,  ) - cx (m) is therefore supermodular and standard
monotone comparative statics imply m (l, , x) is increasing in x.

Lemma 2. Efficient coverage level is increasing in risk aversion.

Proof. Fix   . Efficient coverage level xef f = argmaxx (RP (x0 , F, ,  ) - RP (x, F, ,  ) -
SCM H (x, F,  )).   As the insurer is risk-neutral, the social cost of moral hazard is unaffected by

                                                      57
 . Differentiating RP (x, F, ,  ) with respect to  :

           dRP (x, )                               x )])-1 E [exp(- Z
                                                                     x )Z
                                                                         x] ,
                     = - -1 RP (x, ) + ( E [exp(- Z
             d                          l  F               lF


       x =: zx (l, ) - z
where Z                ¯x (). The first term in the brackets, RP (x, ), is shown to be decreasing
in x in Proposition 2. The second term represents a weighted average of deviations from mean
                                                                                     x becomes
payoffs, where the weights correspond to the utility weight at that realization. As Z
                                                                                              dSS (x,)
less risky as x increases (see proof of Proposition 2), this term is also decreasing in x.      d
                                                                                                         is
therefore increasing in x, and standard monotone comparative statics imply xef f is increasing
in  .

Lemma 3. Efficient coverage level is decreasing in the moral hazard parameter.

Proof. Fix   . Efficient coverage level xef f = argmaxx ((x, ) - SCM H (x, )), where
SCM H (x,  )   = E lF [ 2
                          (1 - cx (m (l, , x)))2 ]. Differentiating   SCM H (x,  )   with respect to  :

                           dSCM H (x, )      1
                                        = E [2 (1 - cx (m (l, , x)))2 ]  0.
                               d          lF


Note that contracts are piecewise linear and cx  [0, 1]. Because m (l, , x) is increasing in
                                                                                             dSCM H (x,)
x (see Lemma 1) and contracts are concave, cx (m (l, , x)) is decreasing in x and               d
                       dSS (x,)
is increasing in x.      d
                                  is therefore decreasing in x, and standard monotone comparative
statics imply xef f is decreasing in  .



Appendix B                  Additional Analysis

B.1     Estimation of Plan Cost-sharing Features

A crucial input to our empirical model is the cost-sharing function of each plan. While Table
1 describes plans using the deductible and in-network out-of-pocket maximum, plans are in
reality characterized by a much more complex set of payment rules, including copayments,
specialist visit coinsurance, out-of-network fees, and fixed charges for emergency room visits.
To structurally model moral hazard, we make the huge simplification that healthcare is a
homogenous good over which the consumer chooses only the quantity to consume. We then
model this decision as being based in part on out-of-pocket cost. To that end, our empirical


                                                   58
model requires as an input a univariate function that maps total healthcare spending into
out-of-pocket cost.

     A natural choice might be to use the deductible, nonspecialist coinsurance rate, and in-
network out-of-pocket maximum. However, in our setting, the out-of-pocket cost function
described by these features does not correspond well to what we observe in the claims data.
In particular, we often observe out-of-pocket spending amounts that exceed plans' in-network
out-of-pocket maximum. Because of this, we take a different approach.

     We define plan cost-sharing functions by three parameters: a deductible, a coinsurance rate,
and an out-of-pocket maximum. Taking the true deductibles as given (since these correspond
well to the data), we estimate a coinsurance rate and an out-of-pocket maximum that minimizes
the sum of squared residuals between predicted and observed out-of-pocket cost. We observe
realized total healthcare spending for each household in the claims data. Predicted out-of-
pocket cost is calculated by applying the deductible and supposed coinsurance rate and out-
of-pocket maximum. "Observed" out-of-pocket cost is either observed directly in the claims
data (if a household chose that plan) or else calculated counterfactually.85 We carry out this
procedure separately for each plan, year, and family status (individual or family).86 Figure
A.1 shows an example of the data and estimates for a particular plan: Moda - 3 for individual
households in 2012. Table A.3 presents the estimated cost-sharing features for all plans in all
years.


B.2         Variation in Plan Menu Generosity

Measuring Plan Menu Generosity. We want to measure the likelihood that a household
would choose generous health insurance coverage when presented with a particular plan menu.
We refer to this measure as "plan menu generosity." At a simple level, if plan menus consisted
of only a single plan, the assignment to higher coverage would obviously constitute a "more
generous menu" than the assignment to lower coverage. Similarly, if plan choice sets were
all the same and only employee premiums varied, lower premiums would clearly correspond
to a more generous menu. However, in our setting, plan menus are more complex. They
contain multiple plans and many possible permutations of plan choice sets, and plans vary

85
     We calculate counterfactual out-of-pocket spending using the "claims calculator" developed for this setting
     by Abaluck and Gruber (2016).
86
     So that the cost-sharing estimates are not affected by large outliers, we drop observations where out-of-pocket
     spending was above $20,000 or total healthcare spending was above $100,000.

                                                          59
by their actuarial value, the identity of their insurer, their associated employee premium, and
their potential HSA/HRA and vision/dental contribution. All of these factors likely influence
households' plan choices.

     In order to construct usable measures of plan menu generosity, we transform these multi-
dimensional objects using a conditional logit model that excludes all household observables.
This specification allows us to predict the probability that a given household would choose a
given plan when presented with a given plan menu as if the household had been acting like
the average household in the data. Variation in the resulting predicted choice probabilities
is driven only by variation in plan menus, and not by variation in (observed or unobserved)
household characteristics.

     Abstracting from the dimension of time for now, we define planjk as an indicator for the
plan j chosen by household k . We estimate the following conditional logit model:

                       planjk = argmax(pjd + V D pV D
                                                  jd + 
                                                        HA HA
                                                          pjd + j +                 jk ),             (12)
                                         j Jd


where Jd is the set of plans available in the school district-family type-occupation type combi-
nation d (to which household k belongs), pjd is the employee premium, pV D
                                                                       jd is the vision/dental
subsidy, and pHA
              jd is the HSA/HRA contribution. Plan characteristics are captured nonpara-
metrically by plan fixed effects j . All household-specific determinants of plan choice are
contained in the error term             jk .   Estimated parameters are presented in Table A.6, separately
for each year of our data. As expected, households dislike premiums, prefer higher HSA/HRA
and vision/dental subsidies, and prefer higher-coverage plans to lower-coverage plans.

     We use the choice probabilities implied by equation 12 to construct our measures of plan
menu generosity. Given plan menu menud  {pjd , pV D HA
                                                jd , pjd , j }j Jd , we denote the predicted
probability that plan j is chosen as jd .87 Our measures of plan menu generosity are the
probability a household would choose a given insurer and the expected actuarial value of a
household's plan choice conditional on insurer, respectively given by:

                                                    f d =          jd ,
                                                               f
                                                            j Jd
                                                                       jd
                                                 AV f d =          (       )AVj ,                     (13)
                                                               f
                                                                       f d
                                                            j Jd


where Jdf is the set of plans in menud offered by insurer f .
87                     exp(Ujd )
     Formally: jd =       exp(Ugd ) ,   where Ujd = pjd + V D pV D
                                                               jd + 
                                                                     HA HA
                                                                       pjd +  j .
                      g Jd




                                                             60
Explaining Plan Menu Generosity. Because the majority of the variation in coverage level
lies within Moda, we focus on explaining plan menu generosity using the predicted actuarial
value among Moda plans. We first compare plan menu generosity to observed household
health (see Table A.4). We can in all years reject the hypothesis that household risk scores
are correlated with plan menu generosity, conditional on family structure. We also find that
plan menus are consistently most generous for single employee coverage and least generous for
employee plus family coverage. This pattern is consistent with our understanding of OEBB's
benefit structure, and is common in employer-sponsored health insurance.

     We further explore which covariates, in addition to family structure, can explain variation
in plan menu generosity. Table A.5 presents three additional regressions of predicted actuarial
value on employee-level covariates (part-time versus full-time status, occupation type, and
union affiliation), as well as on school district-level covariates (home price index and percent of
Republicans). Employees are either part-time or full-time. There are eight mutually exclusive
employee occupation types; the regressions omit the type "Licensed Administrator."88 There
are five mutually exclusive union affiliations, and employees may not be affiliated with a union;
the regressions omit the non-union category. We calculate the average home price index (HP I )
in a school district by taking the average zip-code level home price index across employees'
zip-code of residence.89 P ct. Republican measures the percent of households in a school district
that are registered as Republicans as of 2016.90

     We find that plan menus are less generous for part-time employees, are substantially less
generous for substitute teachers, and are more generous for employees at community colleges.
Certain union affiliations are also predictive of more or less generous plan menus. Across
school districts, plan menu generosity is decreasing in both the logged home price index and
the percent of registered Republicans.




88
     "Licensed" refers to the possession of a teaching license.
89
     We use 5-digit zip-code-level home price indices from Bogin, Doerner and Larson (2019). The data and paper
     are accessible at http://www.fhfa.gov/papers/wp1601.aspx.
90
     Data on percent of registered voters by party is available at the county level; we construct school-district-level
     measures by taking the average over employees' county of residence. Voter registration data in Oregon can
     be downloaded at https://data.oregon.gov/api/views/6a4f-ecbi.

                                                           61
B.3         Reduced-form Estimates of Moral Hazard

While our primary sample consists of data from 2009­2013, we conduct our reduced-form
analysis of moral hazard using only data from 2008.91 The OEBB marketplace began operating
in 2008, so that year all employees chose from this set of plans for the first time. This "active
choice" year permits us to look cleanly at how plan choices and healthcare spending depended
on plan menus without also having to account for how prior-year plan menus affected current-
year plan choices. While our structural model will capture these dynamics, we feel they are
better avoided at this stage.

     We estimate how plan menus--choice sets and prices--affect plan choices, and in turn how
plan choices affect total healthcare spending, as described by equations (14) and (15):

                                           plank = f (menud , Xk , k ),                                        (14)
                                               yk = g (plank , Xk , k ).                                       (15)

Here, plank represents the plan chosen by household k , menud represents the plan menu avail-
able to the school district-family type-occupation type combination d (to which household k
belongs), Xk are observable household characteristics, k are unobservable household charac-
teristics, and yk is total healthcare spending. Because household characteristics appear in both
equations, the standard challenge in estimating the effect of plank on yk is that a household's
chosen plan is correlated with its unobservable characteristics k . Our identifying assumption
is that plan menus are independent of household unobservables k conditional on household
observables Xk .

     We parameterize plank to be an indicator variable for the identity of the insurer and a
continuous variable for the plan actuarial value. We then parameterize equation 15 according
to
                      log(yk ) = f 1f (k)=f +  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda +  Xk + k ,                       (16)

where 1f (k)=f is an indicator for the insurer chosen by household k and AVj (k) is the actuarial
value of the plan chosen by household k . The parameter f represents insurer-specific treatment
effects on total spending.92 Our parameter of interest is  , which represents the responsiveness

91
     The cost-sharing features of 2008 plans are presented in Table A.2; they are very similar to the plans offered
     in 2009. We apply the same sample construction criteria to our 2008 sample, except that households must
     be present for one prior year.
92
     These may arise due to "supply side" effects arising from differences in provider prices, provider networks, or
     care management practices, or due to "demand side" effects from differences in average plan generosity.

                                                          62
of total spending to plan generosity, holding the insurer fixed (at Moda).93 We follow the liter-
ature in formulating the model so that  represents the elasticity of total healthcare spending
with respect to the average out-of-pocket price per dollar of total spending.94

     We estimate equation 16 using two-stage least squares, instrumenting for the chosen insurer
(1f (k)=f ) and actuarial value (AVj (k) ) using menud . As instruments, we use the measures of
plan menu generosity constructed in Appendix B.2. Namely, we instrument for 1f (k)=f using
using f d and for log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda using log(1 - AV d,M oda )d,M oda . Table A.7 reports
the estimates. We report only the coefficient of interest ( ), but all specifications also contain
insurer fixed effects, as well as controls for household risk score and family structure. The
first column presents the parameters estimated without instruments, and the second column
presents the instrumental variables estimates. Comparing the coefficients in columns 1 and
2, we find that moral hazard explains 46 percent of the observed relationship between plan
generosity and total healthcare spending. Our overall estimate of the elasticity of demand for
healthcare spending in the population is -0.27. The standard benchmark estimate from the
RAND health insurance experiment is -0.2 (Manning et al., 1987; Newhouse, 1993).

Heterogeneity. Columns 3 and 4 of Table A.7 introduce heterogeneity in  by household
health. For each household type (individual or family), we classify households into quartiles
based on household risk score, where Qn denotes the quartile of risk (Q4 is highest risk).
We construct separate instruments for each of the eight household types by estimating the
logit model in equation 12 for only that subsample of households.95 We find noisy but large
differences in  across household risk quartiles and between individual and family households.

     Variation in  could reflect either heterogeneity in the intensity of treatment (extent of
exposure to varying marginal prices of healthcare across plans), or heterogeneity in treatment
effect (different responsiveness to varying marginal prices of healthcare across plans), or both.
While this analysis cannot distinguish between these two effects, we find suggestive evidence
that the heterogeneity at least in part reflects differential treatment intensity. The remainder of
this section presents an analysis that compares the realized spending outcomes of households
in different risk quartiles with the variation in plan cost-sharing features that gives rise to
different end-of-year marginal out-of-pocket prices. We find that the household types for which
we estimate higher  are also more likely to be exposed to varying marginal out-of-pocket

93
     We do not try to estimate a moral hazard elasticity among the plans offered by Kaiser and Providence because
     there is so little variation in coverage level.
94
     To accommodate the fact that 2 percent of households have zero spending, we add 1 to total spending.
95
     Estimates for each subsample are presented in Table A.8.

                                                        63
costs. Distinguishing variation in treatment intensity from variation in treatment effect is an
important advantage of our structural model.

Variation in Treatment Intensity. We explore the extent to which heterogeneity in moral
hazard can be explained by variation in the intensity of treatment. Assignment to a lower
or higher coverage plan could affect total spending by exposing consumers to lower or higher
out-of-pocket costs. However, if a consumer is so healthy that they would almost always be
consuming healthcare at levels below the deductible of both plans, there is in fact no variation in
coverage level for that consumer. The same could be true of very sick households that, knowing
they will always spend the out-of-pocket maximum, face the same marginal out-of-pocket cost
in both plans.

  Table A.9 compares the realized spending outcomes of households in different risk quartiles
with the variation in plan cost-sharing features that gives rise to different marginal out-of-
pocket prices. The top panel of Table A.9 shows the observed distributions of total spending
for the four quartiles of risk for individual and family households. The bottom panel shows
the (in-network) deductible and out-of-pocket maximum for each of the Moda plans in 2008.
It shows, for example, that individual households in the first health quartile have the majority
of the density of their spending distribution around or below the deductibles, while individual
households in the third and fourth quartiles have the majority of their spending around or
above the out-of-pocket maximums.

  The patterns of heterogeneity in our estimates of moral hazard in Table A.7 correspond
well to the likely variation in marginal out-of-pocket prices facing each type of household. For
example, we estimate the largest amount of moral hazard for the second quartile of individual
households, whose spending distribution most closely spans the range over which there would
be marginal out-of-pocket price variation across plans. Likewise for family households, those in
the fourth quartile are nearly all above their out-of-pocket maximum, and we do not estimate
any moral hazard within this group. While this exercise is merely suggestive, it points to
the fact that an important dimension of heterogeneity is the extent to which households are
exposed to differential out-of-pocket spending across nonlinear insurance contracts.




                                                64
Appendix C                   Estimation Details

C.1        Fenton-Wilkinson Approximation

Because there is no closed-form solution for the distribution of the sum of lognormal random
variables, the Fenton-Wilkinson approximation is widely used in practice.96 Under this approx-
imation, the distribution of the sum of draws from independent lognormal distributions can
be represented by a lognormal distribution. The parameters of the approximating distribution
are chosen such that its first and second moments match the corresponding moments of the
true distribution of the sum of lognormals. In our application, the sum of lognormals is the
household's health state distribution, and the lognormals being summed are the individuals'
health state distributions. An individual's health state ~
                                                         li is assumed have a shifted lognormal
distribution:
                                         log(~
                                             li + i )  N (µi , i
                                                               2
                                                                 ).

All parameters may vary over time (since individual demographics vary over time), but t sub-
scripts are omitted here for simplicity. The moment-matching conditions for the distribution
of the household-level health state ~
                                    l are:

                                       E (~
                                          l + k ) =          E (~
                                                                li + i ),                  (17)
                                                       iIk

                                     V ar(~
                                          l + k ) =          V ar(~
                                                                  li + i ),                (18)
                                                       iIk

                                             E (~
                                                l) =         E (~
                                                                li ),                      (19)
                                                       iIk

where Ik is the set of individuals in household k . Equation 17 sets the mean of the household's
distribution equal to the sum of the means of each individual's distribution. Equation 18
matches the variance. Because we have a third parameter to estimate (the shift, k ), we use
a third moment-matching condition to match the first moment of the unshifted distribution,
shown in equation 19.

     Under the approximating assumption that ~
                                             l + k is distributed lognormally, and substituting
the analytical expressions for the mean and variable of a lognormal distribution, these equa-
tions become:



96
     See Fenton (1960), and for a summary, Cobb, Rum´
                                                    i and Salmer´
                                                                on (2012).

                                                       65
                                                 2
                                                k                2
                                    exp(µk +       )=    exp(µi + i )
                                                2     iI
                                                                  2
                                                               k

                      2                         2                       2
                  exp(k )   - 1 exp(2µk +       k )   =             exp(i ) - 1 exp(2µi +  2 )
                                                          iIk
                                          2                                    2
                                          k                                   i
                               exp(µk +       ) - k =              exp(µi +      ) - i
                                          2               iIk
                                                                              2

Given a guess of the parameters to be estimated (the individual-level parameters), this leaves
three equations in three unknowns, and we can solve for the household-level parameters. The
                   2
solutions for µk , k , and k are:
                                                          -2
                                               2
              2
              k   = log[1 +            exp(µi + i )                       2
                                                                     (exp(i                  2
                                                                            ) - 1) exp(2µi + i )]
                                 iIk
                                                2              iIk
                       2                            2
                       k                            i
              µk = -       + log[        exp(µi +         )]
                       2           iIk
                                                      2

              k =          i
                    iIk

Given these algebraic solutions for the parameters of a household's health state distribution,
we can work backward to estimate which individual-level parameters best explain the observed
data on individual-level demographics and household-level healthcare spending. A key advan-
tage of using this approximation instead of simply simulating the true distribution of the sum
of lognormals is that we can use quadrature to integrate the distributions of health states,
thereby limiting the number of support points needed for numerical integration.


C.2     Estimation Algorithm

We estimate the model using a maximum likelihood approach similar to that described by Rev-
elt and Train (1998) and Train (2009), with the appropriate extension to a discrete/continuous
choice model in the style of Dubin and McFadden (1984). The maximum likelihood estimator
selects the parameter values that maximize the conditional probability density of households'
observed total healthcare spending, given their plan choices.

  The model contains four dimensions of unobservable heterogeneity: risk aversion, household
health, the moral hazard parameter, and the T1-EV idiosyncratic shock. The last we can
integrate analytically, but the first three we must integrate numerically; we denote these as


                                                          66
kt = {k , µkt , k }. We denote the full set of parameters to be estimated as , which, among
other things, contains the parameters of the distribution of kt . Given a guess of , we simulate
the distribution of kt using Gaussian quadrature with 27 support points, yielding simulated
points kts () = {ks , µkts , ks }, as well as weights Ws .97 , 98 For each simulation draw s, we
then calculate the conditional density at households' observed total healthcare spending and
the probability of households' observed plan choices.

Conditional Probability Density of Healthcare Spending. We have data on realized
healthcare spending mkt for each household and year. We aim to construct the distribution of
healthcare spending for each household-year implied by the model and guess of parameters. We
start by constructing individual-level health state distribution parameters µit , it , and it from
 and individual demographics, as described in equation 7. We then construct household-level
health state distribution parameters µkts , kt , and kt using the formulas in equation 8 and
the draws of kts (). The model predicts that upon realizing their health state l, households
choose total healthcare spending m by trading off the benefit of healthcare utilization with its
out-of-pocket cost. Specifically, accounting for the fact that negative health states may imply
zero spending, the model predicts optimal healthcare spending mjt (l, ks ) = max(0 , ks (1 -
cjt (m )) + l) if household k were enrolled in plan j in year t. Inverting the expression, the
health state realization lkjts that would have given rise to observed spending mkt under moral
hazard parameter ks is given by
                                      
                                      lkjts < 0                            mkt = 0
                            lkjts   :
                                       kjts = mkt - ks (1 - cjt (mkt ))
                                      l                                    mkt > 0.

Household health state is distributed according to

                                                      l = f ~
                                                            l
                                           log(~                   2
                                               l + kt )  N (µkts , kt ).

There are two possibilities to consider. First, if mkt is equal to zero, the implied health state
realization lkjts is negative. Given monetary health state realization lkjts , the implied "quan-
tity" health state realization is equal to ~
                                           lkjts = - 1
                                                   f lkjts , where f is the insurer offering plan j .


97
     Note that the mean vector of kts is a fixed function of  and household demographics.
98
     We use the Matlab program qnwnorm to implement this method, with three points in each dimension of
     unobserved heterogeneity. The program can be obtained as part of Mario Miranda and Paul Fackler's
     CompEcon Toolbox; for more information, see Miranda and Fackler (2002).

                                                        67
Since f > 0, the probability of observing lkjts < 0 is the probability of observing ~
                                                                                    lkjts  kt .
Second, if mkt is greater than zero, it is useful to define kjts = - 1
                                                                   f lkjts + kt , which itself is
distributed lognormally (no shift). The density of mkt in this case is given by the density of
kjts . Taken together, the probability density of total healthcare spending m conditional on
plan, parameters, and household observables Xkt is given by fm (mkt |cjt , kts , , Xkt ) = P (m =
mkt |cjt , kts , , Xkt ), where
                                                      
                                                            log(kt )-µkt
                                                                kt
                                                                                  mkt = 0,
                      fm (mkt |cjt , ks , , Xkt ) =
                                                      -1         log(kjts )-µkt
                                                       f              kt
                                                                                  mkt > 0,

and (·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. For a given guess of pa-
rameters, there are certain values of mkt for which the probability density is zero. In order
to rationalize the data at all possible parameter guesses, in practice we use a convolution of
fm (mkt |cjt , ks , , Xkt ) and a uniform distribution over the range [-1e-75, 1e75].99

Probability of Plan Choices. We next calculate the probability of a household's observed
plan choice. Given  and kts , we simulate the distribution of health states lkjtsd using D = 30
support points:
                                   lkjtsd = f exp(µkts + kt Zd ) - kt ,

where Zd is a vector of points that approximates a standard normal distribution using Gaussian
quadrature, and Wd (to be used soon) are the associated weights. We then calculate the
privately optimal healthcare spending choice mkjtsd associated with each potential health state
realization.

     Plans in our empirical setting are characterized by a deductible D, a coinsurance rate C , and
an out-of-pocket maximum O. Marginal out-of-pocket costs c (m) equal 1 in the deductible
region, c in the coinsurance region, and 0 in the out-of-pocket maximum region. Denote the
boundary between the coinsurance region and the out-of-pocket maximum region (the "stop
loss" level of total spending) by A = C -1 (O - D(1 - C )). Privately optimal spending falls
into one of these three regions depending on the realization of the health state l and the moral
hazard parameter  . The relevant cutoff values for the health state are




99
     We have experimented with varying these bounds and found that this does not affect parameter estimates as
     long as the uniform density is sufficiently small.

                                                       68
                                         Z1 = D -  (1 - C )/2,
                                         Z2 = O - /2,
                                         Z3 = A -  (1 - C/2),

where Z1  Z2  Z3 so long as O  D and C  [0, 1]. There are two types of plans to
consider. If D and A are sufficiently far apart (there is a sufficiently large coinsurance region),
then only the cutoffs Z1 and Z3 matter, and it may be optimal to be in any of the three regions,
depending on where the health state is relative to those two cutoff values. If D and A are close
together, it will never be optimal to be in the coinsurance region (better to burn right though
it and into the free healthcare of the out-of-pocket maximum region), and the cutoff Z2 will
determine whether the deductible or out-of-pocket maximum region is optimal. If the realized
health state is negative, optimal spending will equal zero. In sum:

           IfA - D > /2 :                                         IfA - D  /2 :
                                                                       
                 max(0, l)               l  Z1 ,                       max(0, l)        l  Z2 ,
                                                                   m =
               
            m = l +  (1 - C )            Z1 < l  Z3 ,                  l +              Z2 < l.
               l +                       Z3 < l ;

A graphical example (of the case in which the coinsurance region is sufficiently large) is shown
in Figure A.2b. All plans in our empirical setting have A - D > /2 at reasonable values of  .

  With distributions of privately optimal total healthcare spending mkjtsd in hand for each
household, plan, year, and draw of ks , we can calculate households' expected utility from en-
rolling in each potential plan. We construct the numerical approximation to equation 5 using
the quadrature weights Wd :
                                           D
                              Ukjts = -          Wd · exp (-k zkjts (lkjtsd )) ,
                                          d=1

where the monetary payoff z is calculated as in equation 6. To avoid numerical issues arising
from double-exponentiation, we estimate the model in certainty-equivalent units of Ukjts :
                                            D
                 CE              1
                Ukjts    ¯kjts -
                        =z         log           Wd · exp - k zkjts (lkjtsd ) - z
                                                                                ¯kjts      ,
                                 k         d=1

where z
      ¯kjts = Ed [zkjts (lkjtsd )]. Another reason for estimating the model in certainty equivalents
is that it becomes simple to denominate the logit error term in dollars rather than in utils. This

                                                       69
ensures that our choice model is "monotone," in the sense that the probability of preferring a
less-risky plan is everywhere increasing in risk aversion; see Apesteguia and Ballester (2018)
for a full treatment of this issue.

  Choice probabilities, conditional on kts , are given by the standard logit formula:
                                                             CE
                                                       exp(Ukjts / )
                                     Lkjts =                      CE
                                                                         .
                                                      iJkt exp(Ukits / )

 Likelihood Function. The numerical approximation to the likelihood of the sequence of

choices and healthcare spending amounts for a given household is given by

                              J             S         T
                     LLk =          dkjt         Ws         fm (mkt |, kts , cjt , Xkt )Lkjts ,
                             j =1          s=1        t=1


where dkjt = 1 if household k chose plan j in year t and zero otherwise. The log-likelihood
function for parameters  is
                                                          K
                                           LL() =                log (LLk ) .
                                                       k=1



C.3     Recovering Household-specific Types

We assume that household types kt () = {k , µkt , k } are distributed multivariate normal
with observable heterogeneity in the mean vector, according to equation 9. After estimating
the model and obtaining  ^, we want to use each household's observed outcomes (plan choices
and healthcare spending amounts) to back out which type they are likely to be. Let g ( | ^)
                                                     ^ y ) denote the density of  conditional
denote the population distribution of types. Let h( |,
on parameters ^ and a sequence of observed plan choices and healthcare spending amounts y .
Using what Revelt and Train (2001) term the "conditioning of individual tastes" method, we
recover households' posterior distribution of  using Bayes' rule:

                                                                   ^
                                               ^ y ) = p(y | )g ( |) .
                                           h( |,
                                                           p(y |^)

Taking the numerical approximations, p(y | ^) is simply the household-specific likelihood func-
tion LLk for an observed sequence of plan choices and spending amounts; g ( | ^) is the quadra-
ture weights Ws on each simulated point; and p(y | ) is the conditional household likelihood




                                                            70
function LLks :
                                         J           T
                           LLks =             dkjt           fm (mkt |, ks , cjt , Xkt )Lkjts .
                                     j =1            t=1

Taken together, the numerical approximation to each household's posterior distribution of un-
observed heterogeneity is given by

                                                    ^ yk ) =         LLks · Ws
                                             hks ( |,                          ,
                                                                       LLk

where               ^ yk ) = 1.
             hks ( |,
         s

  For the purposes of examining total variation in types across households (accounting for both
observed and unobserved heterogeneity), we assign each household the expectation of their type
with respect to their posterior distribution. We also use the household-specific distributions
over types to calculated expected quantities of interest for each household. In particular, we
calculate W T Pkjt and SSkjt as

                                  W T Pkjt =                         ^ yk )W T Pkjts ,
                                                              hks ( |,
                                                         s

                                     SSkjt =                         ^ yk )SSkjts .
                                                              hks ( |,
                                                         s



Joint Distribution of Household Types. We investigate the distribution implied by our
primary estimates in column 3 of Tables 3 and A.10. For each household, we first calculate
the expectation of their type with respect to their posterior distribution of unobservable het-
erogeneity:

                                             k =                     ^ yk )ks ,
                                                              hks ( |,
                                                         s

                                             k =                     ^ yk )ks .
                                                              hks ( |,
                                                         s


In place of µkt , a more relevant measure of household health is the expected health state, i.e.,
expected total spending absent moral hazard. Using the expectation of a shifted lognormal
variable and price parameter  = 1, the expected health state ¯
                                                             lkt is given by

                                                                               2
                             ¯                      ^ yk )(exp(µkts +          kt
                             lkt =           hks ( |,                             ) - kt ).
                                     s
                                                                               2

To limit our focus to one type for each household, we look at ¯
                                                              lkt for the first year each household



                                                                71
appears in the data. Figure A.3 presents the joint distribution of household types along the
dimensions of risk aversion, moral hazard parameter, and expected health state. We measure
the expected health state on a log scale for readability.




                                               72
                                   Table A.1. Sample Construction

                      Criteria                     2009      2010           2011       2012         2013
 Individuals in membership file                   161,502   162,363     156,113       156,042     157,799
   Not eligible for coverage                        7,370     8,265       8,422         8,719       8,388
   Retiree, COBRA, or oldest member over 65        13,180    12,567      12,057        11,603      11,840
   Partial year coverage                           17,115    18,649      19,283        21,281      23,074
   Covered by multiple plans                        1,447     1,947       2,038         2,239       2,336
   Opted out                                        3,241     4,205       4,321         4,576       4,529
   Not in intact family                             8,389     9,188       9,181         8,925      10,265
   No prior year of data                            6,175     3,947       2,455         3,104       3,702
   Missing premium or contribution data            25,653    28,466      22,755        23,284      30,401
   Final total                                     78,932    75,129         75,601      72,311      63,264
Notes : The table shows the counts of individuals dropped due to each sample selection criterion.
Drops are made in the order in which criteria appear. All observations in 2008 are dropped because
there is no year of prior data. This table is referenced at footnote 29.



                                   Table A.2. Plan Characteristics

     2008
                       Actuarial    Avg. Employee    Full       Deductible OOP Max.           Market
            Plan
                        Value        Premium ($)  Premium ($)      ($)       ($)              Share
     Kaiser - 1          0.97             682       9,768               0           1,200       0.07
     Kaiser - 2          0.96             313       9,334               0           2,000       0.10
     Moda - 1            0.92           1,086      11,051             300             500       0.28
     Moda - 2            0.89             648      10,613             300           1,000       0.06
     Moda - 3            0.88             363      10,097             600           1,000       0.11
     Moda - 4            0.86             461       9,674             900           1,500       0.07
     Moda - 5            0.82             273       8,888           1,500           2,000       0.12
     Moda - 6            0.78             320       8,032           3,000           3,000       0.03
     Moda - 7            0.68              37       6,141           3,000          10,000     < 0.01
     Providence - 1      0.96           1,005      10,645             900           1,200       0.14
     Providence - 2      0.95             933      10,563             900           2,000       0.02

     2010
                       Actuarial Avg. Employee    Full          Deductible OOP Max.           Market
            Plan
                        Value     Premium ($)  Premium ($)         ($)       ($)              Share
     Kaiser - 1          0.96             701      11,586               0           2,400        0.17
     Kaiser - 2          0.95             582      11,231               0           3,000        0.03
     Moda - 1            0.89           3,876      15,794             600           1,200        0.10
     Moda - 2            0.86           2,867      14,579             600           1,500        0.01
     Moda - 3            0.85           1,833      13,300             600           1,800        0.17
     Moda - 4            0.84             897      11,904             900           2,000        0.12
     Moda - 5            0.82             528      10,890           1,500           2,000        0.21
     Moda - 6            0.78             311       9,795           3,000           3,000        0.09
     Moda - 7            0.75             106       7,472           3,000          10,000        0.02
     Providence - 1      0.91           4,702      16,680           1,200           1,200        0.04
     Providence - 2      0.89           4,314      16,245           1,800           1,800        0.01




                                                  73
                                 Table A.2. Plan Characteristics, cont.

      2011
                        Actuarial   Avg. Employee    Full        Deductible OOP Max.   Market
             Plan
                         Value       Premium ($)  Premium ($)       ($)       ($)      Share
      Kaiser - 1          0.95            520      11,051              0     2,400       0.16
      Kaiser - 2          0.92            348      10,126            300     4,000       0.04
      Moda - 1            0.86          3,414      15,622            600     4,500       0.06
      Moda - 2            0.84          1,009      12,391            900     6,000     < 0.01
      Moda - 3            0.84          1,208      12,688            900     6,000       0.15
      Moda - 4            0.83            603      11,334          1,200     6,300       0.09
      Moda - 5            0.82            367      10,188          1,500     6,600       0.24
      Moda - 6            0.78            190       8,764          3,000     6,600       0.15
      Moda - 7            0.75            130       7,806          3,000    10,000       0.05
      Providence - 1      0.87          2,835      14,882            300     3,600       0.02
      Providence - 2      0.84          2,066      13,891            900     6,000     < 0.01


      2012
                    Actuarial    Avg. Employee    Full          Deductible OOP Max.    Market
        Plan
                     Value        Premium ($)  Premium ($)         ($)       ($)       Share
      Kaiser - 1       0.95           1,478      13,408              0      2,400       0.18
      Kaiser - 2       0.93             843      12,278            450      4,000       0.04
      Moda - 1         0.87           5,677      18,514            600      4,500       0.06
      Moda - 2         0.85           2,164      14,299            900      6,000       0.01
      Moda - 3         0.85           2,995      15,359            900      6,000       0.12
      Moda - 4         0.84           1,899      13,902          1,200      6,300       0.06
      Moda - 5         0.83           1,082      12,670          1,500      6,600       0.22
      Moda - 6         0.79             501      11,139          3,000      6,600       0.17
      Moda - 7         0.76             148       8,395          3,000     10,000       0.11

      2013
                    Actuarial     Avg. Employee    Full         Deductible OOP Max.    Market
         Plan
                     Value         Premium ($)  Premium ($)        ($)       ($)       Share
      Kaiser - 1       0.95           1,815      14,203               0      3,000      0.20
      Kaiser - 2       0.94             998      12,895             600      4,400      0.03
      Moda - 1         0.87           6,537      19,675             600      6,000      0.03
      Moda - 2         0.85           3,069      15,765           1,050      7,200      0.08
      Moda - 3         0.84           1,152      13,157           1,500      7,800      0.22
      Moda - 4         0.82             692      12,212           2,250      8,400      0.06
      Moda - 5         0.80             493      11,427           3,000      9,000      0.11
      Moda - 6         0.78             344      10,480           3,750     12,000      0.05
      Moda - 7         0.77             151       8,574           3,000     10,000      0.13
      Moda - 8         0.76             224       9,474           4,500     15,000      0.05
Notes : The table shows the state-level master lists of plans offered in 2010­2013. Actuarial value is
the ratio of the sum of insured spending across all households to the sum of total spending across all
households. The average employee premium is taken across all employees, even those who did not
choose a particular plan. The full premium reflects the premium negotiated by OEBB and the insurer;
the one shown is for an employee plus spouse. The deductible and out-of-pocket maximum shown are
for in-network services for a family household. This table is referenced at footnote 28.




                                                   74
                                        Figure A.1. Example of Plan Cost-sharing Features Estimation

                                8
Out-of-pocket spending ($000)




                                6



                                4



                                2



                                0
                                    0             20            40              60            80            100
                                                               Total spending ($000)


                                                   Observed data     Observed data     Estimated
                                                        All           Binscatter

                    Notes : The figure shows the data used to estimate the cost-sharing features for plan Moda
                    - 3 for individual households in 2012. Total healthcare spending is on the horizontal axis
                    and out-of-pocket cost is on the vertical axis. Each gray dot represents a household, for a
                    20 percent random sample of households. The blue dots are a binned scatter plot of the
                    gray data, using 100 points. The basic cost-sharing features of the plan (as observed in plan
                    documents) are a deductible of $300, nonspecialist coinsurance rate of 20 percent, and in-
                    network out-of-pocket maximum of $2,000. We estimate a best-fit cost-sharing function by
                    finding the coinsurance rate and out-of-pocket maximum that minimizes the sum of squared
                    errors between predicted and observed out-of-pocket spending. The estimated coinsurance
                    rate is 20.5 percent and the estimated out-of-pocket maximum is $3,218. This figure is
                    referenced in Section B.1.




                                                                      75
                 Table A.3. Estimated Plan Characteristics

2009                      Individuals                    Families
       Plan        Ded.   Coins.   OOP Max.     Ded.    Coins.   OOP Max.
Kaiser - 1            0     0.03          564       0     0.03        645
Kaiser - 2            0     0.03          684       0     0.04        760
Kaiser - 3            0     0.03          734       0     0.04        791
Moda - 1            100     0.10        1,613     300     0.10      2,009
Moda - 2            100     0.18        1,922     300     0.15      2,662
Moda - 3            200     0.20        2,081     600     0.15      3,062
Moda - 4            300     0.19        2,796     900     0.15      3,835
Moda - 5            500     0.22        3,164   1,500     0.16      4,296
Moda - 6          1,000     0.22        3,713   3,000     0.12      5,422
Moda - 7          1,500     0.42        4,693   3,000     0.30      8,086
Providence - 1      300     0.02          790     900     0.00        900
Providence - 2      300     0.03          867     900     0.00        986
Providence - 3      300     0.04        1,116     900     0.01      1,296

2010                      Individuals                    Families
       Plan        Ded.   Coins.   OOP Max.     Ded.    Coins.   OOP Max.
Kaiser - 1            0     0.03          697       0     0.04        805
Kaiser - 2            0     0.04          820       0     0.05        885
Moda - 1            200     0.14        2,526     600     0.12      3,430
Moda - 2            200     0.21        2,846     600     0.18      3,967
Moda - 3            200     0.21        3,189     600     0.18      4,299
Moda - 4            300     0.22        3,109     900     0.18      4,079
Moda - 5            500     0.22        3,321   1,500     0.16      4,572
Moda - 6          1,000     0.22        3,844   3,000     0.12      5,684
Moda - 7          1,500     0.19        4,913   3,000     0.15      7,579
Providence - 1      400     0.05        1,523   1,200     0.02      1,851
Providence - 2      600     0.06        1,998   1,800     0.02      2,473

2011                      Individuals                    Families
       Plan        Ded.   Coins.   OOP Max.     Ded.    Coins.   OOP Max.
Kaiser - 1            0     0.04          883       0     0.06        974
Kaiser - 2          100     0.06        1,340     300     0.06      1,831
Moda - 1            200     0.22        2,608     600     0.18      4,316
Moda - 2            300     0.22        3,201     900     0.17      5,094
Moda - 3            300     0.22        3,246     900     0.17      5,202
Moda - 4            400     0.22        3,324   1,200     0.17      5,367
Moda - 5            500     0.22        3,529   1,500     0.16      5,727
Moda - 6          1,000     0.22        4,061   3,000     0.13      6,728
Moda - 7          1,500     0.21        4,914   3,000     0.15      7,663
Providence - 1      100     0.18        2,164     300     0.16      3,496
Providence - 2      300     0.15        2,911     900     0.13      4,378



                                        76
              Table A.3. Estimated Plan Characteristics, cont.

 2012                    Individuals                          Families
     Plan       Ded.    Coins.    OOP Max.           Ded.    Coins.   OOP Max.
 Kaiser - 1         0      0.04          911            0      0.06         995
 Kaiser - 2       150      0.07        1,709          450      0.05       2,160
 Moda - 1         200      0.21        2,571          600      0.17       4,154
 Moda - 2         300      0.21        3,187          900      0.17       4,981
 Moda - 3         300      0.20        3,218          900      0.17       5,025
 Moda - 4         400      0.21        3,291        1,200      0.16       5,104
 Moda - 5         500      0.21        3,493        1,500      0.16       5,498
 Moda - 6       1,000      0.21        4,000        3,000      0.12       6,608
 Moda - 7       1,500      0.21        4,927        3,000      0.15       7,662

 2013                    Individuals                          Families
     Plan       Ded.    Coins.    OOP Max.           Ded.    Coins.   OOP Max.
 Kaiser - 1         0      0.04          911            0      0.06       1,040
 Kaiser - 2       200      0.03          867          600      0.01         951
 Moda - 1         200      0.20        3,237          600      0.17       4,893
 Moda - 2         350      0.20        3,842        1,050      0.16       5,647
 Moda - 3         500      0.20        4,175        1,500      0.15       6,160
 Moda - 4         750      0.20        4,704        2,250      0.14       6,989
 Moda - 5       1,000      0.19        5,186        3,000      0.12       7,714
 Moda - 6       1,250      0.19        6,414        3,750      0.12       9,187
 Moda - 7       1,500      0.21        4,865        3,000      0.15       7,650
 Moda - 8       1,500      0.19        7,620        4,500      0.11      10,614
Notes : The table shows plan deductibles, estimated coinsurance rates, and estimated
out-of-pocket maximums. The estimation procedure is described in Section B.1. This
table is referenced in Section B.1.




                                         77
            Table A.4. Plan Menu Generosity and Household Health

                                2008      2009      2010      2011      2012      2013
  Household risk score         -0.006    0.017     0.020   0.002       0.006     0.000
                               (0.039)   (0.016)   (0.011) (0.009)     (0.010)   (0.012)
  Family type
   Employee alone              0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000

   Employee + spouse           -1.389 -1.369 -1.498 -1.040             -1.626 -1.612
                               (0.077) (0.040) (0.029) (0.025)         (0.026) (0.031)
   Employee + child            -0.542 -0.634 -0.907 -0.616             -1.092 -0.937
                               (0.084) (0.053) (0.039) (0.031)         (0.031) (0.037)
   Employee + family           -1.792 -1.882 -1.804 -1.306             -2.147 -2.102
                               (0.064) (0.037) (0.028) (0.023)         (0.025) (0.029)
  Dependent variable mean 88.7           88.5      84.6      82.7      83.3      82.6
  R2                      0.020          0.084     0.154     0.115     0.242     0.220
  Number of observations  37,666         31,074    29,538    29,279    27,897    24,283
Notes : The table shows the relationship between plan menu generosity and household health.
The unit of observation is the household. The dependent variable is plan menu generosity,
as measured by predicted actuarial value conditional on choosing Moda, AV d,M oda . This
measure is calculated according to equation 13, and it is multiplied by 100 to increase the
magnitude of estimated coefficients on household risk score. Household risk score is the
mean risk score among all individuals in a household, and it has been z-scored such that
the variable has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one within each year. As we do
not have data before 2008, the 2008 regression uses risk scores calculated using 2008 claims
data.  By normalization. This table is referenced in Section B.2.




                                            78
                         Table A.5. Explaining Plan Menu Generosity: 2008

                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                       Household risk score       -0.006     0.016      0.011     0.025
                                                  (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.038)   (0.040)
                       Family type
                        Employee alone            0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000

                        Employee + spouse         -1.389     -1.374     -1.251    -1.085
                                                  (0.077)    (0.083)    (0.083)   (0.085)
                        Employee + child          -0.542     -0.535     -0.478    -0.462
                                                  (0.084)    (0.085)    (0.084)   (0.082)
                        Employee + family         -1.792     -1.819     -1.688    -1.437
                                                  (0.064)    (0.071)    (0.071)   (0.074)
                       Part-time                             -0.428     -0.448    -0.867
                                                             (0.133)    (0.133)   (0.139)
                       Occupation type
                        Admin.                               -1.745     -1.883    -2.685
                                                             (0.455)    (0.459)   (0.501)
                        Classified                           -0.598     -0.469    -0.155
                                                             (0.283)    (0.414)   (0.457)
                        Comm. coll. fac.                     0.553      1.138     1.044
                                                             (0.287)    (0.430)   (0.470)
                        Comm. coll. non-fac.                 0.671      0.457     0.077
                                                             (0.288)    (0.288)   (0.302)
                        Confidential                         -2.759     -2.883    -3.133
                                                             (0.855)    (0.856)   (0.915)
                        Licensed                             0.001      1.645     1.628
                                                             (0.278)    (0.459)   (0.505)
                        Substitute                           -11.051    -9.312    -9.354
                                                             (0.283)    (0.457)   (0.496)
                       Union affiliation
                        AFT                                             0.251     -0.398
                                                                        (0.374)   (0.432)
                        IAFE                                            0.758     1.222
                                                                        (0.404)   (0.458)
                        OACE                                            2.671     1.617
                                                                        (0.389)   (0.449)
                        OEA                                             -1.799    -1.765
                                                                        (0.434)   (0.491)
                        OSEA                                            -0.086    -0.426
                                                                        (0.395)   (0.449)
                       District characteristics
                        log(HPI)                                                  -0.876
                                                                                  (0.085)
                        Pct. Republican                                           -14.077
                                                                                  (0.467)
                       Dependent variable mean    88.7       89.0       89.1      98.3
                       R2                         0.020      0.031      0.046     0.073
                       Number of observations     37,666     37,666     37,666    35,698

Notes : The table shows the relationship between plan menu generosity and household/employee characteristics.
The unit of observation is the household. The dependent variable is plan menu generosity, as measured by
predicted actuarial value conditional on choosing Moda, AV d,M oda . This measure is calculated according to
equation 13, and it is multiplied by 100 to increase the magnitude of estimated coefficients on household risk
score. Household risk score is the mean risk score among all individuals in a household, and it has been z-scored
such that the variable has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one within each year. As we do not have
data before 2008, the 2008 regression uses risk scores calculated using 2008 claims data.  By normalization.
This table is referenced in Section B.2.


                                                        79
                                 Table A.6. Plan Choice Logit Model

                                         2008       2009       2010       2011       2012       2013
     Employee premium ($000)       -0.789           -0.674     -0.505     -0.372     -0.515     -0.490
                                   (0.017)          (0.014)    (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.008)
     HRA/HSA contrib. ($000)       0.112                       0.358      0.134      0.269      0.534
                                   (0.759)                     (0.044)    (0.024)    (0.019)    (0.015)
     Vision/dental contrib. ($000) 0.654            0.408      0.480      0.794      0.553      0.710
                                   (0.021)          (0.022)    (0.019)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)
     Kaiser - 1                    -0.771           -0.728
                                   (0.026)          (0.030)
     Kaiser - 2                    -1.287           -1.112     -0.846     -0.469     -0.375     -0.074
                                   (0.031)          (0.032)    (0.034)    (0.035)    (0.034)    (0.044)
     Kaiser - 3                                     -1.563     -1.042     -0.985     -1.629     -1.820
                                                    (0.384)    (0.056)    (0.051)    (0.048)    (0.058)
     Moda - 1                            0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

     Moda - 2                            -1.113     -1.184     -0.911     -2.088     -2.578     -0.593
                                         (0.026)    (0.032)    (0.058)    (0.163)    (0.072)    (0.045)
     Moda - 3                            -1.226     -1.110     -0.518     -0.373     -0.389     -0.957
                                         (0.022)    (0.025)    (0.029)    (0.034)    (0.033)    (0.046)
     Moda - 4                            -1.751     -1.540     -1.356     -1.192     -1.554     -2.261
                                         (0.028)    (0.030)    (0.034)    (0.037)    (0.039)    (0.055)
     Moda - 5                            -1.951     -1.881     -1.341     -0.878     -0.999     -2.391
                                         (0.034)    (0.037)    (0.040)    (0.039)    (0.037)    (0.055)
     Moda - 6                            -2.785     -2.871     -2.205     -1.406     -1.917     -3.182
                                         (0.048)    (0.051)    (0.050)    (0.043)    (0.046)    (0.065)
     Moda - 7                            -4.391     -4.260     -3.388     -1.959     -3.007     -3.492
                                         (0.098)    (0.098)    (0.074)    (0.050)    (0.060)    (0.073)
     Moda - 8                                                                                   -3.679
                                                                                                (0.068)
     Providence - 1                      0.001      0.048      0.135      -0.778
                                         (0.019)    (0.028)    (0.038)    (0.053)
     Providence - 2                      -0.600     -0.314
                                         (0.043)    (0.049)
     Providence - 3                                 -0.048     -0.159     -0.939
                                                    (0.078)    (0.083)    (0.436)
     Number of observations              163,431    121,744    116,541    114,527    163,278    163,683
Notes : The table presents parameter estimates from the conditional logit model described by equation 12,
presented separately for each year. The unit of observation is a household-plan. Moda - 1 (the highest coverage
Moda plan) is the omitted plan.  By normalization. This table is referenced in Section B.2.




                                                      80
                    Table A.7. Estimates of Moral Hazard

                                         OLS        IV          IV            IV
                                         All        All     Individuals     Families
                                         (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)
  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda         -0.580     -0.269
                                       (0.053)    (0.084)
  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda × Q1                            -0.220       -0.415
                                                               (0.290)      (0.131)
  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda × Q2                            -0.410       -0.235
                                                               (0.189)      (0.088)
  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda × Q3                            -0.253       -0.218
                                                               (0.136)      (0.090)
  log(1 - AVj (k) )1f (k)=M oda × Q4                            -0.017       0.074
                                                               (0.346)      (0.145)
  R2                                    0.19       0.19          0.44         0.37
  Number of observations               35,146     35,146        8,962        26,184
Notes : The table shows the OLS and IV estimates of equation 16, describing the
relationship between household total spending and plan generosity. The unit of
observation is a household, and the dependent variable is log of 1 + total spending.
In columns 3 and 4, coefficients can vary by household risk quartile Qn , where Q4
is the sickest households. Columns 1 and 2 are estimated on all households, while
columns 3 and 4 are estimated only on individual or family households, respec-
tively. All specifications also include insurer fixed effects and controls for household
risk score and family structure. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by
household plan menu, of which there are 533 among individual households and 1,750
among family households. We can reject the hypothesis that the four coefficients
are equal at the 10 percent level for families, but not for individuals. This table is
referenced in Section B.3.




                                          81
                             Table A.8. Plan Choice Logit Model by Family Status and Risk Quartile, 2008

                                          Ind. Q1     Fam. Q1     Ind. Q2      Fam. Q2       Ind. Q3     Fam. Q3      Ind. Q4     Fam. Q4
         Employee premium ($000)             -1.602      -1.014      -1.345       -1.019        -1.401      -0.949      -1.302        -0.870
                                            (0.128)     (0.047)     (0.114)      (0.049)       (0.113)     (0.053)     (0.108)       (0.056)
         Vision/dental contrib. ($000)       1.301       0.943        1.254        0.884        1.089       0.621       1.042          0.495
                                            (0.092)     (0.061)     (0.094)      (0.065)       (0.094)     (0.071)     (0.099)       (0.076)
         HSA/HRA contrib. ($000)                                                  -6.871                     2.774                    -6.703
                                                                                (318.561)                  (1.068)                  (526.706)
         Kaiser - 1                          -0.074      1.351       -1.452       -0.856        1.069       0.863       2.149          0.525
                                            (0.420)     (0.531)     (0.671)      (0.747)       (0.799)     (0.918)     (0.782)       (0.801)
         Kaiser - 2                          0.575       1.765       -0.960       -0.278        1.483        1.376      2.468         1.135
                                            (0.410)     (0.517)     (0.657)      (0.731)       (0.791)     (0.899)     (0.774)       (0.789)
         Moda - 1                            0.000       0.000       0.000        0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000         0.000

         Moda - 2                            -1.175      -0.425      -1.077        -1.011       -0.498      -0.571      -0.644        -0.930
                                            (0.185)     (0.161)     (0.242)       (0.215)      (0.260)     (0.254)     (0.270)       (0.214)
         Moda - 3                            -0.865      -0.298      -0.880        -1.162       -0.290      -0.395      -0.108        -0.810




82
                                            (0.202)     (0.240)     (0.332)       (0.334)      (0.372)     (0.399)     (0.383)       (0.333)
         Moda - 4                            -1.265      -0.331      -1.535        -1.719       -0.370      -0.535      -0.100        -1.194
                                            (0.280)     (0.349)     (0.477)       (0.488)      (0.534)     (0.584)     (0.553)       (0.486)
         Moda - 5                            -1.083      -0.065      -1.419        -1.896        0.386      -0.119      0.623         -1.029
                                            (0.407)     (0.527)     (0.713)       (0.740)      (0.805)     (0.885)     (0.832)       (0.737)
         Moda - 6                            -1.053      -0.086      -1.903        -2.678        0.515      -0.517      1.390         -1.634
                                            (0.592)     (0.770)     (1.048)       (1.084)      (1.171)     (1.295)     (1.210)       (1.082)
         Moda - 7                            -2.060       0.093      -3.330        -5.027        0.880      -0.940       1.879        -1.986
                                            (0.997)     (1.304)     (1.757)       (1.854)      (1.968)     (2.225)     (2.058)       (1.842)
         Providence - 1                      -0.251      1.141       -1.448        -0.696       0.474       2.210       0.840         -0.613
                                            (0.566)     (0.659)     (0.863)       (0.850)      (0.920)     (0.938)     (0.922)       (0.747)
         Providence - 2                      0.300       1.533       -1.022        -0.194       1.017       2.809       1.215         -0.121
                                            (0.536)     (0.639)     (0.836)       (0.830)      (0.894)     (0.915)     (0.915)       (0.728)
         Number of observations              8,487      25,054       8,367        25,416        8,285       25,393      8,077        25,326
     Notes : The table presents the results of estimating equation 12 separately by quartile of household risk score within individual and family
     households in 2008. The columns indicate which sample is being used: Individuals (Ind.) versus families (Fam.) and the household risk quartile
     Qn , where Q4 is the sickest households. Moda - 1 (the highest coverage Moda plan) is the omitted plan. The coefficient on employee premium
     (measured in thousands of dollars) is normalized to -1. This table is referenced in Section B.3.  By normalization.
    Table A.9. Spending Distributions and Moda Plan Characteristics, 2008
                   (a) Total Spending Distributions by Risk Quartile

                                        Percentile of total spending
               Risk quartile     10th     25th     50th      75th       90th
               Individuals
                 Q1                 0    30          381    851 1,454
                 Q2               293   721        1,286 1,984 3,025
                 Q3               782 1,688        2,861 4,266 5,987
                 Q4             1,869 4,134        7,155 12,765 21,240
               Families
                 Q1               418      985 1,959 3,508 6,718
                 Q2             1,489    2,567 4,212 6,584 10,984
                 Q3             3,373    5,261 7,811 11,745 17,301
                 Q4             5,096    9,820 15,401 22,637 29,615

                                 (b) Plan Characteristics

                                                   Moda plan
                     Plan 1    Plan 2 Plan 3        Plan 4     Plan 5 Plan 6       Plan 7
  Individuals
     Deductible         100        100       200       300        500      1,000    1,500
     OOP Max.           500      1,000     1,000     1,500      2,000      2,000    5,000
  Families
    Deductible          300        300       600       900      1,500      3,000    3,000
    OOP Max.            500      1,000     1,000     1,500      2,000      3,000   10,000
Notes : The table shows the distributions of household realized total healthcare spending and
the plan characteristics of Moda plans in 2008. Panel (a) shows the spending distributions, by
quartile of household risk score within Individual and Family households. Panel (b) shows the
in-network deductible and out-of-pocket maximum (OOP Max.) for each of the Moda plans.
This table is referenced in Section B.3.




                                             83
                        Figure A.2. Healthcare Spending Choice Example
          (a) No Moral Hazard (  $0)                                   (b) Some Moral Hazard ( = $1,000)


                                                                                                           m*
  9000                                            m   *
                                                               9000
                                                        45°                                                     45°




  6000                                                         6000

                                                   c*                                                      c*
  3000                                                         3000

                                                                                                           b*
                                                  b*
     0                                                            0


 -3000                                                         -3000                                    b*­ c*
                                                 b*­ c*



         0       2000       4000      6000      8000                    0      2000    4000    6000     8000

                                             Health state l ($)
Notes : The figure shows optimal healthcare spending m , indirect benefit of optimal healthcare spending
b , and the corresponding out-of-pocket cost c predicted by our parameterization of consumer preferences
(equation 4). The examples consider a contract with a deductible of $2,000, a coinsurance rate of 30 percent,
and an out-of-pocket maximum of $3,000. Predicted behavior is shown under (a) no moral hazard and (b)
under some moral hazard ( = $1,000). The horizontal axis shows possible health state realizations l.
Absent moral hazard (left panel), optimal healthcare spending is equal to the health state. The vertical
axis also shows the net payoff from optimal healthcare utilization, b - c ; this is the outcome over which
households face a lottery. This figure is referenced at footnotes 36 and 82.




                                                          84
                             Table A.10. Additional Parameter Estimates

                                           (1)                          (2)                         (3)
           Variable               Parameter      Std. Err.     Parameter      Std. Err.   Parameter       Std. Err.

  Insurer fixed   effects
    Providence    * (Age-40)      -0.024          0.007        -0.023          0.007      -0.028           0.007
    Providence    * 1[Children]   -0.681          0.151        -0.501          0.146      -0.595           0.147
    Providence    * Region 1      -2.114          0.144        -2.071          0.137      -1.649           0.138
    Providence    * Region 2      -2.658          0.185        -2.635          0.176      -2.179           0.176
    Providence    * Region 3      -1.877          0.207        -2.036          0.200      -1.409           0.193

  Health state distributions
                                   0.155          0.002
    * Risk Q1                                                   0.096          0.002        0.127          0.000
    * Risk Q2                                                   0.224          0.002        0.155          0.001
    * Risk Q3                                                   0.218          0.002        0.228          0.000
    * Risk Q4                                                   0.128          0.042        0.418          0.041
    * Risk Q1 * Risk score                                      0.187          0.004        0.225          0.001
    * Risk Q2 * Risk score                                      0.140          0.002        0.019          0.002
    * Risk Q3 * Risk score                                     -0.060          0.001        0.002          0.001
    * Risk Q4 * Risk score                                      0.155          0.026        0.177          0.027
   µ                               0.590          0.005
   µ * 1[Female 18­35]                                          0.125          0.017       0.088           0.018
   µ * 1[Age < 18]                                             -0.113          0.017      -0.104           0.019
   µ * Risk Q1                                                  1.405          0.137       1.872           0.154
   µ * Risk Q2                                                  0.894          0.025       0.457           0.030
   µ * Risk Q3                                                  0.815          0.008       0.504           0.009
   µ * Risk Q4                                                  1.379          0.017       1.303           0.017
   µ * Risk Q1 * Risk score                                     3.590          0.185       4.875           0.210
   µ * Risk Q2 * Risk score                                     1.978          0.067       1.946           0.081
   µ * Risk Q3 * Risk score                                     0.894          0.019       1.053           0.022
   µ * Risk Q4 * Risk score                                     0.310          0.005       0.329           0.005
                                   1.174          0.002
    * Risk Q1                                                   1.626          0.006        1.748          0.007
    * Risk Q2                                                   1.173          0.005        1.403          0.006
    * Risk Q3                                                   1.060          0.003        1.215          0.004
    * Risk Q4                                                   0.988          0.006        1.016          0.006
Notes : The table presents the parameter estimates that were not presented in Table 3. "Risk Qn " is an
indicator for an individual's risk quartile, where Q4 is the sickest individuals. Higher risk scores correspond
to worse predicted health. All parameters are measured in thousands of dollars. The insurer fixed effect of
Moda is normalized to zero. This table is referenced in Section V.A.




                                                          85
                                      Figure A.3. Joint Distribution of Household Types



                       4.00
log( [Health state])




                       2.00

                       0.00



                       3.00
Risk aversion ()




                       2.00

                       1.00

                       0.00

                       2.00
Moral hazard ()




                       1.50

                       1.00

                       0.50
                               0.00    2.00    4.00   0.00    1.00   2.00   3.00   0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
                              log( [Health state])           Risk aversion ()          Moral hazard ()
 Notes : The figure shows the joint distribution of household types implied by parameter estimates in column 3
 of Tables 3 and A.10. The diagonals show one-way distributions across households, and the off-diagonals show
 bivariate distributions. Households are ex post assigned a single type according to the procedure described in
 Section C.3. Because expected health state can vary over years within a household, this figure uses the first
 year a household appears in the sample. Expected health state is equivalent to a household's expected total
 spending absent moral hazard. This figure is referenced in Section V.A.




                                                               86
                                            Figure A.4. Sets of Potential Contracts: Out-of-pocket Cost Functions
                                                (a) Metal-tier Contracts                                                                 (b) Denser Set of Contracts
                                   10,000                                                                                  10,000
                                                                              Catastrophic
          Out-of-pocket cost ($)




                                                                                                  Out-of-pocket cost ($)
                                                                                  Bronze
                                    7,500                                                                                   7,500



                                                                                    Silver
                                    5,000                                                                                   5,000
                                                                                                                                                                                 Silver


                                                                                    Gold
                                    2,500                                                                                   2,500                                                  Gold


                                                                          Full insurance
                                       0                                                                                       0                                         Full insurance
                                            0              5,000           10,000                                                   0                    5,000            10,000

                                                  Total healthcare spending ($)                                                                  Total healthcare spending ($)
                                                   (c) No Deductible                                                                      (d) No Coinsurance Region
                                   10,000                                                                                  10,000
                                                                              Catastrophic                                                                                   Catastrophic
          Out-of-pocket cost ($)




                                                                                                  Out-of-pocket cost ($)
                                                                                     75%                                                                                         $7,500
                                    7,500                                                                                   7,500



                                                                                     50%                                                                                           $5,000
                                    5,000                                                                                   5,000



                                                                                     25%                                                                                           $2,500
                                    2,500                                                                                   2,500



                                                                          Full insurance                                                                                 Full insurance
                                       0                                                                                       0
                                            0              5,000           10,000                                                   0                    5,000            10,000

                                                  Total healthcare spending ($)                                                                  Total healthcare spending ($)
                                            (e) No Deductible and Extended Coinsurance Region
                                   10,000
                                                                                                                                           50%
  Out-of-pocket cost ($)




                                                                                                                                         37.5%
                                    7,500


                                                                                                                                           25%
                                    5,000


                                                                                                                                         12.5%
                                    2,500


                                                                                                                              Full insurance
                                       0
                                            0             5,000          10,000              15,000                                     20,000

                                                              Total healthcare spending ($)

Notes : The figure shows out-of-pocket cost functions for five sets of potential contracts. Horizontal axes shows
total healthcare spending, and vertical axes shows out-of-pocket cost. Panel (a) depicts our focal set of metal-
tier contracts; panel (b) depicts a denser set of contracts with the same design. Panels (c)­(e) show alternative
sets of potential contracts. Contract labels represent the varying feature: the coinsurance rate in panels (c)
and (e) and the deductible in panel (d). Contracts are vertically differentiated and well-ordered by coverage
level within each panel, but not necessarily across panels. See Appendix A.2 for these definitions. This figure
is referenced in Sections V.B and V.C.

                                                                                             87
                         Figure A.5. Household Demographics by Willingness to Pay
                  (a) Risk-aversion Parameter ( )                             (b) Moral-hazard Parameter ( )
        3.0
                                                                       2.0


        2.0
                                                                       1.5



        1.0                                                            1.0



        0.0                                                            0.5
                0.00    0.20     0.40     0.60    0.80     1.00              0.00    0.20     0.40     0.60    0.80     1.00

                 (c) Expected Health State ($000)                                   (d) Avg. Age of Adults
        80                                                             70

                                                                       60
        60

                                                                       50
        40
                                                                       40

        20
                                                                       30

            0                                                          20
                0.00    0.20     0.40    0.60     0.80     1.00              0.00    0.20     0.40    0.60     0.80     1.00

                        (e) Number of Adults                                        (f) Number of Children
        6                                                              4

        5
                                                                       3

        4
                                                                       2
        3

                                                                       1
        2

        1                                                              0
            0.00       0.20     0.40     0.60     0.80     1.00            0.00     0.20     0.40     0.60     0.80     1.00

                Percentile of households by willingness to pay               Percentile of households by willingness to pay

Notes : The figure shows the distribution across family households of (a) the risk aversion parameter, (b) the
moral hazard parameter, (c) the expectation of the health state distribution, (d) the average age of adults in
the household, (e) the number of adults in the household, and (f) the number of children in the household. An
adult is defined as anyone 18 and older. Each dot represents a household, for a 2.5 percent random sample
of households. The line in each panel is a connected binned scatter plot, representing the mean value of the
vertical axis variable at each percentile of willingness to pay. This figure is referenced in footnote 62.


                                                                  88
                       Figure A.6. Household Health State Distributions by Willingness to Pay

                   150,000




                                                                                        90th pctile
                    10,000
Health state ($)




                                                                                    75th pctile
                     3,000
                                                                                    Median

                     1,000                                                      25th pctile

                                                                                10th pctile




                         50
                              0.00           0.20            0.40            0.60             0.80           1.00
                              High                                                                           Low
                              WTP          Percentile of households by willingness to pay                    WTP

                   Notes : The figure shows the health state distributions faced by households at each percentile
                   of willingness to pay. Health state distributions are represented by their 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th,
                   and 90th percentiles. A health state realization is equal to total healthcare spending absent
                   moral hazard. The vertical axis is on a log scale. This figure is referenced in Section V.B.




                                                                    89
                                    Figure A.7. Efficient Coverage Level by Willingness to Pay

                        1.0
                                \
                                Bronze              Silver

                        0.8
Percent of households




                        0.6                      Gold



                        0.4



                        0.2


                                      Full insurance
                        0.0
                              0.00           0.20             0.40            0.60             0.80            1.00
                              High                                                                             Low
                              WTP            Percentile of households by willingness to pay                    WTP

                        Notes : The figure shows the percentage of family households at each percentile of willing-
                        ness to pay for whom each contract is optimal. Households are ordered on the horizontal
                        axis according to their willingness to pay. Overall, full insurance is efficient for 6 percent
                        of households, Gold for 75 percent of households, Silver for 19 percent of households, and
                        Bronze for less than one percent of households. Coverage lower than Bronze is not efficient
                        for any household. This figure is referenced in Sections V.B and VI.A.




                                                                     90
                  Table A.11. Outcomes Under Alternative Sets of Potential Contracts

                                  Allocation at First Best (FB ) and under the Optimal Menu (Opt )

 Panel A. Considering Each Set of Contracts Separately
    Full    Gold       Silv.       Brnz.  Ctstr.
                                     Metal-tier   25% 50%
                                                Contracts                         75%       $2.5k     $5.0k       $7.5k 12.5% 25%
                                                                                                                  No Deductible            37.5%    50%
                           Full     Gold          Silv.       Brnz.     Ctstr.                      Full     25%      50%     75%      Ctstr.
                FB:        0.06        0.75       0.19        < 0.01      ­             FB:         0.31     0.65     0.03    < 0.01   ­
                Opt:         ­         1.00        ­            ­         ­             Opt:         ­       1.00      ­        ­      ­

                                    No Coinsurance Region                                                  No Ded., Extended Coins.
                           Full     $2.5k         $5.0k       $7.5k     Ctstr.                      Full    12.5%     25%     37.5%    50%
                FB:         ­          0.82       0.17        0.01        ­             FB:         0.66     0.31     0.01    0.01     ­
                Opt:        ­          1.00        ­           ­          ­             Opt:        0.82     0.16     0.02     ­       ­

  Panel B. Considering All Contracts Together
                  Metal-tier Contracts                              No Deductible              No Coins. Region              No Ded., Extended Coins.
           Full   Gold          Silv. Brnz. Ctstr. 25%                    50%       75% $2.5k $5.0k $7.5k 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50%
  FB:       ­     < 0.01        0.01          ­           ­         ­    < 0.01         ­      0.81        0.17     < 0.01     ­       ­        ­    ­
  Opt:      ­          ­          ­           ­           ­         ­         ­         ­      1.00          ­        ­        ­       ­        ­    ­

Notes : The table shows the percent of households allocated to each contract at the first best allocation (FB )
and under the optimal menu (Opt ), among alternative sets of potential contracts. Metal-tier Contracts are
the primary set of contracts considered in the main text (depicted in Fig. A.4a); No Deductible are a set of
contracts that vary only in their coinsurance rate (see Fig. A.4c); No Coinsurance Region are a set of contracts
between that vary only in their deductible (see Fig. A.4d); and No Ded., Extended Coins. are a set of contracts
that vary only in their coinsurance rate and which have a stop-loss point of $20,000, twice as high as the other
contracts (see Fig. A.4e). Panel A considers each set of potential contracts separately. Panel B considers all
four sets of contracts simultaneously. This table is referenced in Section V.C.




                                                                                  91
              Table A.12. Parameter Estimates from Full Sample Including Kaiser

              Variable                 Parameter   Std. Err.            Variable            Parameter   Std. Err.
                                             
Employee Premium ($000s)               -1.000                  Kaiser * (Age-40)            -0.067       0.006
OOP spending, -OOP                     -1.429       0.026      Kaiser * 1[Children]         -1.832       0.141
HRA/HSA contributions, HA               0.286       0.023      Kaiser * Region 1            -4.790       0.135
Vision/dental contributions, V D        1.285       0.024      Kaiser * Region 2            -7.930       0.323
Plan inertia intercept,  plan           5.119       0.065      Providence * (Age-40)        -0.047       0.007
Plan inertia * 1[Children],  plan      -0.154       0.040      Providence * 1[Children]     -0.629       0.151
Kaiser insurer inertia                  9.750       0.262      Providence * Region 1        -1.655       0.132
Moda/Prov. insurer inertia, ins         0.392       0.232      Providence * Region 2        -2.259       0.186
Insurer inertia * Risk score,  ins      0.553       0.073      Providence * Region 3        -1.551       0.213
Moda-specific inertia, 2013             2.162       0.199       * Risk Q1                    0.157       0.000
Narrow net. plan,  N arrowN et         -2.639       0.166       * Risk Q2                    0.204       0.000
Kaiser provider prices, K               0.853       0.008       * Risk Q3                    0.188       0.000
Providence provider prices, P           1.118       0.001       * Risk Q4                    0.146       0.016
Risk aversion intercept,               -0.872       0.109       * Risk Qn<4 * Risk score     0.005       0.000
Risk aversion * 1[Children],           -0.096       0.071       * Risk Q4 * Risk score       0.259       0.013
Moral hazard intercept,                 1.160       0.002      µ * 1[Female 18­35]           0.097       0.015
Moral hazard * 1[Children],             0.425       0.000      µ * 1[Age < 18]               0.018       0.015
Std. dev. of private health info., µ    0.184       0.004      µ * Risk Q1                  -0.399       0.019
Std. dev. of log risk aversion,         0.621       0.064      µ * Risk Q2                   0.326       0.010
Std. dev. of moral hazard,              0.097       0.001      µ * Risk Q3                   0.449       0.008
Corr(µ,  ), µ,                          0.373       0.004      µ * Risk Q4                   1.245       0.014
Corr( ,  ), ,                          -0.252       0.032      µ * Risk Qn<4 * Risk score    1.127       0.018
Corr(µ,  ), µ,                          0.135       0.007      µ * Risk Q4 * Risk score      0.339       0.004
Scale of idiosyncratic shock,           2.519       0.028       * Risk Q1                    1.431       0.008
                                                                * Risk Q2                    1.240       0.004
                                                                * Risk Q3                    1.191       0.003
                                                                * Risk Q4                    1.031       0.004
Number of observations: 451,268
Notes : The table presents parameter estimates using the full sample of households. The specification corre-
sponds to column 3 of Tables 3 and A.10. We assume there is not moral hazard within Kaiser plans, so  is
as before estimated only within Moda and Providence plans. Standard errors are derived from the analytical
Hessian of the likelihood function. The model is estimated on an unbalanced panel of 44,562 households, 14
plans, and 5 years. "Risk Qn " is an indicator for an individual's risk quartile, where Q4 is the sickest individ-
uals. Higher risk scores correspond to worse predicted health. All parameters are measured in thousands of
dollars. The insurer fixed effect of Moda is normalized to zero. This table is referenced in Section V.C.  By
normalization.




                                                        92
                         Figure A.8. Results from Full Sample Parameter Estimates
               (a) Willingness to Pay ($)                                           (b) Decomposition of WTP ($)
    10,000          Full insurance                                     10,000


     8,000                                                              8,000
                Gold                                                                Gold

                                                                                                                  Payoff from moral
     6,000                                                              6,000                                      hazard spending
               Silver                                                                                              /

     4,000                                                              4,000                         Transfer

               Bronze
     2,000                                                              2,000
                                                                                                         Value of risk
                                                                                                          protection
         0                                                                    0
             0.00       0.20     0.40       0.60     0.80   1.00                  0.00      0.20   0.40          0.60    0.80    1.00
             High                                                                                                                Low
             WTP                                                                                                                 WTP
                                        Percentile of households by willingness to pay

                                                      (c) Social Surplus ($)
                          2,000


                          1,500


                          1,000


                               500


                                 0
                                     0.00          0.20         0.40              0.60         0.80              1.00
                                     High                                                                        Low
                                     WTP      Percentile of households by willingness to pay                     WTP


                                               Full insurance          Gold        Silver      Bronze

Notes : The figure shows the distribution across family households of (a) willingness to pay, (b) the decomposi-
tion of willingness to pay for the Gold contract, and (c) social surplus, using parameter estimates derived from
the full sample of households (see Table A.12). The objects in all three panels are measured relative to the
Catastrophic contract. Panel (a) consists of four connected binned scatter plots, with respect to 100 quantiles
of households ordered by willingness to pay. Panel (b) consists of three connected binned scatter plots, with
the area between each line shaded to indicate the component represented. Panel (c) consists of four connected
binned scatter plots, with respect to 50 (to reduce noise) quantiles of households. This figure is referenced in
Section V.C.


                                                                   93
              Table A.13. Outcomes Under Different Distributions of Consumer Types

                                         Outcomes at First Best (FB ) and at the Optimal Menu (Opt ), among:
                                                   Metal-tier contracts                         Dense contracts
     Parameter Estimates          Full      Gold     Silv.        Brnz.    Ctstr.   SS ($)   Offer choice?    SS ($)

                           FB: 0.06         0.75     0.19         < 0.01      ­     1,542                      34
      Main estimates
                           Opt: ­           1.00      ­             ­         ­     1,514       Yes            14

                           FB:      ­       0.29     0.64          0.07       ­     1,091                      42
1.    Double mean 
                           Opt:     ­        ­       1.00            ­        ­     1,069       Yes             4

                           FB:    0.39      0.61    < 0.01          ­         ­     1,855                      10
2.    Halve mean 
                           Opt:   0.61      0.39      ­             ­         ­     1,842       Yes            11

                           FB:    0.30      0.68     0.02           ­         ­     2,184                      18
3.    Double mean 
                           Opt:   0.46      0.54      ­             ­         ­     2,162       Yes            15

                           FB:      ­       0.35     0.63          0.02    < 0.01    919                       18
4.    Halve mean 
                           Opt:     ­        ­       0.98            ­      0.02     915        Yes             2

                           FB:    0.07      0.74     0.18          0.01       ­     1,539                      33
5.    Increase var. 
                           Opt:    ­        1.00      ­             ­         ­     1,531       Yes             9

                           FB:    0.13      0.64     0.21          0.02    < 0.01   1,487                      30
6.    Increase var. 
                           Opt:   0.04      0.76     0.19          0.01       ­     1,463       Yes            16

                           FB:    0.06      0.83     0.11           ­         ­     1,410                      17
7.    Fix F
                           Opt:    ­        1.00      ­             ­         ­     1,407       Yes             6

                           FB:    0.16      0.67     0.17           ­         ­     1,457                      14
8.    Fix F and 
                           Opt:   0.14      0.68     0.18           ­         ­     1,456       Yes            12

                           FB:    0.17      0.72     0.11           ­         ­     1,568                      16
9.    Fix F and 
                           Opt:    ­        1.00      ­             ­         ­     1,559        No             4


Notes : The table shows results under nine perturbations of our parameter estimates, as well as under our main
estimates (column 3 of Tables 3 and A.10). Two sets of results are shown. First, the table shows the percent of
households assigned to each of the five metal-tier contracts (Figure A.4a) under the first best allocation (FB )
and under the optimal feasible allocation (Opt.), as well as the social surplus (SS ) achieved by those allocations,
relative to allocating all households to the Catastrophic contrat. Second, the table indicates whether or not
the optimal menu features a choice when considering a dense set of contracts (Figure A.4b), as well as the
associated social surplus gains ( SS ) at the first best and under the optimal feasible allocation. The nine
perturbation of parameter estimates are as follows: (1) double the moral hazard parameter  for all households;
(2) halve  for all households; (3) double the risk aversion parameter  for all households; (4) halve  for all
households; (5) double the amount of unobserved heterogeneity in moral hazard  ; (6) double the amount of
unobserved heterogeneity in log risk aversion  ; (7) fix household health type F in the population; (8) fix both
health F and the moral hazard parameter  in the population; and (9) fix both health F and risk aversion 
in the population. This table is referenced in Section V.C.




                                                             94
Figure A.9. Distribution of Consumer Surplus ($), Relative to "All Full Insurance"


        4,000



        2,000


                                                            All Gold
                                                             Policy (i)
             0

                                     Vertical choice
                                          Policy (v)


      -2,000

                        All Catastrophic
                           Policy (iii)

      -4,000
                 0.00        0.20              0.40             0.60      0.80   1.00
                 High                                                            Low
                 WTP    Percentile of households by willingness to pay           WTP



   Notes : The figure shows the distribution of consumer surplus across households under
   three policies considered in Table 4. Households are arranged on the horizontal axis ac-
   cording to their willingness to pay. Consumer surplus equals marginal willingness to pay
   less marginal premium-plus-tax, relative to the allocation of all households to full insur-
   ance. The premium/tax that supports the single contract is $6,298 under "All Catas-
   trophic," $10,619 under "All Gold," and $12,695 under "All full insurance." Premiums
   under "Vertical choice" are $7,059 for Full insurance, $4,594 for Gold, $2,173 for Silver,
   $375 for Bronze, $0 for Catastrophic, and a tax of $6,856. This figure is referenced in
   Section VI.B.




                                                       95
