                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO FIRMS WITH SPECIALIZED M&A STAFF MAKE BETTER ACQUISITIONS?

                                         Sinan Gokkaya
                                             Xi Liu
                                         René M. Stulz

                                       Working Paper 28778
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28778


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




Gokkaya is at Ohio University and a Visiting Scholar at the Fisher College of Business, The Ohio
State University. Liu is at the Farmer School of Business, Miami University. Stulz is at the Fisher
College of Business, The Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We are grateful for
discussions with participants at the 2020 Acuris Mergermarket US Corporate Development
Summit and to seminar participants at the joint seminar of the Universities of Bristol, Exeter,
Lancaster, and Manchester, and at the University of Washington. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Firms with Specialized M&A Staff Make Better Acquisitions?
Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 28778
May 2021
JEL No. G14,G24,G30,G34

                                         ABSTRACT

We open the black box of the M&A decision process by constructing a comprehensive sample of
US firms with specialized M&A staff. We investigate whether specialized M&A staff improves
acquisition performance or facilitates managerial empire building instead. We find that firms with
specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions when acquisition performance is measured by
stock price reactions to announcements, long-run stock returns, operating performance,
divestitures, and analyst earnings forecasts. This effect does not hold when the CEO is powerful,
overconfident, or entrenched. Acquisitions by firms without specialized staff do not create value,
on average. We provide evidence on mechanisms through which specialized M&A staff improves
acquisition performance. For identification, we use the staggered recognition of inevitable
disclosure doctrine as a source of exogenous variation in the employment of specialized M&A
staff.

Sinan Gokkaya                                   René M. Stulz
Department of Finance                           The Ohio State University
Ohio University                                 Fisher College of Business
gokkaya@ohio.edu                                806A Fisher Hall
                                                Columbus, OH 43210-1144
Xi Liu                                          and NBER
Farmer School of Business                       stulz@cob.osu.edu
Department of Finance
800 E. High St.
Oxford, OH 45056
liux60@miamioh.edu
1. Introduction

    Mergers and acquisitions represent the largest and most readily observable corporate investments.

Despite the importance of mergers and acquisitions (or just acquisitions for simplicity) for corporations and

for the reallocation of capital within the economy, there is still considerable debate in the literature on

whether firms create value for shareholders with these investments and why so many acquisitions appear

to be unsuccessful. In an attempt to understand the drivers of acquisition performance, an enormous

literature has focused on acquirer and target characteristics, on the incentives and characteristics of CEOs

and directors, the nature of the deals, and so on. However, this literature has not penetrated inside the black

box of the firm's internal decision-making process for acquisitions, most likely because of difficulty in

measuring organizational structure and skills pertaining to acquisitions. In this paper, we open this black

box by manually constructing a novel and comprehensive sample of US public firms employing specialized

M&A staff from 2000 to 2017 and provide the first in-depth investigation of the impact of specialized M&A

staff on acquisition outcomes.

    In the US, corporate staff focused on acquisitions, which we call specialized M&A staff, are corporate

development professionals housed in corporate development departments. As indicated by Marks, Slee, and

Blees (2012) as well as in Ernst & Young and Deloitte surveys, specialized M&A staff are involved in all

aspects of the acquisition process including, but not limited to, development of a firm's inorganic growth

strategy, identification of targets from internal pipelines and information memorandums sent by investment

banks, performing synergy and valuation analyses on transactions, participating in deal negotiations with

the target, undertaking financial due diligence, analyzing post-merger integration, and comparing ex-post

M&A outcomes to pre-acquisition forecasts.

    On the one hand, if the interests of the managers and shareholders are aligned and management is

focused on maximizing shareholder wealth, it will employ specialized M&A staff if such staff is expected

to improve sufficiently its ability to identify more suitable targets through the aforementioned acquisition

related functions and better integrate the target firms. This view leads to our value creation hypothesis,

which is that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions. On the other hand, it is well

                                                      1
recognized that management may pursue its own agenda and be focused on empire building through

acquisitions to extract private benefits rather than maximizing shareholder wealth. Such management may

also want to employ specialized M&A staff so that firm size can be increased faster through acquisitions.

In this case, specialized M&A staff is expected to facilitate management's empire-building behavior and

hence is not expected to improve acquisition performance. Therefore, our alternative hypothesis is what we

call the agency hypothesis--management employs specialized M&A staff to further its own agenda and

firms with specialized staff do not make better acquisitions. Ultimately, whether specialized M&A staff

helps firms create value through acquisitions is an open empirical question. We find that firms with

specialized M&A staff make significantly better acquisitions, so that, on average, the evidence supports the

value creation hypothesis and rejects the agency hypothesis.

    We manually construct a comprehensive sample of firms with specialized M&A staff using Boardex

Individual, LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. We find that 36.56%

of all public firms have specialized M&A staff between 2000 and 2017, and the percentage of firms

employing such staff exhibits an upward trend over time. For instance, roughly less than 30% of public US

firms employ specialized M&A staff before 2003, and this percentage exceeds 40% from 2011 to 2017.

When we focus on the employment of specialized M&A staff by acquirers, we find that 47.01% of

acquisitions are executed by firms employing such staff over the sample period. We begin our analyses by

examining the association between specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance using a sample of

11,098 unique acquisitions of public firms, private firms, and subsidiaries (totaling $6.38 trillion in deal

value).

    A traditional measure of acquisition performance is the abnormal stock price reaction to the

announcement of an acquisition. While not without controversy, this performance measure is immediate

and captures the stock market's expected change in discounted cash flows emanating from an acquisition.

We find that the average five-day cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over the [-2, +2] event window

surrounding the acquisition announcement is 0.75% and significant at the 1% level for firms with

specialized M&A staff. By contrast, the five-day CAR for acquisitions by firms without such staff is

                                                     2
insignificantly negative (-0.12%). The difference between the two samples is significant, translating into a

$95.77 million higher abnormal shareholder wealth gain per acquisition by firms with specialized M&A

staff. We report that the difference is similar for acquisitions of public, private, and subsidiary targets as

well as targets paid for with all cash or some equity.

    Our evidence from the univariate announcement returns is consistent with the value creation hypothesis

that firms use M&A specialized staff to make better acquisitions rather than to pursue empire-building

goals. It is, however, possible that firms with specialized M&A staff have higher acquisition returns for

other reasons. First, it could be that acquirers with specialized M&A staff have firm, deal, or top

management characteristics that are also associated with better acquisitions so that, if we control for these

characteristics, specialized M&A staff is no longer important for acquisition performance. Second, there

are various disadvantages to measuring acquisition performance with short-term CARs such as, among

others, over or underestimation of value created by a transaction, noise in the stock prices, and deal

anticipation (e.g., Malmendier, Moretti, and Peter, 2018; Ben-David, Bhattacharya, and Jacobsen, 2020).

Therefore, it is plausible that specialized M&A staff may not be associated with better acquisition

performance if we measure performance with alternative metrics. Third, specialized M&A staff is not

randomly allocated to firms. Hence, it is possible that non-random matching between specialized M&A

staff and firms or omitted characteristics that correlate with the employment of specialized M&A staff

explains or biases our results. We investigate these three plausible concerns in turn.

    There is a vast literature showing that acquirer CARs are related to firm, deal, CEO, and director

characteristics. We perform multivariate regressions that explicitly control for an array of such

characteristics (along with industry-year fixed effects). Our results show that specialized M&A staff is

among the most important factors related to acquisition performance. Ceteris paribus, five-day CARs are

1.31% higher for acquisitions of firms with specialized M&A staff compared to those of firms without such

staff, an abnormal gain of $145.89 million in shareholder wealth for the average acquirer in our sample.

    A valid concern is whether our results are robust to using alternative measures of acquisition

performance. We find that our results remain similar when we extend the pre-acquisition announcement

                                                         3
window to account for potential market anticipation of deal announcement and measure post-announcement

event returns over a longer window. We further find that our evidence is equally strong for performance

metrics that are not based on stock returns. We find that firms with specialized M&A staff 1) are less likely

to divest acquisitions, 2) have their consensus analyst earnings forecasts increase more following the

acquisitions, 3) have their abnormal operating performance improve more in the post-acquisition period

relative to the pre-acquisition year, and 4) are less likely to make an acquisition with a large shareholder

wealth loss.

    Having found that known determinants of acquisition performance do not explain the better acquisition

performance of firms with specialized M&A staff and that our results are robust to alternative performance

metrics, we then show that it is unlikely that potentially non-random matching between specialized M&A

staff and acquirers explains our results. The most obvious possible explanation for our results is that firms

hire specialized M&A staff in anticipation of valuable future acquisition opportunities. For instance, if a

firm believes that it can increase shareholder wealth through an acquisition strategy, it may be more likely

to hire specialized M&A staff. If so, higher acquisition returns are not the result of employing specialized

M&A staff, but instead, are due to acquiring firms having better inorganic growth opportunities. We provide

a series of tests to rule out this explanation. First, we use the empirical approach of past work (e.g., Custodio

and Metzger, 2013; Huang, Jiang, Lie and, Yang, 2014; Fields and Mkrtchyan, 2017, among others) and

remove acquisitions for which specialized M&A staff is hired within three (or five) years or more before

the acquisition is announced. In this case, it is difficult to believe that the firm hired specialized staff in

anticipation of a particular acquisition more than three (five years) years into the future. When we remove

such transactions, we find that specialized M&A staff still improves acquisition performance. Second,

mergers are documented to occur in waves (e.g., Harford, 2005). Therefore, it would seem likely that

acquisitions triggered by merger waves are less likely to be foreseen by firms relative to acquisitions

occurring outside merger waves. Our results hold for transactions announced as a part of a merger wave.

Third, we only focus on frequent acquirers executing acquisitions with and without specialized M&A staff

and add firm fixed effects. In this setting, we isolate time-invariant firm characteristics that may be related

                                                       4
to acquisition performance and employment of specialized M&A staff. Examining how acquisition

performance varies for the same firm between periods when it has specialized M&A staff and periods when

it does not, we find that acquisition performance is higher when firms have specialized M&A staff. Fourth,

we implement a propensity score matching technique using a nearest-neighbor matching estimator with

replacement. Specifically, we match acquisitions of firms with specialized M&A staff to similar

acquisitions executed by similar acquirers (including their acquisition likelihood) except that they do not

have specialized M&A staff. Our results remain similar. Fifth, we conduct a falsification test where we

replace our variable of interest (specialized M&A staff) with specialized product development staff. Unlike

corporate development, product development staff focuses on product and partner strategies. As expected,

we find that acquisition performance is not related to specialized product development staff.

    Perhaps most importantly, we exploit an exogenous variation in the probability of employing

specialized M&A staff using an instrumental variable analysis in a two-stage least squares framework. Our

instrument is the staggered recognition of the inevitable disclosure doctrine (IDD) by US state courts that

concludes that former employees can be prevented from working at rival firms if doing so inevitably results

in disclosures of trade secrets concerning their former employers (e.g., Klasa, Ortiz-Molina, Serfling, and

Srinivasan, 2018; Li, Qiu, and Shen, 2018; among others). We expect the adoption of IDD to increase the

likelihood that a firm employs specialized M&A staff since such staff is less likely to be poached by rival

firms--strategic plans and acquisitions are among the most common types of trade secrets lost to rivals and

former employees represent the greatest source of risk for losing such trade secrets. Using this source of

exogenous variation, we find that firms are indeed more likely to employ specialized M&A staff following

the staggered adoption of IDD. Importantly, accounting for this source of exogenous variation does not

affect the conclusion that specialized M&A staff improves acquisition performance. The results of these

numerous tests are difficult to explain except as support for our value creation hypothesis that firms make

better acquisitions because they have specialized M&A staff.

    We next seek to understand whether the benefits from specialized M&A staff vary cross-sectionally as

predicted. If specialized M&A staff improves acquisition performance, we would also expect that firms

                                                     5
with better specialized M&A staff make even better acquisitions. We find this to be the case--acquisition

performance is also incrementally related to measures of specialized M&A staff's quality. More

specifically, acquisition performance is even better when the managers of specialized M&A staff have

longer firm and employment experience, and when the acquirer has a larger specialized M&A staff. Further,

we expect that specialized staff do not improve acquisition performance when the CEO is less likely to

listen to their input when making acquisition decisions. Our evidence is consistent with this view--the

marginal impact of specialized M&A staff is positive but insignificant under powerful or overconfident

CEOs. Lastly, we examine whether specialized M&A staff adds value when agency costs of managerial

discretion are higher. We find that the marginal impact of specialized staff on acquisition performance is

insignificant for firms with dual-class shares, without independent boards, and when the CEO is the

chairman of the board.

    How does specialized M&A staff create value for the acquirer's shareholders? Our results suggest that

specialized M&A staff helps acquirers identify targets that have higher synergies with the acquirer as

reflected in higher combined announcement returns and improvements in the combined firm's abnormal

operating performance in the post-acquisition period. We do not find evidence that specialized M&A staff

drives a better bargain for the acquirer in that such acquirers capture more of the combined synergy gains

or pay lower takeover premiums. Moreover, while these firms do not seem to retain fewer external advisors,

we find that they pay lower advisory fees. The lower fees paid by firms with specialized M&A staff further

suggest that the specialized M&A staff performs some tasks that otherwise would be performed by the

investment bankers.

    Our evidence strongly suggests that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions. An

obvious question is why not all firms employ specialized staff. We attempt to gain a better understanding

of this question by further exploring the firm and management characteristics that are prevalent when a firm

employs specialized M&A staff. Obviously, such staff are not as valuable for firms for which inorganic

growth through acquisitions does not represent an important component of their growth strategy. As

expected, we find that the average ratio of total dollars spent on acquisitions relative to that on total

                                                     6
investments over the past ten years is positively associated with employment of specialized M&A staff. We

also find that firms are less likely to employ specialized M&A staff when management possesses more

specialized knowledge pertaining to acquisitions. Specifically, CEOs with longer industry experience,

experience in the target's industry, or with investment banking experience are less likely to employ such

staff. Firms with directors possessing such specialized knowledge are likewise less likely to employ

specialized M&A staff, consistent with the notion that CEOs may rely on such directors for acquisitions.

Finally, our findings show that firms with busier CEOs or directors are more likely to have specialized staff,

suggesting that such firms may delegate acquisition related tasks and functions to specialized M&A staff.

In sum, these results are consistent with the view that firms are more likely to have specialized M&A staff

when specialized staff are most useful to them.

    Our paper cuts across several strands of academic literature. First, we make an important contribution

to the vast body of literature attempting to identify the cross-sectional variation in acquisition performance

by focusing on deal, firm, and top management characteristics (for surveys of this literature, see Betton,

Eckbo, and Thorburn, 2008, and Renneboog and Vansteenkiste, 2019). In this paper, we open the black

box of the firm's acquisition-related decision-making process and find that more than 40% of US acquirers

have specialized M&A staff in the 2010s. More importantly, having specialized M&A staff is among the

most economically important factors for acquisition performance. The only related study is the survey paper

by Aktas, Boone, Witkowski, Xu, and Yurtoglu (2020). Their paper examines the role of internal M&A

teams through a small survey among large firms in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland. These teams have

some of the functions of the corporate development departments in the US, but not all. Specifically, unlike

European internal M&A teams, corporate development departments play a leading role in the development

of corporate inorganic growth strategy. Their empirical work uses 40 public firms, all of which appear to

use M&A teams. The authors also find correlations suggesting that internal M&A teams affect outcomes

for their sample of large European firms, but they are mostly focused on the value of internal M&A teams

relative to the value of external advisors. In contrast, we offer the first large-sample systematic evidence on

the implications of specialized M&A staff in the US where we compare firms with specialized M&A staff

                                                      7
to other firms, provide identification, identify settings where such staff adds value to acquisition outcomes,

and explore why some firms employ specialized M&A staff and others do not.

    Second, our study fits into the broader literature in economics, finance, and management that seeks to

understand the impact of management practices on corporate decision making and firm performance (e.g.,

Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007, 2010; Bloom, Eifer, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts, 2013; Duchin and

Sosyura, 2013; Agrawal, Hacamo, and Hu, 2020). Research in this field acknowledges that the practices,

training, skills, and decision rights of managers outside the executive suite can crucially affect corporate

behavior and performance. We add to this growing literature by highlighting the importance of specialized

M&A staff for the largest and most important investments made by US corporations.

    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain the role of specialized M&A staff in

corporations, show how we build our sample, and compare firms with specialized staff and their

acquisitions to firms without specialized staff and their acquisitions. In Section 3, we examine the

association between specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance. While doing so, we consider a

wide array of alternative performance metrics (Section 3.2), provide a number of tests to mitigate

endogeneity concerns (Section 3.3), and consider cross-sectional analyses (Section 3.4). In Section 4, we

turn to an investigation of how specialized M&A staff contributes to acquisition performance. In Section

5, we further examine why some firms have specialized staff and others do not. Section 6 concludes.



2. Specialized M&A staff: Definition, sample construction, and sample characteristics

    In this section, we first show how we identify whether a firm has specialized M&A staff, explain the

construction of our sample of acquisitions, and demonstrate how firm and transaction characteristics differ

depending on whether the acquirer employs specialized M&A staff.




                                                      8
2.1. Definition and identification of specialized M&A staff

    In the US, specialized M&A staff focused on acquisitions are corporate development professionals

housed in the corporate development department and managed by corporate development managers. For

the most part, as indicated by Ernst & Young and Deloitte surveys,2 and Marks, Slee, and Blees (2012), as

well as our interviews with corporate development managers, specialized M&A staff are involved in all

aspects of inorganic corporate growth strategy, including: i) identifying target firms from internal deal

pipeline and strategic M&A portfolios, as well as analyses of teasers and confidential information

memorandums sent by investment bankers, ii) undertaking synergy and valuation analyses through the

examination of revenue and cost synergies, product portfolios and fit of corporate cultures between the

acquirer and target, iii) participating in M&A negotiations, iv) undertaking financial due diligence, v)

analyses of post-merger integration via transaction integration and post-closing adjustments and assessing

ex-post M&A performance.3 Ultimately, corporate development professionals are viewed as central to

corporations' inorganic growth strategy and they spend roughly 80% of their time on acquisition-related

functions (e.g., E&Y, 2015). Typically, corporate development managers report directly to the top executive

team, and their compensation is generally tied to i) identification of potential targets, ii) return on completed

transactions, iii) fit of transactions with corporate strategy, iv) realization of transaction synergies, and iv)

the number of deals completed.

    In this paper, we take the view that if a firm has one or more corporate development managers, it

indicates that the firm employs specialized M&A staff focused on acquisitions. Such an association is

almost obvious as corporate development managers and professionals spend much of their time on

acquisition-related functions. To identify whether a firm has specialized M&A staff, we construct a sample

of corporate development managers from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual (Boardex


2
  See, Ernst & Young "2015 Global Corporate development study: corporate development today--driving strategy,
accelerating growth" and annual "Corporate Development strategy" surveys by Deloitte.
3
  Other responsibilities of corporate development officers may include: 1) corporate strategy development, 2)
providing financing for acquisitions, development programs, and corporate initiatives through project loans, term
loans, high-yield notes, margin loans, stock issuance, and working capital revolvers, 3) financial planning and
analyses, and 4) ad-hoc strategy and briefing to executives.

                                                       9
Individual).4 We start our sample in 2000 as Boardex Individual's coverage is relatively incomplete prior

to 2000 (e.g., Ishii and Xuan, 2014). We manually construct a comprehensive sample of corporate

development managers from Boardex Individual by parsing the "Rolename" and "Full text Description" of

individual profiles for variants of "Corporate Development." Corporate development managers are defined

as individuals holding the following titles: "Head/Global Head/Chief of Corporate Development," as well

as corporate development managers with the following titles: "Corporate Director" or "Executive Director"

or "President" or "Co-President" or "Chairman" or "Co-Chairman" or "Vice President" or "Executive Vice

President" or "Managing Director" or "Regional Director".

       To ascertain the quality of the data cleaning and integration process, we manually check all corporate

development managers, their titles, employing companies and employment dates, and make the necessary

corrections. For instance, in some cases, Boardex Individual assigns a different identifier to the same

individual or the same firm because it collects biographical information from public sources that may use

different spellings or abbreviations. We manually go through every observation to ensure the same

individual or firm is associated with only one unique identifier and eliminate duplications in the process.

For corporate development managers with non-complete profiles (i.e., missing employer firm names or

employment years or vague titles), we manually collect complete historical employment background

information from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. In addition, for

corporate development managers with non-missing profiles at Boardex Individual, we cross-check their

appointment dates using the above sources. Next, we merge our sample of corporate development managers

with CRSP/Compustat using employer firms' CUSIPs, CIK codes, and Boardex Individual company names

to obtain financial statement and stock return information. This leaves us with a novel and comprehensive

sample of 8,566 corporate development managers employed by 3,593 public U.S. firms between 2000 and

2017.




4
    Due to data availability, we do not observe rank and file level junior specialized M&A staff.

                                                            10
    Table 1 documents the distribution of corporate development managers and the number of US

corporations employing at least one corporate development manager over time. A clear time-series pattern

is observed. Consistent with the growing importance and prevalence of specialized M&A staff in the US as

indicated by practitioner surveys, the percentage of public firms employing corporate development

managers increases over time. For example, in 2000, 1,042 firms have a at least one corporate development

manager, or 25.51% of firms in our merged sample of Boardex Individual/CRSP/Compustat. In our sample,

these firms employ 1,672 unique corporate development managers for whom there is information in

Boardex Individual. By 2007, 35% of public firms have at least one corporate development manager. This

percentage exceeds 40% after 2011. Overall, 36.56% of all public US firms employ at least one corporate

development manager who supervises specialized M&A staff between 2000 and 2017.



2.2. The acquisition sample

    We next merge the sample of corporate development managers with Thomson One Platinum Securities

Data Company (SDC) M&A database and collect deal information from January 1, 2000, to December 31,

2017. We exclude transactions labeled as spinoffs, recapitalizations, repurchases, exchange offers, minority

stake purchases, acquisitions of remaining interest, and privatizations. We restrict the acquirers and targets

to be domestic companies and focus on transactions that involve a change of control, defined as acquirers

having a majority of target shares after the transaction but not before. Our full sample selection criteria are

as follows:



         Step 1: All Acquisitions between January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017.

         Step 2: Deal Status is "Completed."

         Step 3: Acquirer and Target are domestic companies.

         Step 4: The acquirer owns less than 50% of the target six months prior to the deal announcement

         and controls more than 50% of the target following the transaction.



                                                      11
         Step 5: The deal value exceeds $1 million and represents at least 1% of the acquirer's market

         capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the deal announcement date.



    After implementing these data screens and merging the M&A sample with the Boardex

Individual/CRSP/Compustat sample, we are left with 11,098 transactions executed by 2,602 unique firms

and totaling over $6.38 trillion in deal value.

    In column five of Table 1, we show the distribution of the 11,098 unique transactions over our sample

period. The deal activity reaches its highest level in 2005, drops significantly following the 2007-2008

crisis, and then recovers starting in 2010. The pattern is consistent with past studies. In column six of Table

1, we show the percentage of transactions undertaken by firms with specialized M&A staff. As expected,

firms with specialized M&A staff acquire more, so that the percentage of acquisitions executed by firms

with specialized M&A staff (as shown in column five) exceeds the percentage of firms with specialized

staff (as shown in column three). We find that 47.01% of M&As are executed by acquirers with specialized

M&A staff between 2000 and 2017 compared to 36.56% of all public US firms having specialized M&A

staff.



2.3. How do acquirer- and deal-specific characteristics vary based on employment of
specialized M&A staff?

    In Table 2, we present descriptive statistics for the characteristics of acquirers and transactions for the

overall sample of M&As, and separately for M&As of firms with and without specialized M&A staff,

respectively. All variables are defined in the Appendix. Panel A of Table 2 documents acquirer

characteristics. The mean (median) acquirer size is $11.13 (1.45) billion in our sample. Acquirers with

specialized M&A staff are significantly larger relative to acquirers without such staff. This result is perhaps

not surprising given that top management of larger firms cannot devote as much attention and time to

individual acquisitions. In contrast, in smaller firms, top executives and directors typically take the lead in

acquisitions (e.g., Marks, Slee, and Blees, 2012). Since the existing evidence that the acquisition


                                                      12
performance of larger acquirers is worse than that of smaller acquirers (e.g., Moeller, Schlingemann, and

Stulz, 2004), the fact that larger firms are more likely to have specialized M&A staff suggests that univariate

comparisons of acquisition performance between firms with and without specialized M&A staff may

potentially lead to higher stock price reactions for firms without such staff.

    We also find that acquirers with specialized M&A staff have better stock price performance (14.2%)

over the [-205, -6] event window relative to the deal announcement date, compared to acquirers without

such M&A staff (11.8%). Stock return volatility does not vary economically across acquirers depending on

the employment of specialized M&A staff over the same event window. Past studies argue debt serves as a

monitoring device that makes it less likely that acquirers will make poor acquisitions (e.g., Maloney,

McCormick, and Mitchell, 1993; Masulis, Wang, and Xie, 2007). We find that acquirers with specialized

M&A staff have lower book leverage during the fiscal year preceding acquisition announcements,

suggesting that debt plays less of a monitoring role for such firms. Prior studies show that the bidder's

Tobin's Q has an ambiguous effect on the shareholder wealth effects of M&As (e.g., Lang, Stulz, and

Walking, 1989; Servaes, 1991; Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson, and Teoh, 2006), while firms with higher

return on assets (ROA) have acquisitions that create more abnormal value (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny,

1990). The average acquirer with specialized M&A staff has a higher Tobin's Q and higher ROA prior to

M&A announcements compared to other acquirers. Consistent with Jensen's (1986) free cash flow

hypothesis, past work reports a negative relation between free cash flow and M&A announcement returns

(e.g., Lang, Stulz, and Walkling, 1991). Acquirers with specialized M&A staff have higher cash flow-to-

equity ratios at the fiscal year-end before the acquisition announcement. 36.6% of acquirers with such staff

operate in high-tech industries as defined in Loughran and Ritter (2004), compared to 23% for the other

acquirers. Finally, the mean and median institutional ownership, defined as the fraction of the acquirer's

stock owned by institutional investors during the quarter before the M&A announcement, is higher for firms

with specialized M&A staff. Chen, Harford and Li (2007) arrive at the conclusion that total institutional

holding is uninformative for M&A performance.



                                                      13
    In Panel B, we present statistics for a number of deal characteristics examined in the M&A literature.

The mean (median) dollar size of the transaction relative to the size of the acquirer is smaller for acquirers

with specialized M&A staff. Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004) find a negative association between

relative deal size and acquirer returns. Focusing on the ownership status of targets, we find that 49% of

targets are private firms, and 34.6% of targets are subsidiaries of target firms. Existing empirical evidence

shows that acquirer returns are higher for acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries (e.g., Fuller, Netter

and Stegemoller, 2002; Netter, Stegemoller, and Wintoki, 2011). Firms with specialized M&A staff are

more likely to acquire public firms and less likely to acquire subsidiaries compared to other firms. Not

surprisingly, hostile acquisitions are unusual in our sample as they represent only 0.2% of all acquisitions

in our sample. There is no difference in the frequency of hostile acquisitions between firms with and without

specialized M&A staff. Next, we consider whether diversifying acquisitions vary based on the employment

of specialized M&A staff. We define an acquisition as diversifying if the acquirer and target firm do not

belong to the same two-digit SIC code (e.g., Golubov, Petmezas, and Travlos, 2012). Past research shows

mixed results on the association between diversifying deals and value creation from M&As (Morck,

Shleifer and Vishny, 1990; Campa, and Kedia, 2002; Villalonga, 2004; Masulis, Wang, and Xie, 2007).

Approximately 47.9% of acquisitions are classified as diversifying transactions and firms with specialized

M&A staff are less likely to undertake such transactions. With respect to the method of payment used for

acquisitions, 35.8% of acquisitions are financed solely by cash, while 21.6% of acquisitions have some or

all stock financing. The remaining deals (42.66%) involve some cash or other method of payment. The

literature finds that acquisitions paid for with some stock have lower stock price reactions (e.g., Travlos,

1987; Amihud, Lev, and Travlos, 1990). Firms with specialized M&A staff are more likely to make

acquisitions financed by pure cash only. In terms of the retention of external financial advisors, an average

M&A transaction is associated with 0.38 external advisors (1.23 advisors conditional on the retention of at

least one external advisor), with top tier banks representing roughly one fourth of financial advisors (65%

conditional on retention of at least one advisor). These figures are higher for acquirers with specialized

M&A staff.

                                                      14
3. Specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance

    In this section, we examine the association between specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance

to test our value creation and agency hypotheses. In section 3.1, we examine the abnormal stock price

reactions to acquisition announcements. In section 3.2, we consider alternative ways of measuring

acquisition performance with alternative announcement event windows, announcement returns that account

for bid anticipation, avoidance of large loss deals, long-term buy-and-hold-abnormal returns following

acquisition announcements, likelihood of divestitures following acquisitions, post-acquisition abnormal

operating performance, and changes in analyst earnings forecasts surrounding acquisition announcements.

In Section 3.3, we consider the impact of potential non-random matching between acquirers and the

employment of specialized M&A staff on our parameter estimates. Finally, in Section 3.4, we examine

cross-sectional variation in the association between acquisition performance and specialized M&A staff as

well as CEO characteristics.



3.1. Abnormal Announcement Returns

    Our value creation hypothesis posits that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions.

In particular, this means that acquisition-related functions undertaken by specialized M&A staff should

translate into higher wealth creation for shareholders of the acquiring firms. Alternatively, with our agency

hypothesis, management is focused on extracting private benefits and specialized M&A staff facilitates

management's empire-building behavior through acquisitions. With the agency hypothesis, therefore,

specialized M&A staff is not expected to be associated with higher wealth creation for shareholders.

    A traditional way to measure whether an acquisition creates wealth is to assess the abnormal reaction

of the stock market to the announcement of an acquisition. We use this approach as our starting point. To

this end, we calculate market model adjusted abnormal returns (CARs) over the [-2, +2] event window

surrounding acquisition announcement dates obtained from the SDC M&A database. The parameters of the

market model are estimated using the CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the



                                                     15
acquisition announcement date (e.g., Golubov, Petmezas, and Travlos, 2012). All the results we show are

robust to using a three-day event window surrounding acquisition announcements (i.e., [-1, +1]) and using

alternative windows to estimate the market model (i.e., [-210, -11] as in Masulis, Wang, and Xie, 2007;

Huang, Lie, and Yang, 2014).

    Panel A of Table 3 presents the estimates for average cumulative abnormal returns surrounding

acquisition announcements. For the full sample, the average CAR is 0.28% and is significant at the 1%

level. When we distinguish between acquirers based on the employment of specialized M&A staff, we find

an average acquisition CAR for firms with specialized M&A staff of 0.75% and significant at the 1% level

(t-statistic of 7.48). In contrast, the average acquisition CAR for firms without specialized M&A staff is an

insignificant -0.12% (t-statistic of -1.21). The difference in announcement returns of acquisitions by firms

with specialized M&A staff and other firms is 0.86% and is significant at the 1% level (t-statistic of 6.21).

In untabulated analyses, we also estimate average CARs on a yearly basis. The average yearly CAR is never

negative for acquisitions by firms with specialized staff, and is significantly positive for fourteen out of

eighteen years considered in our sample period. In sharp contrast, the average yearly CAR for acquisitions

of firms without specialized staff is negative ten out of eighteen years over the same time period,

significantly so in four years (i.e., 2001, 2003, 2004, 2008), and average yearly CAR is significantly positive

only in one year (i.e., 2014). In further untabulated analyses, we also estimate value-weighted CARs with

the market capitalization of acquiring firms on 50 trading days prior to the M&A announcement date serving

as our weights. We find that the value-weighted average CAR for acquisitions of firms with specialized

staff is 0.493% (t-statistic of 5.49) and it is -0.210% (t-statistic of -2.42) for firms without such staff. The

difference between these two groups of acquisitions is significant at the 1% level (t-statistic of 5.63).

    As indicated earlier, it is known that stock price reactions differ greatly between acquisitions of public

firms, acquisitions of private firms, and acquisitions of subsidiaries. Therefore, in Panel B, we report results

where we divide the sample according to the type of acquisition. With our hypothesis, we expect all three

types of acquisitions to have higher average CARs for firms with specialized M&A staff. We find that the

acquisitions of public firms, private firms, and subsidiaries have higher average CARs for firms employing

                                                      16
specialized M&A staff. There is no subsample where average CAR is positive and significant for firms

without such staff. The average CAR for acquisitions of public firms is significantly negative irrespective

of whether a firm has specialized M&A staff.

    Acquisition announcement returns are also known to vary based on the mode of payment. In Panel C,

we consider subsamples of acquisitions paid for with no equity and acquisitions paid for with some or all

equity. Once again, we find that acquirers with specialized M&A staff have significantly higher average

CARs irrespective of the mode of payment. The average CARs for firms with specialized M&A staff are

significantly positive, while the average CARs for the remaining firms are insignificant in the case of

acquisitions paid for with no equity and significantly negative (t-statistic of -1.81) in the case of acquisitions

paid for with some equity.

    Lastly, we split the subsamples in Panel B by mode of payment and show the results in Panel D. For

acquisitions paid for without equity, average CARs are significantly higher for acquisitions of private and

subsidiary targets by firms with specialized M&A staff than for other firms. When the mode of payment

includes at least some equity, we find significant differences for acquisitions of subsidiaries, but not for

acquisitions of public and private firms, even though the differences are economically similar for

acquisitions paid for without equity. However, in Panel D, no acquisition type has a significantly positive

average CAR for acquisitions executed by firms without specialized M&A staff. In contrast, acquisitions

of private firms and subsidiaries are associated with significantly positive average CARs for acquisitions

by firms with specialized M&A staff. Acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity have significantly

negative average CARs irrespective of whether the acquirer employs specialized M&A staff.

    Our univariate results up to this point are consistent with the value creation hypothesis. However, it is

possible that firms with specialized M&A staff have higher acquisition returns because of uncontrolled firm

and deal characteristics that are associated with higher acquisition returns. To address this concern, we next

estimate OLS regressions and explicitly control for a battery of acquirer and deal characteristics that are

standard in the literature and introduced in Section 2.3. Our dependent variable is the CAR estimated over



                                                       17
the [-2, +2] event window surrounding the acquisition announcement date.5 Our key independent variable

of interest is a binary indicator equal to one if the acquirer has specialized M&A staff, and zero otherwise.

Harford (2005) shows acquisitions occur in waves and these waves are clustered within industries. Hence,

we include industry and year, as well as industry-year paired fixed effects in our specifications, and report

heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. In untabulated analyses, we also cluster standard errors at the

acquirer level and find that the results are essentially the same. Our regression model is as follows (we omit

the time and stock subscripts):



CAR (-2, +2) = 1 Specialized M&A Staff + 2 Stock Price Runup + 3 Sigma + 4 Ln (Acquirer Size)+ 5

Book Leverage + 6 Tobin's Q + 7 ROA + 8 Book-to-Market + 9 Cash Flows-to-Equity + 10 High Tech

+ 11 Institutional Ownership + 12 Relative Size + 13 Private + 14 Subsidiary + 15 Hostile + 16

Diversifying + 17 No of Advisors + 18 Top tier Advisor+ 19 Payment-All Cash + 20 Payment-Includes

Stock + 21 No of M&As (past 10 years)+ Industry and Year Fixed Effects/ Industry-Year Fixed Effects+ 

                                                                                                             (1)

    Table 4 presents estimates of the model. Models 1 and 2 differ in fixed effects. Model 1 includes

industry and year fixed effects, and Model 2 includes industry-year paired fixed effects. Irrespective of the

fixed effects used, acquisitions by firms with specialized M&A staff have higher abnormal returns after

explicitly controlling for a battery of acquirer- and deal-specific characteristics. For instance, Model 2,

which has industry-year paired fixed effects, suggests that CARs of acquirers with specialized M&A staff

are 1.31% higher relative to those of other firms. For the average acquirer in our sample, this coefficient

estimate translates into an abnormal gain of $145.89 million in shareholder value. To put this result in

economic perspective, one standard deviation increase in acquirer size (book leverage) is related to 0.49%


5
  Fuller, Netter, and Stegemoller (2002) find that announcement dates obtained from SDC are inaccurate by no more
than two trading days for 8% of the M&A sample. Therefore, for our main analyses, we use 5-day announcement
returns as our dependent variable. Results are similar when we consider the shorter event window (i.e. [-1, +1])
surrounding M&A announcements as documented in Appendix Table 1.



                                                       18
(0.24%) lower (higher) acquirer announcement returns, while acquisitions paid for with all cash generate

0.31% higher announcement returns. The sign of most of the parameter estimates for other controls is

generally consistent with past studies.

    The existing literature shows that acquisition announcement returns may also be related to CEO and

director characteristics (e.g., Malmendier and Tate, 2008; Custodio and Metzger, 2013; Huang, Jiang, Lie,

and Yang, 2014; Field and Mkrtchyan, 2017). Therefore, we obtain a battery of CEO and director specific

characteristics from Boardex Individual, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp, and control for the following

attributes: CEO tenure, CEO gender, CEO-Chairman duality, CEOs experience in target's industry, CEOs'

financial or investment banking experience, number/percentage of directors with financial or executive or

investment banking or experience in target firm's industry. The sample size is reduced to 7,034 acquisitions

due to data availability. In Model 3, we repeat our regressions with the addition of these CEO and director-

specific characteristics. For brevity, we do not report coefficients on such characteristics. Our results

continue to show that the coefficient estimate on Specialized M&A Staff remains positive and statistically

significant. This coefficient translates into a 1.11% higher average CAR, representing a $122.50 million

higher abnormal shareholder wealth gain for the average acquirer five days surrounding the announcement

window. In light of the positive association between acquirer size and employment of specialized M&A

staff as documented in Panel A of Table 2, we finally consider the possibility that the relation between

CARs and the acquirer's size may be nonlinear. To address this, Model 4 includes two additional controls

for the acquirer size: i) an indicator variable for large bidders where an acquirer is defined as a large bidder

if the size of an acquirer is above the sample median of this measure, zero otherwise, and ii) the squared

acquirer size. Once again, our results remain similar.



3.2. Alternative measures of acquisition performance

    Section 3.1. uses short-term abnormal acquisition announcement returns as a measure of acquisition

performance. This measure is widely used and has significant advantages. First, by definition, short-term

CARs capture the market's expected change in future discounted cash flows emanating from the

                                                      19
announcement of a transaction. Second, it is an immediate and market-based estimate for the wealth effect

of the announcement of a transaction. However, there are also various disadvantages to measuring M&A

performance with short-term CARs. First, it is plausible that synergies and value created by a transaction

may be over or underestimated around the announcement of M&As because of deal anticipation,

information leakage during the private merger bidding process, uncertainties surrounding deal completion,

arbitrageur positioning, as well as market inefficiencies. Second, the short-term CARs may be affected by

information about the standalone firm value of the acquirer signaled by the acquisition announcement.

Specifically, a firm announcing an acquisition could signal a lack of internal growth opportunities, and a

firm paying with equity could signal that its stock may be overvalued (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 2003).

Given these issues, it is perhaps not surprising that some studies (e.g., Malmendier, Moretti, and Peter,

2018; Ben-David, Bhattacharya, and Jacobsen, 2020) conclude that short-term announcement returns may

not correlate with post-acquisition long-term performance.

    In Table 5, we present evidence using other metrics of acquisition performance. While these measures

are interesting on their own, they also allow us to be more confident that the positive association between

specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance documented in Section 3.1. is not sensitive to how

acquisition performance is measured. First, in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5, we measure CARs starting at

trading day -21 or -42 relative to the announcement date to account for the possibility that the stock market

anticipates M&A announcements (e.g., Schwert 1996, 2000) and repeat Model 2 of Table 4 with these

CARs serving as our dependent variable. Our results are robust to using these alternative measures of

acquisition performance. In Column 3, we investigate whether acquisitions by firms with specialized M&A

staff are less likely to be associated with large shareholder wealth losses (Large Loss Acquisition) defined

as transactions for which shareholders of acquiring firms lose more than $500 million in 2017 dollars over

the [-2, +2] event window surrounding the announcement date (e.g., Field and Mkrtchyan, 2017). Towards

this end, we estimate a logistic regression with the aforementioned acquirer and transaction characteristics

where a binary indicator for large loss transactions serves as our dependent variable. As illustrated in

Column 3 of Table 5, firms with specialized staff are much less likely to make large loss acquisitions.

                                                     20
    Next, we examine whether acquisitions executed by firms with specialized M&A staff have better

performance over a longer horizon following M&A announcements. We employ characteristics-adjusted

stock returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) and calculate post-M&A long-term buy-and-

hold abnormal returns (BHAR) over 2 trading days prior to the announcement date through the effective

closing date (DGTW BHAR [-2, Close]), as well as six months or one year after the announcement date

(DGTW BHAR [-2, 126]; DGTW BHAR [-2, +252]), and then repeat Model 2 of Table 4 with long-term

BHARs serving as our dependent variable. Columns 4 through 6 indicate that the greater acquisition

performance of firms with specialized M&A staff is economically more significant when returns are

measured over longer event windows. Economically, acquirers with specialized M&A staff outperform

acquirers without such staff by roughly 4.5% to 4.7% over six months and one year following the

acquisition announcement date.

    Another commonly employed measure of M&A performance is whether an acquisition is subsequently

divested (e.g., Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992). To supplement our analyses with this measure, we obtain a

complete list of divestitures from SDC and then define our dependent variable as a binary indicator that

equals one if the acquirer makes a divestiture in the same two-digit SIC industry of the target firm within

three years following an acquisition's effective closing date (Divestment). In Column 7, we estimate a

logistic regression where the binary indicator for Divestment is our dependent variable. Our results show a

negative and significant coefficient estimate on Specialized M&A staff, suggesting that acquisitions

considered unsuccessful ex-post are less likely to be undertaken by firms with specialized M&A staff.

    Next, we consider changes in average analyst consensus earnings forecasts (EPS) around M&A

announcements (e.g., Chen, Harford, and Li, 2007). The benefit of this measure is that it captures how sell-

side analysts revise their expectations for the acquirer as a result of a particular acquisition. We obtain

annual earnings forecast data from I/B/E/S and calculate the changes in analyst earnings forecasts as the

difference between annual analyst consensus earnings forecasts six months preceding the M&A

announcement date and six months following the closing date (Change in Consensus Analyst EPS forecast).

Column 8 re-estimates Model 2 of Table 4 with changes in analyst earnings forecasts serving as our

                                                    21
dependent variable. We find that firms with specialized M&A staff have a greater increase in analyst

consensus EPS forecasts compared to firms without such staff, which again supports our hypothesis that

acquirers with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions.

    Finally, we consider changes in post-acquisition abnormal operating performance. We follow the

existing literature and measure operating performance with return on assets (ROA) (e.g., Chen, Harford,

and Li, 2007, and Custodio and Metzger, 2013). Given that the counterfactual operating performance (i.e.,

had the acquirer not acquired a firm) is difficult to measure, we use the industry performance as

counterfactual and calculate industry-adjusted abnormal ROAs. To do so, we follow Barber and Lyon

(1996) and construct industry-benchmark portfolios by identifying all firms sharing the same two-digit SIC

code as the acquirers (excluding the acquirer and target firms) and selecting matched firms with ROAs that

are between 90% and 110% of the acquiring firm's ROA during the year preceding acquisition

announcement. If no matching firms can be found, we select the industry-matched firm with the closest

ROA to that of the acquirer. We calculate the median ROA of industry-benchmark portfolios and define

industry-adjusted ROA as the difference between the ROA of the acquirer and median ROA of the

benchmark portfolio of industry-matched firms. We then compare the changes in industry-adjusted ROA

for the acquiring firms from the pre-acquisition year (t-1) to one, two, and three years after deal completion

(t+1, t+2, and t+3). Re-estimating Model 2 of Table 4 with changes in industry-adjusted ROA serving as

our dependent variable in Columns 9 through 11, we find that firms with specialized M&A staff are

associated with higher abnormal ROA changes following the acquisitions relative to firms without

specialized M&A staff.

    Taken as a whole, the empirical evidence in Table 5 continues to support our value creation hypothesis

that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions and is inconsistent with our alternative

agency hypothesis. We find that these firms create more shareholder wealth through acquisitions, are less

likely to announce a large loss acquisition, have better post-acquisition stock performance, are less likely

to divest the acquisition, and experience greater expected and realized improvement in accounting

performance.

                                                     22
3.3. Do firms make better acquisitions because of specialized staff?

    Our results in the previous sections demonstrate that firms with specialized M&A acquisition staff

make better acquisitions. A plausible concern with these analyses is that specialized M&A staff is not

randomly allocated to firms but, rather, firms choose when (or if) to have such specialized M&A staff. For

example, if firms that foresee valuable future acquisition opportunities also decide to hire such staff, then

the higher acquisition performance of firms with specialized M&A staff would be due to better acquisition

opportunities rather than due to having such staff. If the employment of specialized M&A staff is

endogenously determined, then OLS estimates presented in earlier sections could produce unreliable

estimates. In this section, we provide a number of tests to mitigate this concern and provide more direct

evidence on our value creation hypothesis. All regressions control for the acquirer and deal-specific

characteristics introduced in Section 2.3, but we do not report the coefficients to make the table easier to

read.

    First, we focus on acquirers for which specialized M&A staff was in place at least three years prior to

the announcement of an acquisition. If the non-random matching between acquirers and specialized M&A

staff is driving our results, then we would expect such results to be generated by specialized staff hired

recently prior to a transaction. Therefore, we remove transactions for which the acquiring firm hired

specialized M&A staff within three years before an acquisition announcement. Given that it is highly

unlikely that specialized staff was hired in anticipation of a transaction more than three years into the future,

this empirical method provides a way of eliminating transactions that are most likely to be subject to non-

random matching between acquirers and the hiring of specialized M&A staff. This empirical method is

used by past studies looking at the association between the characteristics of top executive teams and

acquisition performance (e.g., Huang, Jiang, Lie, and Yang, 2014, and Fields and Mkrtchyan, 2017). Re-

estimating Model 2 of Table 4 with this restricted sample, Model 1 of Table 6 documents that firms with

specialized M&A staff continue to have higher CARs. Importantly, the coefficient estimate on Specialized

M&A Staff is economically similar to those obtained in Table 4. In Model 2 of Table 6, we take a step



                                                       23
further and eliminate acquisitions where specialized M&A staff was hired during the five years before an

acquisition announcement. We find similar results with this more restricted subsample.

    Second, we exploit the fact that mergers occur in waves, and merger wave-induced acquisition

opportunities are less likely to be foreseen relative to acquisitions executed outside the wave period (e.g.,

Custodio and Metzger, 2013). Therefore, it is sensible to alleviate endogeneity concerns by differentiating

between in-wave and out-of-wave M&As. To this end, we partition Specialized M&A staff into two

variables based on whether an acquisition is announced within an industry hit by a merger wave or occurs

outside of a wave and then re-estimate our baseline regressions. We define an acquisition as part of a wave

if a transaction is announced between six months before the start of a merger wave and six months after the

end of a merger wave, where merger waves are defined as in Harford (2005). We eliminate merger waves

induced by deregulation. Using logistic regressions, untabulated analyses document that the acquisition

likelihood of firms is higher by 11.87% during a wave period relative to out-of-wave periods after

controlling for variables known to affect the acquisition propensity. Results are robust for firms with and

without specialized staff. Hence, we conclude that merger waves indeed increase the acquisition propensity

of firms considered in our sample. More importantly, in Model 3 of Table 6, we find that firms with

specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions both during waves and outside waves.

    Third, we consider the possibility that unobserved firm characteristics may explain the positive

coefficient on the specialized M&A staff indicator. If one takes the view that the matching between firms

and employment of specialized M&A staff is based on time-invariant firm characteristics, then a valid way

to address this concern is to rely on within-firm variation by controlling for firm fixed effects. Towards this

end, Model 4 of Table 6 focuses on a subsample of frequent acquirers with and without specialized M&A

staff and includes firm fixed effects. It is important to note that this test is feasible only for acquirers that

have within firm variation in the employment of specialized staff. Our results show that firms make better

acquisitions during periods when they employ specialized M&A staff than during periods when they do not

have such staff. For the same firm, average CAR over the [-2, +2] event window surrounding the M&A

announcement date is 1.09% higher when the firm has specialized M&A staff than when it does not.

                                                       24
    Fourth, we compare the acquisition performance of firms with specialized M&A staff to that of firms

that have a similar propensity of having specialized staff but do not employ such staff. We first estimate a

probit regression on observable acquirer and deal characteristics introduced in Section 2.3 with the

employment of specialized M&A staff serving as our dependent variable. We then match acquirers using a

nearest-neighbor matching estimator with replacement using the propensity scores obtained from the probit

model. This method allows us to match acquisitions by firms with specialized M&A staff to similar

acquisitions by similar acquirers, except that they do not employ specialized staff. Finally, we estimate

OLS regressions on the control and matched sample of acquisitions using Model 2 of Table 4. Model 5 of

Table 6 presents these results. Again, acquirers with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions.

    Next, we repeat the propensity score matching technique but, this time, we also match on acquisition

likelihood of firms in a given year to mitigate the concern that the firms with specialized M&A staff are

more likely to make acquisitions and this association may potentially bias our estimates. We obtain

propensity scores from bivariate probit regressions that use the full sample of firms in CRSP/Compustat

where the dependent variable takes the value of one if a firm announces at least one acquisition in year t,

and of zero otherwise. As expected, firms employing specialized M&A staff in year t-1 are more likely to

execute an acquisition in year t relative to firms lacking such staff. We next repeat the nearest-neighbor

matching estimator propensity score matching technique but now also control for a firm's acquisition

likelihood in the probit model. We then use the propensity scores obtained from this "expanded" probit

model to match acquisitions by firms with specialized M&A staff to similar acquisitions by similar

acquirers (also with similar acquisition likelihoods) except that they do not employ such staff. In other

words, control and matched acquirers are not only similar along firm- and deal-specific characteristics

(except employment specialized M&A staff), but also similar with respect to their acquisition likelihood.

Our results in Model 6 of Table 6 remain robust to this alternative matching technique.

    Sixth, we conduct falsification tests to address the concern that our results may simply be an artifact of

spurious correlations between the employment of specialized M&A staff and acquisition returns. To

implement this test, we construct a binary indicator variable for firms employing specialized product

                                                     25
development staff. Product development staff differs from specialized M&A staff in that product

development focuses on developing new markets, product, and partner strategies to influence a firm's

product evolution and direction as opposed to acquisition-related functions. Similar to our main setting, we

first identify product development managers by parsing the "Rolename" and "FulltextDescription" of

individual profiles in Boardex Individual for the variants of "Product Development." Next, we classify

firms as employing specialized product development staff if there exists at least one product development

manager listed in Boardex Individual. We then re-estimate Model 2 of Table 4 with the falsified product

development staff serving as the main independent covariate of interest. Model 7 of Table 6 does not find

any significant relation between falsified specialized staff and shareholder gains from M&A

announcements, indicating that our results are not a result of spurious correlations between specialized

M&A staff and acquisition returns. Note that if the better acquisition performance of firms with specialized

M&A staff were simply due to firms investing more in staffing functions in general, then product

development staffing would be a proxy for the level of human capital through staffing in general and would

be expected to be positive and significant. Consequently, the lack of significance on product development

staff further suggests that our results are related to employing specialized M&A staff as opposed to such

firms investing more in human capital through staffing functions.

    Finally, in Panel B of Table 6, we use an instrumental variable approach implemented using two-stage

least squares to further address concerns on non-random matching between specialized M&A staff and

acquirers. To implement this approach, we need an instrumental variable that explains a firm's decision to

have specialized staff in the first stage equation (the relevance condition) that does not explain acquisition

performance in the second stage equation (the exclusion condition) outside of its effect on having

specialized staff. Moreover, the instrument in the first stage should have sound economic justification. We

use the staggered recognition of the inevitable disclosure doctrine (IDD) by U.S. state courts as our

instrumental variable to predict exogenous variation in the employment of specialized M&A staff by U.S.

firms. This doctrine states that a firm's former employees can be prevented from working at a rival firm if

doing so may lead to inevitable disclosures of their former employer's trade secrets to rival firms (e.g.,

                                                     26
Hamler, 1999; Klasa, Ortiz-Molina, Serfling, and Srinivasan, 2018; Li, Qiu, and Shen, 2018). CEOs and

surveys conducted by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce suggest that former employees represent the greatest

source of trade secrets lost to rivals. More importantly for our setting, survey evidence shows that strategic

plans and acquisition plans are among the most common types of trade secrets lost to rival firms6 and firms

even avoid sharing investment banks with industry rivals to avoid information leakages (Asker and

Ljungqvist, 2010). Therefore, our expectation is that the staggered adoption of the IDD will encourage

firms to employ specialized M&A staff by reducing the risk that former specialized M&A employees will

pass along their strategic and M&A-specific proprietary information to competing firms.

      To measure the legal protection of strategic plans and M&A specific trade secrets imposed by the IDD,

we follow Klasa, Ortiz-Molina, Serfling, and Srinivasan (2018) and create an IDD index that is based on

state-by-state identification of case laws encompassing trade secrets by US state courts from 1977 to 2011

for 21 unique states. The IDD index takes the value of one starting the year a state court recognizes the IDD

in a precedent-setting case, and is zero otherwise. If a state court rejects a previously recognized IDD, then

the index reverts from one to zero (3 rejection cases). The IDD index equals zero for all other state years.

Consistent with past work, a firm's location is captured by the location of its headquarters (e.g., Pirinsky

and Wang, 2006). Model 1 of Panel B in Table 6 presents the results of the first-stage regression where we

control for IDD along with a set of firm and deal-specific characteristics introduced in earlier sections and

the dependent variable is a binary indicator that takes the value of one for firms with specialized M&A staff

and zero otherwise. For brevity, we only tabulate the coefficient on IDD and find that it is positive and

highly significant (t-statistic of 16.67), satisfying the relevance condition. In economic terms, the

recognition of IDD increases a firm's likelihood of having specialized staff by 17.34%. Furthermore, the

F-statistic for weak instruments (Angrist and Pischke, 2009) is statistically significant at the 1% level

(untabulated), suggesting that our model is properly identified. Consistently with the descriptive statistics

presented in Table 2, untabulated results show that larger firms, firms with a higher Tobin's Q and firms



6
    See "Trends in Proprietary Information Loss," ASIS International 2002

                                                         27
operating in high-tech industries are more likely to employ specialized M&A staff. In addition, untabulated

analyses show a positive association between the number of acquisitions a firm executed over the past ten

years and employment of M&A staff, consistent with the importance of specialized staff for acquisitions.

    Next, we obtain the predicted value of specialized M&A staff from the first-stage regression

(Specialized M&A Staff(predicted)) and estimate the second stage regression that repeats model 2 of Table

4 with the predicted value of specialized M&A staff serving as our independent variable of interest.7 Our

second stage regression documents that Specialized M&A staff (predicted) continues to be positively and

significantly associated with shareholder wealth gains surrounding M&A announcements.

    A valid concern with this analysis is whether IDD affects acquisition opportunities for the acquirer as

well as the value of having specialized staff. It is reasonable to think that IDD in the state of the target

makes an acquisition of such target more valuable because IDD helps the acquirer retain target firm's

employees and reduce the risks of post-acquisition employee turnovers. Consistently with this view, Chen,

Gao and Ma (2020) find that IDD in target firm's states is positively associated with acquisition

performance. Therefore, for robustness, we further drop targets in IDD states (not tabulated). When we do

so, we find that our results remain robust (coefficient estimate on Specialized M&A staff (predicted) equals

2.02% with a t-statistic of 2.10).

    Collectively, our analyses from this section suggest that it is unlikely that our results are explained by

non-random matching between specializes staff and acquirers or some form of reverse causality. Overall,

this evidence renders a causal interpretation reasonable--namely, that firms make better acquisitions

because they employ specialized M&A staff and therefore is consistent with our value creation hypothesis.




7
 To the best of our knowledge, past research has not examined the association between IDD in acquiring firm's state
and acquisition returns. Untabulated analyses find that this association is insignificant (coefficient estimate on IDD is
negative), which suggests that our instrument satisfies the exclusion restriction.


                                                           28
3.4. Specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance: Cross-sectional analyses

    Having established that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions, we next explore

whether the relation between acquisition performance and attributes of such staff is as expected.

Specifically, we would expect specialized M&A staff to be more valuable if its managers (i.e., corporate

development managers) have longer experience and if the size of the specialized M&A staff is larger. We

would also not expect specialized M&A staff to add significant value if the CEO is more powerful or more

overconfident as such a CEO would be more likely to make decisions on his own with little to no input

from lower-level employees such as specialized M&A staff. Lastly, we would not expect specialized staff

to add value to acquisition performance in firms where agency costs of managerial discretion are higher.

An important benefit of this analysis is that it not only adds more texture to our findings and identify settings

where specialized staff value to acquisition outcomes, but also allows us to be even more confident that our

main results are not driven by omitted variables or reverse causality.

    In Panel A of Table 7, we focus on the cross-sectional variation in the characteristics of the specialized

M&A staff. We report only the variables of interest to conserve space. First, we consider the experience of

the corporate development managers who supervise specialized M&A staff. We expect that specialized

M&A staff supervised by more experienced managers make better acquisitions. To test this conjecture, we

first identify when corporate development managers are hired at a given firm, and then create a binary

indicator variable that equals one if the employment experience of the corporate development manager at

an acquirer is above the sample median of this measure in a given year (Corporate Development Managers-

High Firm experience).8 Model 1 of Table 7 re-estimates Model 2 of Table 4 with the inclusion of this

measure (in addition to Specialized M&A Staff) and finds that the firm-specific employment experience of

the corporate development managers is incrementally informative about M&A performance. In economic

terms, acquisitions by firms employing corporate development managers with longer tenure have a 0.87%

higher return significant at the 1% level, and this effect is incremental to the positive association between


8
 For instances where a firm employs more than one corporate development manager, we calculate the average firm
specific/total employment experience for all corporate development managers employed by a given firm.

                                                       29
announcement CARs and the firm having specialized M&A staff. In Model 2 of Table 7, we also consider

the total employment experience of the corporate development managers and find similar results.

    Next, we focus on a proxy for the size of the specialized M&A staff, namely the number of corporate

development managers recorded by Boardex Individual. We take the view that larger staff should be

supervised by more corporate development managers, and such staff should have better resources, including

but not limited to, better datasets, access to a greater number of junior-level associates, and better

administrative support. These resources should help the specialized M&A staff obtain a better and deeper

understanding of the industry, build and maintain a better deal pipeline, and identify targets that deliver

greater economic gains to the acquirers. Our findings document that the acquirer announcement returns are

positively and incrementally associated with the size of the specialized M&A staff. The coefficient estimate

on No of Corporate Development Managers suggests that a one standard deviation increase in the number

of corporate development managers is associated with an incrementally 0.20% higher 5-day announcement

CARs compared to acquirers without specialized M&A staff.

    In Panel B of Table 7, we turn to CEO characteristics. We conjecture that more powerful CEOs or more

overconfident CEOs would be less likely to pay attention to specialized M&A staff for acquisitions.

Therefore, we expect the marginal effect of specialized staff to be eliminated when the CEO is powerful or

overconfident. To test this conjecture, we proxy for CEO power using the pay differential between the CEO

and other top executives based on total salary plus bonus (i.e., total compensation) in the most recent year

prior to an acquisition. More specifically, a CEO is classified as powerful when she receives 100% or more

total compensation compared to the next highest paid top executive (e.g., Filkelstein, 1992; Hayward and

Hambrick, 1997; Golubov, Yawson, and Zhang 2015; among others). To measure CEO overconfidence,

we draw upon stock option-based compensation measures employed by Malmendier and Tate (2008) and

Campbell, Gallmeyer, Johnson, Rutherford, and Stanley (2011), where a CEO is defined as overconfident




                                                    30
if she holds stock options that are more than 67% in the money and she exhibits such option-holding

behavior at least twice during the period preceding an acquisition announcement.9

    To test our conjecture about the role of the CEO power or overconfidence on the value-added from

specialized M&A staff, we re-estimate our baseline regression model (i.e., Model 2 of Table 4) but add our

measures for CEO power or overconfidence as well as the interactions between these proxies and

specialized M&A staff. The coefficient of interest is the sum of the coefficient estimates on Specialized

M&A Staff and the interaction term. If specialized M&A staff do not add value to acquisition performance

in firms led by powerful or overconfident CEOs, then we expect the sum of the coefficient on Specialized

M&A Staff and the interaction to be insignificant. The empirical evidence presented in Panel B in Table 7

is consistent with both of these conjectures, suggesting that powerful or overconfident CEOs are more likely

to make M&A decisions in relative isolation without input from lower-level staff such as specialized M&A

staff, echoing the survey findings of Graham, Harvey, and Puri (2015).10

    Finally, in Panel C of Table 7, we turn to proxies for agency costs of managerial discretion. We use

three such proxies. First, we use the concentration of titles by the CEO where the CEO is both the chairman

and the president or if she is the chairman and her firm has no president or Chief Operating Officer among

the top executive team (e.g., Adams, Almedia, and Ferreira, 2005). Second, we use an indicator for firms

with a dual-class share structure. Admittedly, dual-class shares may create shareholder wealth in some firms

and destroy shareholder wealth in others. However, on average, Masulis, Wang and Xie (2009) and others

document that separation of insiders' ownership and control rights through a dual class voting structure

aggravates the agency conflicts between the top managers and shareholders. Lastly, we use an indicator

variable for whether the board is not independent. Like Masulis and Reza (2015), we consider a board to

be independent if at least 60% of the members are independent and the nominating committee members to



9
   Stock option holding behavior of CEOs is calculated using Execucomp as in Campbell, Gallmeyer, Johnson,
Rutherford, and Stanley (2011) given that the proprietary CEO compensation data employed by Malmendier and Tate
(2008) covers a small sample of US firms from 1980 to 1994, and our sample period starts in 2000.
10
    As expected from Malmendier and Tate (2008), our results also show that overconfident CEOs make value-
destroying acquisitions.

                                                      31
be fully independent. Acquirers without such characteristics are defined as not having an independent

board. We show the results in Panel C of Table 7. The results show that when the agency costs of managerial

discretion are high, specialized M&A staff do not add significant value to acquisition performance.

Particularly, we find that sum of the coefficients on Specialized M&A Staff and the interaction term with

dual class share structure and firms without independent boards is insignificant, suggesting that specialized

M&A staff do not add significant value for the shareholders of firms with higher agency costs of managerial

discretion.



4. How does specialized M&A staff create value for acquirers?

    Our analyses so far suggest that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions and that the

effect of such staff is economically important. In this section, we shed light on potential mechanisms

through which specialized M&A staff creates value for acquirers. In Section 4.1, we examine whether

specialized M&A staff help identify targets that have higher synergies with the acquirer. In Section 4.2, we

examine whether acquirers with specialized M&A staff capture higher value from targets through

negotiating better terms, paying lower takeover fees, and capturing a higher fraction of combined deal

synergies. In Section 4.3, we investigate whether specialized M&A staff reduces acquisition-related

transaction costs.



4.1. Transaction synergies: Combined CARs and change in combined firm's post-acquisition
operating performance
    One important mechanism through which specialized M&A staff may create value for acquirers is by

selecting targets with higher synergies with the acquirer. As discussed in Section 2.1, specialized M&A

staff help acquirers manage an active deal pipeline, screen and identify potential targets, and estimate

potential revenue and cost synergies. Therefore, it is plausible that specialized M&A staff translates into

higher acquisition performance through the selection of targets with greater synergies with the acquirer.




                                                     32
    Our first proxy to measure synergy gains is the value-weighted combined abnormal returns of the

acquirer and the target firm, calculated as 5-day CARs over [-2, +2] event window relative to deal

announcement date (e.g., Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1988; Kale, Kini, and Ryan Jr., 2003; Harford,

Humphery-Jenner, and Powell, 2012). This measure captures the synergies created by a transaction as

perceived by the stock market. Because stock returns can be measured only for publicly traded firms, we

focus only on acquisitions of public targets. Following past literature, our weights are based on the

acquirer's and target's market capitalization on 50 trading days prior to the M&A announcement date. We

then regress value-weighted combined CARs against a battery of firm and deal-specific characteristics and

include industry-year paired fixed effects as in earlier sections.

    Model 1 of Table 8 shows that transaction synergies are higher for firms with specialized M&A staff.

The results are also economically significant. For instance, acquirers with specialized M&A staff are

associated with 1.46% higher combined abnormal acquisition announcement returns, which represents

roughly 77% of average 5-day combined CARs in this subsample of acquisitions of public targets. Other

controls also generally behave as expected-- acquirers with higher book leverage generate higher combined

announcement returns, while acquisitions of larger firms and transactions financed with some equity elicit

lower combined stock returns. When we measure the value-weighted combined CARs over the [-1, +1]

event window, we continue to find similar results (untabulated).

    Since combined announcement returns only reflect the measure of surplus perceived by the stock

market around the short event-window surrounding acquisition announcement dates, we next examine an

ex-post measure of operating synergies. To this end, we follow the approach used in earlier studies (e.g.,

Huang, Jiang, Lie, and Yang, 2014; Chen, Gao, and Ma, 2020, among others) and investigate the changes

in the operating performance of the combined firm from pre-acquisition year to post-acquisition period for

acquisitions of public targets. As in Section 3.2, operating performance is measured with industry-adjusted

abnormal ROA. For the period before the acquisition, operating performance is the weighted-average

abnormal ROA based on the total assets of acquirer and target firms in the fiscal year preceding the

acquisition. For the post-acquisition period, we only focus on the operating performance of acquiring firms.

                                                      33
We then compare the changes in industry-adjusted ROA for the combined firm from the pre-acquisition

year to up to three years following the acquisition completion. Columns 2 through 4 of Table 8 show that

having specialized M&A staff is associated with improved operating performance for the combined firm.

In economic terms, the combined firm generates 4.13% higher abnormal ROA in the post-acquisition year

(t+1) relative to the year preceding the acquisition. Therefore, this evidence further supports the notion that

specialized M&A staff help acquirers identify targets that generate greater synergies in the post-acquisition

period.



4.2. Value Capture: Takeover Premiums and Bidder's Share of Combined Synergies

    In this section, we examine whether value-capture from the targets also represents a mechanism through

which specialized M&A staff creates value for acquirers. In particular, specialized staff may help acquirers

design a better bidding and negotiation strategy after a target has been identified, leading to lower takeover

premiums and a greater share of combined acquisition synergies captured by the acquirer.

    We first focus on takeover premiums. We follow Schwert (2000) and measure the takeover premium

as the difference between the price paid per share (as obtained from SDC) and the target firm's stock price

63 trading days prior to M&A announcement date. To mitigate concerns that the transaction process or the

target stock price runup may start earlier than 63 trading days prior to the official announcement of an

acquisition, we also measure the takeover premium using the stock price on 105 trading days preceding the

M&A announcement date as suggested by Eaton, Liu and Officer (2019). As in Section 4.1, we can only

perform this analysis for publicly traded targets.

    Models 1 and 2 of Table 9 report the regression results. In Model 1, we find that the coefficient estimate

for Specialized M&A Staff is statistically insignificant at conventional levels (t-statistic of 1.15). In Model

2, we obtain similar results when deal premiums are measured using the target firm's stock price at five

months prior to M&A announcement. These findings are inconsistent with specialized M&A staff

improving acquisition performance by helping the acquirer pay less to target shareholders.



                                                      34
    As an alternative to acquisition premiums, in Model 3, we use the comparable industry transaction

method of Officer (2007), which allows for the inclusion of all targets irrespective of their public status.

We first obtain acquisition multiples based on deal value to sales from SDC. For each transaction, we then

calculate the average deal value to sales multiple on matched transactions that are in the same two-digit

SIC and occur within the three-year window of an acquisition's announcement (i.e., t-1, t, t+1), and has

deal value that is within 20% of the original transaction. Acquisition premiums are then defined as the

percentage difference between the multiple of the acquisition of interest and the average multiple for the

portfolio of comparable industry-matched transactions. Our findings continue to show that specialized

M&A staff is not significantly associated with premiums paid to target firms' shareholders.

    Finally, we focus on the acquirer's share of the total takeover gains and examine whether specialized

M&A staff affects acquirers' ability to capture a higher share of the combined abnormal shareholder wealth

gains around M&A announcements. As in past studies, we calculate the bidder's share of the total wealth

gain (Bidder's Share of Total Gain) as the total abnormal dollar gain to bidder shareholders scaled by the

total combined abnormal dollar gain to the shareholders of the bidder and the target firms over [-2, +2]

event window relative to acquisition announcement date. When the combined abnormal dollar gain is

negative, the measure is defined as one minus Bidder's Share of Total Gain (e.g., Kale, Kini, and Ryan Jr.,

2003). The coefficient estimate on Specialized M&A Staff is, once again, statistically insignificant,

suggesting that transferring a greater proportion of transaction surplus to acquirers' shareholders (after a

target has been identified) is unlikely to be a mechanism through which specialized staff improves

acquisition performance.



4.3. Transaction Costs: Use of External Advice and Advisory Fees

    In this section, we examine whether lower transaction costs may explain the value creation from

specialized M&A staff to acquirers. Towards this end, we study the impact of specialized M&A staff on i)

the number of retained external advisors and ii) acquisition-related advisory fees.



                                                     35
    Advisory units of investment banks play a prominent role in the takeover market. If investment banks

and specialized M&A staff are perfect substitutes for acquisition-related functions, then acquirers with

specialized staff would be less likely to retain external advisors for executing M&As. Alternatively, it is

also plausible that specialized M&A staff and investment banks are not perfect substitutes, and acquirers

with specialized M&A staff still hire investment banks to execute some of the acquisition-related functions.

These functions include approaching and negotiating with targets, arranging meetings between acquirers

and targets, setting up online data rooms, financial due diligence, finalizing deal terms, and so forth.

Consistent with this view, Marks, Slee, and Blees (2012) argue that M&As typically represent a

"choreographed" dance between specialized M&A staff and investment bankers employed by external

advisors. If so, we do not expect acquirers with specialized M&A staff to have a lower need for retaining

external advisors. However, in this case, we expect advisory fees to be lower since firms with specialized

M&A staff are likely to use fewer acquisition-related functions by investment banks. For instance, target

identification is likely to be performed by the specialized M&A staff of acquirers, so that investment banks

are less likely to be used for that function. In sum, ex ante, it is unclear whether specialized M&A staff

improve acquisition performance by lowering transactions costs as a result of having a lower need for

retaining investment banks or paying lower advisory fees.

    To assess whether specialized staff reduces the use of investment banks and advisory fees, we first

estimate a regression where the dependent variable equals the number of external advisors retained for a

transaction. Our econometric model includes the firm and deal characteristics of Model 2 of Table 4 except

for investment bank-specific variables (Top Tier Advisor, No of Advisors). Model 1 of Table 10 shows that

specialized M&A staff is not significantly related to the number of retained external advisors. In untabulated

analyses, we re-estimate the regression with a negative binomial model and find similar results. These

results are inconsistent with the view that specialized M&A staff and investment bankers are perfect

substitutes for each other in the takeover market.

    We then attempt to understand the impact of specialized staff on advisory fees conditional on the

acquiring firm retaining at least one investment bank. Because investment banking advisory fees are

                                                     36
typically charged as a percentage of deal value, we measure transaction costs as total advisory fees paid by

the acquirer (as obtained from SDC) scaled by the total transaction dollar value. The mean of investment

banking fees is 1.01% for acquirers with specialized M&A staff compared to 1.48% for acquirers without

such staff (t-statistic for the difference is 3.33). Next, we use a multivariate setting where our key

independent variable of interest is a binary indicator that equals one if firm j employs specialized staff in

year t, zero otherwise. We then regress advisory fees as a percentage of deal value against our key

independent variable along with acquirer- and deal-specific characteristics. We also include the natural

logarithm of deal value (Ln (Deal Value)) as an independent covariate since McLaughlin (1990) shows that

advisory fees as a percentage of deal value are negatively related with the transaction size. Model 2 of Table

10 shows a negative and significant coefficient estimate on specialized M&A staff, suggesting that

specialized M&A staff reduces advisory fees for acquiring firms. In economic terms, the advisory fees of

acquirers with specialized M&A staff are lower by 0.38% compared to advisory fees on acquisitions

executed by firms without such staff, a reduction of almost 26% from the sample mean of 1.48% advisory

fees in transactions by acquirers without specialized M&A staff. We also confirm the findings in past

studies--percentage transactions fees are negatively associated with the deal size and top tier investment

banks charge higher percentage advisory fees.



5. Why do not all firms have specialized M&A staff?

    Our evidence up to this point shows that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions,

and this result is unlikely to be spurious or explained by omitted variables. In other words, the evidence

suggests that the relation between specialized M&A staff and acquisition performance is likely causal.

However, this evidence raises the question of why not all firms employ specialized staff. In this section, we

attempt to gain a better understanding of this question by investigating whether the employment of

specialized M&A staff is correlated with firm, CEO and director attributes we would expect to be associated

with the employment of specialized M&A staff for firms executing acquisitions.



                                                     37
     Towards this end, we expand the analyses of determinants of specialized M&A staff employment

introduced in the first-stage regression of Panel B of Table 7 (with the inclusion of IDD) through the

addition of new variables of interest that measure i) relative importance of firm acquisition strategy for

corporate growth, ii) management's specialized knowledge relevant to acquisitions, and iii) CEO's and

directors' busyness.11 As a result of data availability, the sample size is reduced to 7,029 acquisitions. These

variables and their expected signs are as follows:



     1) Average ratio of total dollars spent on M&A to that spent on total investment over the past ten

         years: We expect specialized M&A staff to be more likely to be employed by firms for which

         inorganic growth through acquisitions represents a more important component of corporate growth

         strategy.

     2) CEO and directors have longer industry experience, CEO and directors have industry experience

         in the target's industry and have investment banking experience: We expect that firms led by CEOs

         with such specialized acquisition relevant knowledge (e.g., Custodio and Metzger, 2013; Huang,

         Jiang, Lie and, Yang, 2014; Fields and Mkrtchyan, 2017) to have a lower likelihood of employing

         specialized staff. Moreover, if directors have more specialized knowledge pertaining to acquisitions

         as proxied by these characteristics, then we also expect the CEO to rely more on such knowledge

         for acquisitions instead of employing specialized M&A staff.

     3) CEO and director busyness: A busier CEO is less likely to devote substantial time and effort on

         specific acquisition related functions and, therefore, is more likely to rely on specialized M&A staff

         for such functions. Likewise, a busier board of directors is expected to be less helpful to the CEO

         for acquisitions, so that the CEO is again more likely to delegate acquisition related tasks to

         specialized M&A staff. We measure busyness by the extent of appointments in other boards to




11
  Our regression further controls for the CEO specific characteristics introduced in model 3 of Table 4 (i.e., CEO
tenure, CEO gender, CEO-Chairman duality).

                                                         38
         capture CEO and directors' busyness (e.g., Fich and Shivdasani, 2006; Hauser, 2018, among

         others).



     In Table 11, we only tabulate the coefficient estimates on these new variables of interest. It is

immediately clear that firms with a strategy that relies more on acquisitions for corporate growth are more

likely to have specialized staff. The coefficient is positive and significant for the fraction of investment

expenses represented by acquisitions over the past ten years (t-statistic of 4.15). We also find that the more

specialized acquisition knowledge the CEO and the directors have, the less likely a firm employs

specialized M&A staff. In particular, the length of CEO and directors' industry experience, CEO and

directors' investment banking experience, and their experience in the target's industry are negatively

associated with the employment of specialized staff. Coefficient estimates on all of these characteristics are

statistically significant at conventional levels. Finally, we also find that CEO and board busyness are

positively and significantly related to the firm having specialized M&A, consistent with the view that such

firms delegate acquisition related tasks to specialized M&A staff. In untabulated analyses, we find that

neither CEO-Chairman duality nor CEO tenure is related to whether a firm has specialized staff. 12



6. Conclusion

     In this paper, we attempt to penetrate the black box of intra-firm decision-making for investments. We

expect that firms with specific skills and organizational structure devoted to a type of investment make

better investments of that type. Our focus is on acquisitions. In this context, our value creation hypothesis

predicts that firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions while our agency hypothesis

predicts that specialized M&A staff facilitates management's empire-building behavior and therefore, firms




12
  Importantly, IDD continues to be an economically and statistically predictor of specialized M&A staff employment.
Moreover, if we use this expanded regression in our two-stage least squares regression in Table 7, the predicted value
of specialized M&A staff continues to be positively and significantly associated with CARs in the second stage
regressions. Results are available upon request.

                                                         39
with such staff do not make better acquisitions. In the US, corporate development professionals, which we

call specialized M&A staff, are involved in major aspects of the corporate inorganic growth strategy,

starting from target identification to the post-acquisition integration process. We find that specialized M&A

staff is an economically important driver of acquisition performance as measured by shareholder wealth

creation around acquisition announcements, long-term stock returns, changes in long-term operating

performance, changes in consensus analyst earnings forecasts around acquisitions, and announcement of

transactions with large shareholder wealth losses.

    We find evidence that, on average, firms with specialized M&A staff make better acquisitions,

consistent with the value creation hypothesis. However, specialized M&A staff does not help firms make

better acquisitions in all cases. Specifically, we show that specialized staff is not associated with higher

acquisition performance for firms with higher agency costs of managerial discretion or firms headed by

more overconfident or powerful CEOs. Plausible explanations for these exceptions are that specialized staff

does not help create value when management is more likely to pursue private benefits at the expense of

shareholders and such CEOs are more likely to ignore their advice.

    We also show that a causal interpretation is reasonable, namely that firms make better acquisitions

because they have specialized M&A staff. To make that case, we first show that specialized M&A staff

does not proxy for firm or deal characteristics known to affect acquisition performance. The effect we

document is distinct from what has been reported in the literature. We then provide evidence to help rule

out the possibility that potential non-random matching between specialized M&A staff and firms (or

omitted characteristics) explains our results. Towards this end, we provide a series of tests supporting our

interpretation that specialized M&A staff causes firms to have better acquisition performance. Perhaps most

importantly, we use a source of exogenous variation in the employment of specialized M&A staff, namely

the staggered recognition of the inevitable disclosure doctrine (IDD) by courts. In our context, recognition

of IDD makes it harder for specialized M&A personnel to walk away from her employer and bring her

knowledge of the firm's M&A strategy and practices to rival firms. As expected, we show that firms are



                                                     40
more likely to employ specialized M&A staff following the staggered recognition of IDD. Accounting for

this source of exogenous variation strengthens our results.

    We explore why firms with specialized staff make better acquisitions. We find that the quality of the

specialized staff is also incrementally related to acquisition performance. Specialized M&A staff supervised

by more experienced corporate development managers add even more value to acquisition performance.

When we examine how specialized staff makes acquisitions better, we establish that the acquisitions made

by firms with specialized M&A staff have greater synergies. Specialized staff does not appear to help

acquirers capture more of synergies from targets. There is no evidence that firms with specialized M&A

staff pay less for acquisitions, but there is evidence that firms with specialized staff pay less for investment

banking services, presumably because their work substitutes for some services that investment banks would

otherwise provide.

    Finally, we investigate why not every firm employs specialized M&A staff. Our findings show that

firms for which acquisitions represents a more important component of their corporate growth strategy are

more likely to employ specialized M&A staff. Further considering the acquisition relevant knowledge

possessed by CEO and directors, we find that CEO's and directors' industry and investment banking

experience as well as experience in the target's industry is negatively associated with the likelihood of

employing such staff. Firms with busier CEOs and directors are also more likely to employ such staff,

consistent with such firms delegating acquisition related functions to specialized M&A staff.




                                                      41
References
Adams, Renée B., Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira. "Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate
performance." Review of Financial Studies 18, no. 4 (2005): 1403-1432.
Agrawal, Ashwini K., Isaac Hacamo, and Zhongchen Hu. "Information dispersion across employees and
stock returns." Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming (2020).
Aktas, Nihat, Audra Boone, Alexander Witkowski, Guosong Xu, and Burcin Yurtoglu. "The Role of
Internal M&A Teams in Takeovers." Review of Finance, forthcoming
Amihud, Yakov, Baruch Lev, and Nickolaos G. Travlos. "Corporate control and the choice of investment
financing: The case of corporate acquisitions." The Journal of Finance 45, no. 2 (1990): 603-616.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly harmless econometrics: an empiricist's companion,
Princeton University Press (2009): 113-220.
Asker, John, and Alexander Ljungqvist. "Competition and the structure of vertical relationships in capital
markets." Journal of Political Economy 118, no. 3 (2010): 599-647.
Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon. "Detecting abnormal operating performance: The empirical power and
specification of test statistics." Journal of Financial Economics 41, no. 3 (1996): 359-399.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Utpal Bhattacharya, and Stacey E. Jacobsen. "Do Acquirer Announcement Returns
Reflect Value Creation?" No. w27976. National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
Betton, Sandra, B. Espen Eckbo, and Karin S. Thorburn. "Corporate takeovers." Handbook of empirical
corporate finance (2008): 291-429.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. "Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
and countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 4 (2007): 1351-1408.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. "Why do management practices differ across firms and
countries?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, no. 1 (2010): 203-24.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. "Does management
matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, no. 1 (2013): 1-51.
Bradley, Michael, Anand Desai, and E. Han Kim. "Synergistic gains from corporate acquisitions and their
division between the stockholders of target and acquiring firms." Journal of Financial Economics 21, no.
1 (1988): 3-40.
Campa, Jose Manuel, and Simi Kedia. "Explaining the diversification discount." The Journal of
Finance 57, no. 4 (2002): 1731-1762.
Campbell, T. Colin, Michael Gallmeyer, Shane A. Johnson, Jessica Rutherford, and Brooke W. Stanley.
"CEO optimism and forced turnover." Journal of Financial Economics 101, no. 3 (2011): 695-712.
Chen, Xia, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li. "Monitoring: Which institutions matter?" Journal of Financial
Economics 86, no. 2 (2007): 279-305.
Chen, Deqiu, Huasheng Gao, and Yujing Ma. "Human Capital-Driven Acquisition: Evidence from the
Inevitable Disclosure Doctrine." Management Science (2020).


                                                   42
Custódio, Cláudia, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Pedro Matos. "Generalists versus specialists: Lifetime work
experience and chief executive officer pay." Journal of Financial Economics 108, no. 2 (2013): 471-492.
Custódio, Cláudia, and Daniel Metzger. "How do CEOs matter? The effect of industry expertise on
acquisition returns." Review of Financial Studies 26, no. 8 (2013): 2008-2047.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers. "Measuring mutual fund performance
with characteristicbased benchmarks." The Journal of Finance 52, no. 3 (1997): 1035-1058.
Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson, and Siew Hong Teoh. "Does investor misvaluation drive
the takeover market?" The Journal of Finance 61, no. 2 (2006): 725-762.
Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura. "Divisional managers and internal capital markets." The Journal of
Finance 68, no. 2 (2013): 387-429.
Eaton, Gregory W., Tingting Liu, and Micah S. Officer. "Rethinking Measures of Mergers & Acquisitions
Deal Premiums." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (2019): 1-30.
El-Khatib, Rwan, Kathy Fogel, and Tomas Jandik. "CEO network centrality and merger
performance." Journal of Financial Economics 116, no. 2 (2015): 349-382.
Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Angie Low, and René M. Stulz. "Why do firms appoint CEOs as outside
directors?." Journal of Financial Economics 97, no. 1 (2010): 12-32.
Fich, E.M. and Shivdasani, A., "Are Busy Boards Effective Monitors?" The Journal of Finance, 61, no.2
(2005): 689-724.
Field, Laura Casares, and Anahit Mkrtchyan. "The effect of director experience on acquisition
performance." Journal of Financial Economics 123, no. 3 (2017): 488-511.
Finkelstein, Sydney. "Power in top management teams: Dimensions,                       measurement,     and
validation." Academy of Management Journal 35, no. 3 (1992): 505-538.
Fracassi, Cesare, and Geoffrey Tate. "External networking and internal firm governance." The Journal of
Finance 67, no. 1 (2012): 153-194.
Fuller, Kathleen, Jeffry Netter, and Mike Stegemoller. "What do returns to acquiring firms tell us? Evidence
from firms that make many acquisitions." The Journal of Finance 57, no. 4 (2002): 1763-1793.
Golubov, Andrey, Dimitris Petmezas, and Nickolaos G. Travlos. "When it pays to pay your investment
banker: New evidence on the role of financial advisors in M&As." The Journal of Finance 67, no. 1 (2012):
271-311.
Golubov, Andrey, Alfred Yawson, and Huizhong Zhang. "Extraordinary acquirers." Journal of Financial
Economics 116, no. 2 (2015): 314-330.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri. "Capital allocation and delegation of decision-
making authority within firms." Journal of Financial Economics 115, no. 3 (2015): 449-470.
Hamler, Nathan. "The impending merger of the inevitable disclosure doctrine and negative trade secrets: Is
trade secrets law headed in the right direction." Journal of Corporate Law 25 (1999): 383.
Hansen, Lars Peter. "Large sample properties                  of   generalized    method     of   moments
estimators." Econometrica 50, no. 4 (1982): 1029-1054.

                                                    43
Harford, Jarrad. "What drives merger waves?" Journal of Financial Economics 77, no. 3 (2005): 529-560.
Harford, Jarrad, Mark Humphery-Jenner, and Ronan Powell. "The sources of value destruction in
acquisitions by entrenched managers." Journal of Financial Economics 106, no. 2 (2012): 247-261.
Hauser, R., "Busy directors and firm performance: Evidence from mergers." Journal of Financial
Economics, 128, no. 1, (2018): pp.16-37.
Hayward, Mathew LA, and Donald C. Hambrick. "Explaining the premiums paid for large acquisitions:
Evidence of CEO hubris." Administrative Science Quarterly 42, no. 1 (1997): 103-127.
Huang, Qianqian, Feng Jiang, Erik Lie, and Ke Yang. "The role of investment banker directors in
M&A." Journal of Financial Economics 112, no. 2 (2014): 269-286.
Ishii, Joy, and Yuhai Xuan. "Acquirer-target social ties and merger outcomes." Journal of Financial
Economics 112, no. 3 (2014): 344-363.
Kale, Jayant R., Omesh Kini, and Harley E. Ryan Jr. "Financial advisors and shareholder wealth gains in
corporate takeovers." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, no. 3 (2003): 475-501.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Michael S. Weisbach. "The success of acquisitions: Evidence from
divestitures." The Journal of Finance 47, no. 1 (1992): 107-138.
Khanna, Vikramaditya, E. Han Kim, and Yao Lu. "CEO connectedness and corporate fraud." The Journal
of Finance 70, no. 3 (2015): 1203-1252.
Klasa, Sandy, Hernan Ortiz-Molina, Matthew Serfling, and Shweta Srinivasan. "Protection of trade secrets
and capital structure decisions." Journal of Financial Economics 128, no. 2 (2018): 266-286.
Lang, Larry HP, René M Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling. "Managerial performance, Tobin's Q, and the gains
from successful tender offers." Journal of Financial Economics 24, no. 1 (1989): 137-154.
Lang, Larry HP, René M Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling. "A test of the free cash flow hypothesis: The case
of bidder returns." Journal of Financial Economics 29, no. 2 (1991): 315-335.
Li, Kai, Buhui Qiu, and Rui Shen. "Organization Capital and Mergers and Acquisitions." Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, no. 4 (2018): 1871-1909.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. "Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market's
reaction." Journal of Financial Economics 89, no. 1 (2008): 20-43.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Enrico Moretti, and Florian S. Peters. "Winning by losing: Evidence on the long-run
effects of mergers." Review of Financial Studies 31, no. 8 (2018): 3212-3264.
Maloney, Michael T., Robert E. McCormick, and Mark L. Mitchell. "Managerial decision making and
capital structure." Journal of Business 66, no. 2 (1993): 189-217.
Marks, Kenneth H., Robert T. Slee, Christian W. Blees, and Michael R. Nall. "Middle Market M&A:
Handbook for Investment Banking and Business Consulting." Vol. 10. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
Masulis, Ronald W., Cong Wang, and Fei Xie. "Corporate governance and acquirer returns." The Journal
of Finance 62, no. 4 (2007): 1851-1889.




                                                  44
Masulis, R.W., Wang, C. and Xie, F., 2009. Agency problems at dualclass companies. The Journal of
Finance, 64(4), pp.1697-1727.
Masulis, Ronald W., and Syed Walid Reza. "Agency problems of corporate philanthropy." The Review of
Financial Studies 28, no. 2 (2015): 592-636.
McLaughlin, Robyn M. "Investment-banking contracts in tender offers: An empirical analysis." Journal of
Financial Economics 28, no. 1-2 (1990): 209-232.
Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz. "Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions." Journal of Financial Economics 73, no. 2 (2004): 201-228.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "Do managerial objectives drive bad
acquisitions?." The Journal of Finance 45, no. 1 (1990): 31-48.
Netter, Jeffry, Mike Stegemoller, and M. Babajide Wintoki. "Implications of data screens on merger and
acquisition analysis: A large sample study of mergers and acquisitions from 1992 to 2009." Review of
Financial Studies 24, no. 7 (2011): 2316-2357.
Officer, Micah S. "The price of corporate liquidity: Acquisition discounts for unlisted targets." Journal of
Financial Economics 83, no. 3 (2007): 571-598.
Pirinsky, Christo, and Qinghai Wang. "Does corporate headquarters location matter for stock returns?." The
Journal of Finance 61, no. 4 (2006): 1991-2015.
Renneboog, Luc, and Cara Vansteenkiste. "Failure and success in mergers and acquisitions." Journal of
Corporate Finance 58 (2019): 650-699.
Schwert, G. William. "Hostility in takeovers: in the eyes of the beholder?." The Journal of Finance 55, no.
6 (2000): 2599-2640.
Servaes, Henri. "Tobin's Q and the Gains from Takeovers." The Journal of Finance 46, no. 1 (1991): 409-
419.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. "Stock market driven acquisitions." Journal of Financial
Economics 70, no. 3 (2003): 295-311.
Travlos, Nickolaos G. "Corporate takeover bids, methods of payment, and bidding firms' stock returns." The
Journal of Finance 42, no. 4 (1987): 943-963.
Villalonga, Belen. "Diversification discount or premium? New evidence from the business information
tracking series." The Journal of Finance 59, no. 2 (2004): 479-506.




                                                    45
Appendix. Variable descriptions
 Variable                                                 Definition
 Specialized M&A Staff        Indicator variable is one if a firm has one or more corporate
                              development managers, zero otherwise. Information on corporate
                              development managers is from Boardex Individual and data is
                              supplemented from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis
                              Who's Who databases.

                                   Acquirer Characteristics
 Acquirer Size                Market value of acquirer's equity 4 weeks prior to the acquisition
                              announcement date obtained from SDC. Information market value of
                              equity is obtained from CRSP.

 Stock Price Runup            CRSP value-weighted index adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal return
                              (BHAR) of the acquirer firm's stock over the [-205, -6] event window
                              relative to the acquisition announcement date. Stock price data is from
                              CRSP.

 Sigma                        Standard deviation of the acquirer's CRSP value-weighted index
                              adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal return (BHAR) over the [-205, -6]
                              event window relative to the acquisition announcement date. Stock
                              price data is from CRSP.

 Book Leverage                Total debt (current liabilities plus long-term debt) scaled by book value
                              of total assets in the fiscal year preceding the acquisition announcement.
                              Information is from Compustat.

 Tobin's Q                    Market value of the acquirer's assets divided by book value of its assets
                              in the fiscal year preceding the acquisition. The market value of assets
                              is calculated as the sum of book value of assets and market value of
                              common stock minus the book value of common stock minus deferred
                              taxes in the balances sheet. The data are from CRSP and Compustat
                              Acquirer's net income divided by book value of its total assets for the
 ROA                          fiscal year before the acquisition announcement. Information is from
                              Compustat.
 Book-to-Market               Acquirer's book value of equity (in the fiscal year before the acquisition
                              announcement) divided by the market value of four weeks preceding the
                              acquisition announcement. The data are from CRSP and Compustat.
 Institutional Holding        Total percentage Institutional ownership of the acquirer in the quarter
                              before the acquisition announcement. The data are from WRDS.
 Cash Flows-to-Equity         Income before extraordinary items plus depreciation minus dividends
                              scaled by the book value of assets in the fiscal year before the
                              acquisition announcement. Information is from Compustat.
 No of M&As (past 10 years)   Number of acquisitions executed by the acquirer over the past ten years
                              preceding the announcement date of the current acquisition. Information
                              is from SDC.



                                                46
Large Bidders                 Indicator variable is one if the size of an acquirer is above the sample
                              median of this measure, zero otherwise
M&A to Total investment Ratio Average ratio of total dollars spent on M&A to that spent on total
(past 10 years)               investment over the past ten years. The information is from Compustat.
Dual-Class                    Indicator variable is one if the acquirer has a dual-class share structure.
                              The information is from Riskmetrics.
                                      Deal Characteristics
Relative Size                 Value of the acquisition (as obtained from SDC) divided by market
                              value of acquirer's equity four weeks prior to the acquisition
                              announcement date. Information on market value of equity is obtained
                              from CRSP.


Private                          Indicator variable is one for an acquisition of private target, zero
                                 otherwise. Information is from SDC.

Public                           Indicator variable is one for an acquisition of a publicly traded target,
                                 zero otherwise. Information is from SDC.

Subsidiary                       Indicator variable is one for an acquisition of a subsidiary, zero
                                 otherwise. Information is from SDC.

Hostile                          Indicator variable is one for hostile acquisitions, zero for unsolicited
                                 acquisitions. Information is from SDC.
                                 Indicator variable is one if the acquirer retained a top tier investment
Top tier Advisor                 bank for an acquisition, zero otherwise. To define top tier banks, we
                                 calculate the total value of deals by each investment bank over 2000 and
                                 2017 and define an investment bank as top tier if it ranks in the top 10
                                 over the sample period based on the total value of deals it advises.
                                 Information is from SDC.

No of Advisors                   Number of investment banks retained for an acquisition by the acquiring
                                 firm. Information is from SDC.
Payment-All Cash                 Indicator variable is one if the acquisition is paid for with all cash, zero
                                 otherwise. Information is from SDC.
Payment-Includes Stock           Indicator variable is one if the acquisition is paid for with some equity,
                                 zero otherwise. Information is from SDC.
Diversifying                     Indicator variable is one if the acquirer and target do not belong to the
                                 same two-digit SIC code, zero otherwise. Information is from SDC,
                                 CRSP and Compustat.
                                    CEO/Director Characteristics
CEO tenure                       The number of years for which the acquirer's CEO have worked in the
                                 acquiring firm prior to the announcement of an acquisition. The
                                 information is from Boardex, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.
Female CEO                       Indicator variable is one if the acquirer's CEO is a female, zero
                                 otherwise. The information is from Boardex and Riskmetrics.
                                 Indicator variable is one if CEO worked in the target's industry where
CEO with experience in
                                 industries are defined based on the two-digit SIC code, zero otherwise.
target's industry
                                 The information is from Boardex, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.


                                                    47
CEOs' financial experience     The number of years for which the acquirer's CEO worked in the
                               financial services industry in a finance-related role (as CFO, treasurer,
                               VP of finance, or accountant) or in a top tier auditing firm including
                               PwC, E&Y, Deloitte, KPMG, Arthur Anderson, Coopers, Touche Ross,
                               or Peat Marwick. The information is from Boardex, Riskmetrics, and
                               Execucomp.
CEO with investment banking Indicator variable is one if the acquirer's CEO worked as an investment
experience                     banker, zero otherwise. Investment banking experience is defined as in
                               Huang, Jiang, Lie and Yang (2014). The information is from Boardex,
                               Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.
Powerful CEO: Pay>100%         Indicator variable is one if the acquirer's CEO receives 100% or more
Closest Executive              total compensation compared to the next highest paid top executive
                               prior the acquisition announcement date. The information is from
                               Execucomp.
Chairman& President            Indicator variable is one if the acquirer's CEO is both the chairman and
                               the president or if she is the chairman and her firm has no president or
                               Chief Operating Officer among the top executive team. The information
                               is from Execucomp.
Overconfident CEO              Indicator variable is one if the acquirer's CEO holds stock options that
                               are more than 67% in the money and she exhibits such option-holding
                               behavior at least twice during the period preceding an acquisition
                               announcement. The information is from Execucomp.
Firm without independent       Indicator variable is zero if at least 60% of the members are independent
board                          and the nominating committee members are fully independent, one
                               otherwise. The information is from Boardex, Riskmetrics, and
                               Execucomp.
CEO Total industry             The number of years for which CEO of the acquirer worked in the
Experience                     acquirer's industry (excluding the focal firm). The information is from
                               Boardex, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.
CEO Busyness                   The number of external board seats CEO of an acquirer has at year t-1
                               relative to the acquisition announcement date. The information is from
                               Boardex, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.
Average Director Busyness      Average number of external board seats directors of an acquirer have at
                               year t-1 relative to the acquisition announcement date. The information
                               is from Boardex, Riskmetrics, and Execucomp.
Percentage of directors with   The percentage of directors with financial experience (defined as for
financial experience           CEOs) prior to the acquisition announcement date.
Percentage of directors with   The percentage of directors with investment banking experience at year
investment banking             t-1 relative to the acquisition announcement date. Investment banking
experience                     experience is defined as in Huang, Jiang, Lie and Yang (2014).
Percentage of directors with   The percentage of directors who worked in the target's industry (as
experience in target's         defined for CEOs) at year t-1 relative to the acquisition announcement
industry                       date.
                             Specialized M&A Staff Characteristics
Corporate Development          Indicator variable is one if the employment experience of corporate
Manager - High Firm            development managers at an acquirer is above the sample median of this
experience                     measure preceding an acquisition announcement, zero otherwise. For
                               instances where a firm employs more than one corporate development
                               manager, we calculate the average firm-specific employment
                               experience for all corporate development managers employed by a

                                                  48
                            given acquirer. Information on corporate development managers is from
                            Boardex Individual and data is supplemented from LinkedIn.com,
                            Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases.

Corporate Development       Indicator variable is one if the total employment experience of corporate
Manager- High Employment    development managers is above the sample median of this measure in a
experience                  given year, zero otherwise. For instances where a firm employs more
                            than one corporate development manager, we calculate the average total
                            employment experience for all corporate development managers
                            employed by a given acquirer. Information on corporate development
                            managers is from Boardex Individual and data is supplemented from
                            LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who
                            databases.

No of Corporate Development The number of corporate development managers at an acquirer
Managers                    preceding an acquisition announcement. Information on corporate
                            development managers is from Boardex Individual and data is
                            supplemented from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis
                            Who's Who databases.




                                              49
Table 1. Sample Distribution
This table reports summary statistics for the distribution of specialized M&A staff, number and percentage of firms
employing specialized M&A staff, the number of M&As, and the percentage of M&As executed by firms with
specialized M&A staff over 2000 and 2017. Specialized M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate
development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers is from Boardex of
Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and
Marquis Who's Who databases. M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum Securities Data Company
M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the
period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50%
of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the
transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization
on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description
of variables.


            No of Corporate          No of Firms          % Firms with                          % M&As by firms
  Year       Development           with Specialized       Specialized         No of M&As        with Specialized
              Managers               M&A Staff             M&A Staff                               M&A Staff
  2000            1672                   1042                 25.51%               733                43.52%
  2001            1832                   1155                 27.75%               576                49.48%
  2002            1953                   1239                 29.46%               658                39.51%
  2003            2076                   1335                 31.26%               682                46.63%
  2004            2237                   1459                 32.78%               735                49.12%
  2005            2490                   1556                 33.54%               847                50.06%
  2006            2587                   1625                 34.35%               816                45.47%
  2007            2708                   1679                 35.72%               783                50.06%
  2008            2679                   1653                 37.49%               509                49.71%
  2009            2552                   1550                 37.63%               409                56.72%
  2010            2568                   1563                 39.65%               562                53.38%
  2011            2644                   1575                 41.60%               548                49.09%
  2012            2558                   1564                 42.47%               660                46.06%
  2013            2508                   1571                 43.01%               530                44.91%
  2014            2486                   1600                 42.78%               630                45.56%
  2015            2402                   1610                 42.81%               555                43.60%
  2016            2188                   1518                 41.28%               431                44.78%
  2017            1927                   1409                 39.01%               434                38.48%

  Total           8566                   3593                 36.56%             11,098               47.01%




                                                         50
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics over 2000 and 2017. Panels A and B present the mean and median for acquirer- and deal-specific characteristics, respectively.
Column 1 presents the statistics for the whole sample, and Column 2 (3) for M&As executed by firms with (without) specialized M&A Staff. Specialized M&A
staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers is from Boardex of
Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A
sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary
acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target
six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent
at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Statistical tests for differences in means and
equality of medians for each bidder and deal specific characteristics across M&As with and without specialized M&A staff are also presented. Differences in means
are based on a t -test. Differences in medians are based on Wilcoxon rank sum test. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables.


Panel A: Acquirer Characteristics
                                                                                    Specialized                   No Specialized
                                                     Full Sample                    M&A staff                      M&A staff                       Differences
                                                     (N=11,098)                     (N=5,215)                      (N=5,883)
                                                          (1)                          (2)                             (3)                           (2)-(3)
                                                                                                                                             p-value of p-value of
Variable                                         Mean         Median            Mean         Median            Mean         Median             Mean        Median
Size (in $million)                             11136.680     1457.860         18346.660     2471.320          4745.390     1008.250           <.0001        <.0001

Stock Price Runup                                0.129         0.040             0.142        0.042             0.118        0.038             0.0293       0.2543

Sigma                                            0.024         0.020             0.024        0.020             0.024        0.019             0.0145       0.9494

Book Leverage                                    0.254         0.228             0.230        0.203             0.276        0.254             <.0001       <.0001

Tobin's Q                                        2.638         2.006             2.931        2.179             2.379        1.889             <.0001       <.0001

ROA                                              0.100         0.114             0.106        0.118             0.095        0.109             0.0002       <.0001

Book-to-Market                                   0.532         0.420             0.466        0.377             0.590        0.461             <.0001       <.0001

Cash Flows-to-Equity                             0.023         0.048             0.035        0.051             0.012        0.044             <.0001       <.0001

No of M&As (past 10 years)                       6.002         3.000             6.554        4.000             5.511        3.000             <.0001       <.0001

High Tech                                        0.294         0.000             0.366        0.000             0.230        0.000             <.0001       <.0001

Institutional Ownership                          0.554         0.654             0.572        0.673             0.539        0.636             <.0001       0.0004




                                                                                  51
Panel B: Deal Characteristics
                                                       Specialized        No Specialized
                                  Full Sample          M&A staff            M&A staff            Differences
                                  (N=11,098)           (N=5,215)           (N=5,883)
                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (2)-(3)
                                                                                            p-value of p-value of
Variable                        Mean      Median    Mean       Median    Mean      Median     Mean        Median
Relative Size                   0.163     0.050     0.139      0.039     0.184     0.057     <.0001        <.0001

Public                          0.164           -   0.185            -   0.145        -      <.0001

Private                         0.490           -   0.482            -   0.497        -      0.1117

Subsidiary                      0.346           -   0.333            -   0.358        -      0.0058

Hostile Takeover                0.002           -   0.002            -   0.002        -      0.7027

Diversifying                    0.479           -   0.433            -   0.520      1.000    <.0001      <.0001

All-Cash                        0.358           -   0.405            -   0.315        -      <.0001

Payment-Includes Stock          0.216           -   0.220            -   0.212        -      <.0001

No of Advisors                  0.382           -   0.441            -   0.331        -      <.0001

Top Tier Advisor                0.257           -   0.319            -   0.201        -      0.3658




                                                    52
Table 3. Specialized M&A Staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns
This table presents market model adjusted cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) over [-2, +2] event window surrounding
the M&A announcement dates where the parameters of the market model are estimated using CRSP value-weighted index
over [-240, -41] days relative to the acquisition announcement date. Panel A presents the CARs for the full sample, Panel
B presents CARs based on Target Status (Public, Private, and Subsidiary), and Panel C shows CARs based on mode of
payment (no stock vs. with some stock financing). In Panel D, we split the subsamples in Panel B by the mode of payment.
Specialized M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information
on corporate development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary
data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the
Thomson One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private,
and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be
completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than
50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the
acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix
for a detailed description of variables.

Panel A: Full Sample
                                                       Specialized          No Specialized
                              Full Sample              M&A staff             M&A staff
                              (N=11,098)               (N=5,215)             (N=5,883)               Difference
         Year                      (1)                     (2)                    (3)                  (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]             0.28***                 0.75***                 -0.12                 0.86***
        p-value                (<.0001)                 (<.0001)                (0.20)                (<.0001)


Panel B: Target Status
                                                     Public Targets

                                                       Specialized          No Specialized
                              Full Sample              M&A staff             M&A staff
                               (N=1,820)                (N=966)               (N=854)                Difference
         Year                      (1)                      (2)                  (3)                   (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]             -0.94***                 -0.48**              -1.45***                0.97***
        p-value                 (<.0001)                  (0.03)              (<.0001)                 (0.00)

                                                     Private Targets

                                                       Specialized          No Specialized
                              Full Sample              M&A staff             M&A staff
                               (N=5,439)               (N=2,514)             (N=2,925)               Difference
         Year                      (1)                     (2)                    (3)                  (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]             0.44***                 0.91***                  0.03                 0.87***
        p-value                 (<.0001)                (<.0001)                (0.78)                (<.0001)


                                                   Subsidiary Targets

                                                       Specialized          No Specialized
                              Full Sample              M&A staff             M&A staff
                               (N=3,839)               (N=1,735)             (N=2,104)               Difference
         Year                      (1)                     (2)                    (3)                  (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]             0.65***                 1.19***                  0.21                 0.98***
        p-value                 (<.0001)                (<.0001)                (0.18)                 (0.00)


                                                           53
Panel C: Mode of Payment

                                             No Stock Payment

                                                 Specialized      No Specialized
                           Full Sample           M&A staff         M&A staff
                            (N=8,703)            (N=4,070)         (N=4,633)       Difference
         Year                   (1)                  (2)                (3)          (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]          0.36***              0.76***              0.01         0.76***
        p-value              (<.0001)             (<.0001)            (0.94)        (<.0001)


                                             With Stock Payment

                                                 Specialized      No Specialized
                           Full Sample           M&A staff         M&A staff
                            (N=2,395)            (N=1,145)         (N=1,250)       Difference
         Year                   (1)                  (2)                (3)          (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]            0.02                0.67**             -0.56*        1.25***
        p-value               (0.90)               (0.02)            (-0.07)         (0.00)




Panel D: Mode of Payment and Target Status

No Stock Payment

                                                Public Target

                                                 Specialized      No Specialized
                           Full Sample           M&A staff         M&A staff
                            (N=979)               (N=571)           (N=408)        Difference
         Year                   (1)                  (2)                (3)         (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]            0.17                0.41*              -0.15           0.57
        p-value               (0.32)               (0.07)             (0.57)         (0.11)


                                               Private Target

                                                 Specialized      No Specialized
                           Full Sample           M&A staff         M&A staff
                            (N=4,286)            (N=1,950)         (N=2,336)       Difference
         Year                   (1)                  (2)               (3)           (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]          0.30***              0.76***             -0.01         0.84***
        p-value               (0.00)               0.0001             0.874         <.0001


                                              Subsidiary Target

                                                 Specialized      No Specialized
                           Full Sample           M&A staff         M&A staff
                            (N=3,438)            (N=1,549)         (N=1,889)       Difference
         Year                   (1)                  (2)                (3)          (2)-(3)
     % CAR [-2, +2]          0.48***              0.90***              0.15         0.75***
        p-value               (0.00)               (0.00)             (0.35)         (0.00)

                                                     54
With Stock Payment

                                     Public Target

                                      Specialized      No Specialized
                     Full Sample      M&A staff         M&A staff
                      (N=841)          (N=395)           (N=446)        Difference
        Year              (1)             (2)               (3)          (2)-(3)
    % CAR [-2, +2]    -2.24***         -1.78***          -2.64***          0.86
       p-value        (<.0001)         (<.0001)          (<.0001)         (0.13)


                                    Private Target

                                      Specialized      No Specialized
                     Full Sample      M&A staff         M&A staff
                      (N=1,153)        (N=564)           (N=589)        Difference
        Year              (1)             (2)                (3)         (2)-(3)
    % CAR [-2, +2]     0.95***         1.41***              0.50           0.91
       p-value          (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.34)         (0.18)


                                   Subsidiary Target

                                      Specialized      No Specialized
                     Full Sample      M&A staff         M&A staff
                      (N=401)          (N=186)           (N=215)        Difference
        Year              (1)             (2)                (3)         (2)-(3)
    % CAR [-2, +2]     2.12***         3.65***              0.79         2.86**
       p-value          (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.26)         (0.01)




                                          55
Table 4. Specialized M&A Staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on
Specialized M&A staff, acquirer-, and deal-specific characteristics. The dependent variable is market model adjusted
CARs over the [-2, +2] event window surrounding the M&A announcement date where the parameters of the market model
are estimated using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. Specialized
M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate
development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from
LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson
One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and
subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be
completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than
50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the
acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix
for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                                          (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
Specialized M&A Staff                                                1.312***       1.312***      1.119***       1.124***
                                                                       (7.903)        (7.366)       (5.557)        (5.573)
Stock Price Runup                                                     -0.367*       -0.442**     -0.736***       -0.731***
                                                                      (-1.774)       (-1.994)      (-2.821)       (-2.801)
Sigma                                                                 -23.002       -21.472*       -15.099        -15.285
                                                                      (-1.578)       (-1.656)      (-1.111)       (-1.123)
Ln (Acquirer Size)                                                  -0.298***      -0.254***     -0.287***       -0.368***
                                                                      (-3.277)       (-2.637)      (-3.590)       (-3.576)
Relative Size                                                          2.496*         2.724*        1.464*         1.441*
                                                                       (1.887)        (1.934)       (1.873)        (1.840)
Private                                                              1.776***       1.943***      1.667***       1.654***
                                                                       (5.977)        (6.229)       (5.575)        (5.518)
Subsidiary                                                           1.865***       1.967***      1.896***       1.884***
                                                                       (6.955)        (7.021)       (6.306)        (6.244)
Hostile                                                                 -0.253         0.541          1.701          1.671
                                                                      (-0.188)        (0.407)       (1.204)        (1.192)
Book Leverage                                                          1.069*         1.145*       1.287**        1.250**
                                                                       (1.912)        (1.881)       (2.079)        (2.006)
Tobin's Q                                                               -0.023         -0.040         0.027          0.029
                                                                      (-0.513)       (-0.840)       (0.438)        (0.469)
ROA                                                                     -0.985         -1.004         1.546          1.558
                                                                      (-0.633)       (-0.632)       (0.828)        (0.834)
Book-to-Market                                                          0.018          0.022         -0.270         -0.273
                                                                       (0.080)        (0.094)      (-1.016)       (-1.025)
Cash Flows-to-Equity                                                    0.129          0.297          0.240          0.254
                                                                       (0.357)        (0.749)       (0.433)        (0.460)
Top tier Advisor                                                        0.144          0.092        0.444*         0.443*
                                                                       (0.505)        (0.305)       (1.684)        (1.678)
No of Advisors                                                          -0.178         -0.242        -0.166         -0.161
                                                                      (-0.948)       (-1.247)      (-0.869)       (-0.843)
Payment-All Cash                                                        0.181         0.320*          0.058          0.064
                                                                       (1.099)        (1.828)       (0.303)        (0.332)
Payment-Includes Stock                                                  -0.383         -0.344        -0.462         -0.455
                                                                      (-1.358)       (-1.157)      (-1.344)       (-1.321)

                                                             56
No of M&As (past 10 years)                 0.008      0.006      0.012      0.013
                                          (1.056)    (0.725)    (0.960)    (1.052)
High Tech                                  0.140      0.153      0.068      0.071
                                          (0.684)    (0.706)    (0.297)    (0.310)
Diversifying                               -0.207     -0.153   -0.471*    -0.471*
                                         (-1.153)   (-0.740)   (-1.828)   (-1.827)
Institutional Ownership                 -0.519**    -0.421*      0.127      0.133
                                         (-2.244)   (-1.675)    (0.385)    (0.395)
Large Bidders (indicator)                                                   0.318
                                                                           (0.977)
Ln (Acquirer Size-squared)                                                  0.000
                                                                           (1.330)
Industry Fixed Effects                     Y           N          N           N
Year Fixed Effects                         Y           N          N           N
Industry-Year Fixed Effects                N           Y          Y           Y
CEO and Director Characteristics           N           N          Y           Y
R2                                       4.50%      13.90%     17.28%     17.30%
N                                        9,906       9,906      7,034       7,034




                                   57
Table 5. Specialized M&A Staff and Alternative Measures of Acquisition Performance
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of alternative measures of M&A performance on specialized M&A staff, acquirer and deal-specific
characteristics across columns 1 and 11. In Column 1 (2), the dependent variable is market model adjusted CARs over the [-20, +2] ([-42, +2]) event window surrounding the
M&A announcement where the parameters of the market model are estimated using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. In
Column 3, we estimate a logistic regression where the dependent variable equals one if the acquirer makes a large loss M&A defined as a transaction for which shareholders of
acquirers lost more than $500 million in 2017 dollars over the [-2, +2] event window surrounding acquisition announcement date, zero otherwise. In Columns 4, 5, and 6, the
dependent variable is the DGTW buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHAR) over the [-2, +Close], the [-2, +126], or the [-2, +256] event window surrounding the M&A
announcements. In column 7, we estimate a logistic regression where the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals one if the acquirer makes a divestiture in the same
two-digit SIC industry as the target within three years following an acquisition's effective closing date, zero otherwise. In column 8, the dependent variable is the change in
consensus analyst annual between six months preceding M&A announcement date and six months following the closing date. In Column 9, 10, and 11, the dependent variable is
the changes in industry adjusted ROA for the acquiring firms from the pre-acquisition year (t-1) to one, two, and three years following the deal completion. Specialized M&A staff
equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic
Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One
Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000,
to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of
the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the
acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                                                                                                                            Change in Change in                 Change in
                                                                                                                    in       Industry Industry                   Industry
                                                                      DGTW       DGTW       DGTW                 Consensus Adjusted Adjusted                    Adjusted
                                                        Large Loss     BHAR       BHAR      BHAR                  Analyst      ROA      ROA                        ROA
                                                        Acquisition
                           CAR [-20, +2] CAR [-42, +2)]             [-2, Close] [-2,+126] [-2, +252] Divestment EPS forecast [-1, +1] [-1, +2]                   [-1, +3]

                                 (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)           (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)
Specialized M&A Staff         1.469***        1.659***      -11.040**     1.845***    4.458*** 4.756*** -188.260*** 2.349*** 1.692*** 1.609***                   1.423**
                               (4.715)         (3.753)       (-2.253)      (4.483)     (6.081)     (4.185)     (-16.719)      (3.277)     (3.287)     (4.015)    (2.348)
Bidder Characteristics            Y              Y              Y             Y            Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y           Y
Deal Characteristics              Y              Y              Y             Y            Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y           Y
Industry-Year Fixed
                                  Y              Y              Y             Y            Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y           Y
Effects
R2                            15.98%          21.94%         13.80%       14.14%       17.55%      18.80%       56.99%        20.45%      11.52%     19.40%      17.62%
N                               9,906           9,906         9,906         8,975       8,996       9,017        9,906         7,456       9,906      8,141       7,615


                                                                                      58
Table 6. Specialized M&A Staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns: Non-Random Matching between Specialized M&A Staff and
Acquirers
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on Specialized M&A staff, acquirer, and deal-specific
characteristics. The dependent variable is market model adjusted CARs over the [-2, +2] event window surrounding the M&A announcement date where the
parameters of the market model are estimated using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. In Panel A, we present
a number of identification tests. In model 1(2), we remove transactions for which the acquiring firm's specialized M&A staff is put in place within three (five)
years before an acquisition. Model 3 differentiates between in-wave and out-of-wave acquisitions. Model 4 focuses on a subsample of frequent acquirers with and
without specialized M&A staff and includes firm fixed effects. Model 5 (6) compares firms with specialized M&A staff to firms that have a similar propensity of
having specialized staff (also with similar acquisition likelihoods). Model 7 presents falsification tests where falsified product development staff replaces
Specialized M&A staff as our main independent variable of interest. In Panel B, we test the relationship between Specialized M&A staff and acquisition returns
with instrumental variable analyses in a two-stage framework. In the first-stage regression, our dependent variable equals one if a firm employs Specialized M&A
staff, zero otherwise and the staggered recognition of the inevitable disclosure doctrine (IDD) by US state courts serves as our instrument. In the second-stage
regression, we replace Specialized M&A staff with its predicted value from the first-stage regression (Specialized M&A staff (predicted)) where the dependent
variable is market model adjusted CARs over the [-2, +2] event window. Specialized M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development
manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary
data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum Securities Data
Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December
31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50%
of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading
day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed
effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Panel A: Identification

                                                                             (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)      (7)
Specialized M&A Staff (eliminate <=3 years)                               1.398***
                                                                           (6.607)
Specialized M&A Staff (eliminate <=5 years)                                          1.264***
                                                                                      (4.941)
Specialized M&A Staff (during M&A Wave)                                                         1.316***
                                                                                                 (3.988)
Specialized M&A Staff (outside M&A Wave)                                                        1.311***
                                                                                                 (7.049)
Specialized M&A Staff (with firm fixed effects)                                                          1.091***
                                                                                                          (4.965)
Specialized M&A Staff (Propensity Score match)                                                                      1.089***
                                                                                                                     (7.414)
Specialized M&A Staff (Propensity Score with Acquisition Propensity)                                                           1.221***


                                                                                  59
                                                                                                            (8.091)
Specialized Product Staff (Falsification)                                                                     -0.147
                                                                                                             (-0.169)
Firm Controls                                                         Y      Y      Y      Y      Y      Y      Y
Deal Specific Controls                                                Y      Y      Y      Y      Y      Y      Y
Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                           Y      Y      Y      N      Y      Y      Y
Industry Fixed Effects                                                N      N      N      N      N      N      N
Year Fixed Effects                                                    N      N      N      Y      N      N      N
Firm Fixed Effect                                                     N      N      N      Y      N      N      N
R2                                                                 15.81% 17.57% 13.90% 25.90% 15.13% 14.50% 13.90%
N                                                                   7,634  6,537  9,906 5,048 9,578    8,570 9,906




Panel B: Instrumental Variable Analyses: Two Stage Least Squares
                                                                    First Stage Regression Second Stage Regression
                                                                    Specialized M&A Staff       CAR [-2, +2]
Inevitable disclosure doctrine                                             17.348***
                                                                            (16.675)
Specialized M&A Staff (predicted)                                                                 2.221**
                                                                                                   (2.252)
Firm Controls                                                                   Y                     Y
Deal Specific Controls                                                          Y                     Y
Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                                     Y                     Y
R2                                                                           26.99%                13.40%
N                                                                             9,906                 9,906




                                                                       60
Table 7. Specialized M&A Staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns: Cross-Sectional Analyses
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on specialized
M&A staff, acquirer-, and deal-specific characteristics. The dependent variable is market model adjusted CARs over the
[-2, +2] event window surrounding the M&A announcement date where the parameters of the market model are estimated
using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. Specialized M&A staff equals
one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development
managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com,
Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum
Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions
announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own
less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the
transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the
42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables.
T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


     Panel A. Specialized M&A Staff Characteristics
                                                                                             (1)         (2)      (3)
     Specialized M&A Staff                                                                0.938*** 1.069*** 1.120***
                                                                                           (4.264) (4.945) (5.644)
     Corporate Development Manager - High Firm experience                                 0.872***
                                                                                           (3.752)
     Corporate Development Manager- High Employment experience                                      0.522**
                                                                                                    (2.353)
     No of Corporate Development Managers                                                                    0.124**
                                                                                                             (2.005)
     Firm specific Controls                                                                   Y        Y        Y
     Deal specific Controls                                                                   Y        Y        Y
     Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                                              Y        Y        Y
     R2                                                                                    14.03% 13.95% 13.94%
     N                                                                                      9,906    9,906    9,906


     Panel B: Specialized M&A Staff and CEO Characteristics

                                                                                          (1)         (2)
     Specialized M&A Staff                                                            1.34***      1.21***
                                                                                       (4.88)       (4.58)
     Specialized M&A Staff * Powerful CEO: Pay>100% Closest Executive                -1.05***
                                                                                       (-2.81)
     Powerful CEO: Pay>100% Closest Executive                                            0.34
                                                                                       (1.15)
     Specialized M&A Staff * Overconfident CEO                                                      -0.87**
                                                                                                     (-2.34)
     Overconfident CEO                                                                             -0.88***
                                                                                                     (-2.90)
     Specialized M&A Staff + Interaction                                               0.292          0.349
                                                                                      (1.044)       (1.280)
     Firm specific Controls                                                              Y              Y


                                                              61
Deal specific Controls                                                        Y          Y
Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                                   Y          Y
R2                                                                         18.23%     19.20%
N                                                                           5681       5923


Panel C: Specialized M&A Staff and Agency costs of managerial discretion

                                                                              (1)        (2)      (3)
Specialized M&A Staff                                                      1.18***    0.894*** 1.655***
                                                                            (4.36)     (4.521)  (7.830)
Specialized M&A Staff * Chairman & President                               -0.78**
                                                                            (-2.09)
Chairman & President                                                         -0.09
                                                                            (-0.29)
Specialized M&A Staff * Dual-Class                                                    -1.571**
                                                                                       (-2.203)
Dual-Class                                                                              -0.199
                                                                                       (-0.371)
Specialized M&A Staff * Firm without independent board                                            -1.123**
                                                                                                   (-2.428)
Firm without independent board                                                                       -0.320
                                                                                                   (-0.874)
Specialized M&A Staff + Interaction                                         0.400      -0.676        0.532
                                                                           (1.407)    (-0.972)      (1.234)
Firm specific Controls                                                        Y           Y            Y
Deal specific Controls                                                        Y           Y            Y
Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                                   Y           Y            Y
R2                                                                         18.27%     21.52%       21.79%
N                                                                           5681        5,303        4,861




                                                   62
Table 8 Specialized M&A Staff and Synergies with the Target: Combined Announcement Returns and
Change in Combined Firm's Operating Performance

This table test the association between Specialized M&A Staff and identifying targets with higher synergies with the
acquirer. Columns 1 through 4 presents the estimates from ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of transaction
synergies on Specialized M&A Staff, acquirer-, and deal-specific characteristics. In column 1, the dependent variable equals
the value-weighted combined cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of the acquirer and the target firm over the [-2,+2]
event window relative to the acquisition announcement date where the parameters of the market model are estimated using
CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. In columns 2, 3, and 4, the
dependent variable is the changes in the combined firm's industry adjusted ROA from the pre-acquisition year (t-1) to one,
two, and three years following the deal completion. Specialized M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate
development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers is from Boardex of Management
Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who
databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC)
and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to
December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to
M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1
million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition
announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry
and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.




                                          Synergy Gain:    Change in        Change in         Change in
                                           Acquirer &      Combined         Combined          Combined
                                              Target    Firm's Industry- Firm's Industry- Firm's Industry-
                                            combined     adjusted ROA adjusted ROA adjusted ROA
                                          CARs [-2,+2]       [-1,+1]           [-1,+2]          [-1,+3]
                                                (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
           Specialized M&A Staff            1.461***       4.131***          3.239***          2.602**
                                             (2.686)         (2.613)          (3.074)           (2.168)
           Stock Price Runup                  -0.156          -5.171           -1.960            -1.191
                                             (-0.225)       (-1.385)          (-1.343)         (-1.020)
           Sigma                              70.879       -160.875            88.243         153.303*
                                             (1.471)        (-1.338)          (1.049)           (1.784)
           Ln (Acquirer Size)                 -0.171        -1.104*            -0.426            -0.035
                                             (-0.784)       (-1.747)          (-1.092)         (-0.088)
           Relative Size                    2.656***          -2.207         -3.366**         -3.398**
                                             (2.998)        (-1.495)          (-2.232)         (-2.166)
           Hostile                             0.753          2.344            -2.469             4.434
                                             (0.448)         (0.586)          (-1.225)          (0.813)
           Book Leverage                       2.142          1.749             3.619             3.663
                                             (1.273)         (0.378)          (1.095)           (1.080)
           Tobin's Q                          -0.184          -0.768           -0.219             0.084
                                             (-0.936)       (-1.117)          (-0.687)          (0.268)
           ROA                                 2.866          -0.574       -30.774***        -34.189***
                                             (1.077)        (-0.060)          (-3.843)         (-2.993)
           Book-to-Market                      1.031          -1.793           -0.420             0.180
                                             (1.480)        (-1.285)          (-0.445)          (0.168)
           Cash Flows-to-Equity               -0.693      -21.423***        -13.103**        -16.832***
                                             (-0.316)       (-3.659)          (-2.304)         (-5.112)


                                                            63
Top tier Advisor                 0.626       -0.515    1.303        0.848
                               (1.001)     (-0.304)   (1.174)     (0.748)
No of Advisors                   0.218       -0.926    -0.723      -0.250
                               (0.648)     (-1.284)   (-1.367)   (-0.469)
Payment-All Cash                -0.022       -0.977    1.693       -0.345
                               (-0.031)    (-0.606)   (1.037)    (-0.228)
Payment-Includes Stock        -2.133**       -0.977    1.503       -0.201
                               (-2.522)    (-0.575)   (0.941)    (-0.143)
No of M&As (past 10 years)      -0.002       -0.006    0.007        0.024
                               (-0.077)    (-0.091)   (0.130)     (0.487)
High Tech                       -0.388       -0.682    -0.571      -0.512
                               (-0.483)    (-0.358)   (-0.489)   (-0.394)
Diversifying                    -0.648       0.323     -1.199      -1.110
                               (-1.161)     (0.216)   (-1.251)   (-1.059)
Institutional Ownership          0.570       -0.264    0.194       -0.454
                               (0.773)     (-0.142)   (0.127)    (-0.278)
Industry-Year Fixed Effects        Y           Y         Y            Y
R2                             35.90%      37.85%     52.28%     52.72%
N                                1,500       1,081     1,011        1,008




                                          64
Table 9. Specialized M&A staff and Value Capture from Target: Takeover Premiums and Bidder's
Share of Combined Synergies
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of specialized M&A staff and value capture from
target firms. In Column 1 (2), the dependent variable equals the takeover premium calculated as the difference between
the price paid per share and target firm's stock price 63 (105) trading days prior to M&A announcement. InColumn 3, the
dependent variable is defined as the percentage difference between the multiple of acquisition of interest and the average
multiple for the portfolio of comparable industry-matched transactions. In Column 4, the dependent variable is the bidder's
share of total wealth gain (Bidder's Share of Total Gain) and calculated as the total abnormal dollar gain to bidder
shareholders scaled by the total combined abnormal dollar gain to the shareholders of the bidder and target firms over the
[-2, +2] event window relative to deal announcement date where the parameters of the market model are estimated using
CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the M&A announcement. Specialized M&A staff equals one
if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development managers
is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg,
Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum Securities Data
Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions announced over
the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own less than 50%
of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the transaction,
and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading
day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics
are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1%, respectively.


                                          M&A Premium           M&A Premium                            Buyer's Share of
                                         (Target's Price at    (Target's Price at   M&A Premium         Synergy Gains
                                             day -63)             day -105)       (Deal Multiple: P/S) (CARs: [-2, +2])
Specialized M&A staff                         8.030                  7.264               -4.889            -39.546
                                              (1.158)               (1.007)             (-0.798)           (-0.440)
Stock Price Runup                              8.937                23.991**               7.853               -27.392
                                              (1.552)                (2.496)              (1.558)              (-0.686)
Sigma                                       -919.445**             -1138.703***          -278.265             2936.735
                                              (-2.396)               (-3.163)             (-0.997)             (1.379)
Ln (Acquirer Size)                             -2.573                 -0.176               2.569               -19.642
                                              (-1.034)               (-0.060)             (0.863)              (-0.962)
Relative Size                                  -6.188                 -1.449               -9.316               -1.770
                                              (-1.105)               (-0.202)             (-0.992)             (-0.018)
Private                                        6.927                  22.063                                   103.529
                                              (0.330)                (1.012)                                   (0.669)
Subsidiary                                     1.945                 -12.410                                  219.205**
                                              (0.171)                (-0.450)                                  (2.443)
Hostile                                       -34.861                -41.987*                                 161.163*
                                              (-1.226)               (-1.864)                                  (1.659)
Book Leverage                                 -18.684               -38.770**             12.434               13.303
                                              (-1.373)               (-2.077)             (0.710)              (0.138)
Tobin's Q                                      -0.838                 0.033               4.164*                -2.708
                                              (-0.686)               (0.011)              (1.675)              (-0.353)


                                                              65
ROA                           -19.194         -13.374     -6.354     181.726
                              (-0.820)        (-0.474)    (-0.252)   (1.251)
Book-to-Market                 -8.130          -5.290     -0.156     -48.497
                              (-1.423)        (-0.840)    (-0.025)   (-0.983)
Cash Flows-to-Equity           5.407           3.989      -4.953     55.634
                              (0.457)         (0.424)     (-0.249)   (1.050)
Top tier Advisor               -4.699          -8.648     -3.385     120.865
                              (-0.609)        (-1.050)    (-0.413)   (1.519)
No of Advisors                 -1.426          -3.030     -3.445     -52.893
                              (-0.436)        (-0.855)    (-0.639)   (-1.541)
Payment-All Cash              -19.598         -38.236     -3.881     121.618
                              (-0.644)        (-1.521)    (-0.563)   (1.325)
Payment-Includes Stock        -31.935         -40.737*     3.396     -82.437
                              (-1.132)        (-1.752)    (0.408)    (-0.839)
No of M&As (past 10 years)    -0.583**        -0.665**     0.246     -0.108
                              (-2.238)        (-2.159)    (0.308)    (-0.020)
High Tech                      2.992           3.439     21.509***   179.661
                              (0.471)         (0.475)     (3.146)    (1.106)
Diversifying                  -11.171*         -7.252     -1.908     -38.973
                              (-1.892)        (-1.309)    (-0.300)   (-0.388)
Institutional Ownership        -0.972          -7.237     -0.677     -31.565
                              (-0.127)        (-0.725)    (-0.069)   (-0.250)
Industry-Year Fixed Effects      Y               Y           Y          Y
    2
R                             27.45%          35.83%      41.30%     23.27%
N                              1,359           1,350       1,002      1,500




                                         66
Table 10 Specialized M&A staff and Transaction Costs: Use of External Advisors and Advisory Fees
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of specialized M&A staff and transaction costs. In
column 1, the dependent variable equals the number of investment banks retained for a transaction by the acquirer. In
column 2, the dependent variable is the total advisory fees paid by the acquirer scaled by the dollar transaction value.
Specialized M&A staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information
on corporate development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary
data from LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the
Thomson One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private,
and subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be
completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than
50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the
acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix
for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                    No of External        Advisory Fees as of
                                                                       Advisors              Deal Value
                                                                           (1)                      (2)
           Specialized M&A staff                                          1.795                -0.389**
                                                                         (1.348)                (-2.025)
           Stock Price Runup                                              0.102                   -0.187
                                                                         (0.096)                (-1.200)
           Sigma                                                      -175.610*                  10.272
                                                                        (-1.841)                 (0.435)
           Ln (Acquirer Size)                                          6.293***               -0.353***
                                                                       (11.253)                 (-3.840)
           Relative Size                                              56.705***               -1.653***
                                                                       (14.563)                 (-3.383)
           Private                                                   -42.415***                   -0.068
                                                                       (-19.139)                (-0.094)
           Subsidiary                                                -34.385***                   -0.624
                                                                       (-14.690)                (-1.004)
           Hostile                                                       10.566                   -0.500
                                                                         (0.582)                (-0.910)
           Book Leverage                                                  0.471                   0.791
                                                                         (0.126)                 (0.815)
           Tobin's Q                                                  -1.094***                   -0.003
                                                                        (-4.468)                (-0.113)
           ROA                                                            0.086                   0.765
                                                                         (0.016)                 (0.218)
           Book-to-Market                                             -5.740***                  1.374*
                                                                        (-4.094)                 (1.751)
           Cash Flows-to-Equity                                           1.959                -8.280**
                                                                         (0.895)                (-1.983)
           Top tier Advisor                                                                     0.601**
                                                                                                 (2.215)
           No of Advisors                                                                         0.112
                                                                                                 (0.927)
           Payment-All Cash                                            9.220***                   -0.358
                                                                        (6.695)                 (-1.202)
           Payment-Includes Stock                                     26.743***                   -0.406
                                                                       (13.332)                 (-1.270)

                                                             67
No of M&As (past 10 years)         -0.663***      0.007
                                    (-8.581)     (0.448)
High Tech                             1.259       -0.241
                                     (0.779)    (-0.859)
Diversifying                          -0.409      0.131
                                    (-0.306)     (0.539)
Institutional Ownership               2.863       0.128
                                     (1.413)     (0.339)
Log (Deal Value)                               -0.435**
                                                (-2.418)
Industry-Year Fixed Effects            Y            Y
R2                                  37.45%      56.58%
N                                    9,906        1,012




                              68
Table 11 Why doesn't every firm employ Specialized M&A staff?
This table tests the relationship between the employment of specialized M&A staff and CEO/director characteristics
through expanding the analyses of specialized M&A staff employment used in the first-stage regression of Panel B of
Table 7. Our dependent variable equals one if a firm employs specialized M&A staff, zero otherwise. Specialized M&A
staff equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate
development managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from
LinkedIn.com, Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson
One Platinum Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and
subsidiary acquisitions announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be
completed, the bidder to own less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than
50% of the target following the transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the
acquirer's market capitalization on the 42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix
for a detailed description of variables. T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                                   Specialized
                                                                                   M&A Staff

                         M&A to Total investment Ratio (past 10 years)               6.290***
                                                                                       (4.152)
                         CEO with Experience in Target Firm's industry               -3.812**
                                                                                      (-2.297)
                         CEO with Investment Banking Experience                    -13.943***
                                                                                      (-2.797)
                         CEO Industry Experience                                    -0.306***
                                                                                      (-3.006)
                         CEO Busyness                                                1.582***
                                                                                       (7.695)
                         % Directors with Experience in Target industry              -4.552**
                                                                                      (-2.262)
                         % Directors with Investment Banking Experience            -82.260***
                                                                                      (-4.961)
                         Average Director Industry Experience                        -0.465**
                                                                                      (-2.547)
                         Average Director Busyness                                   2.576***
                                                                                       (4.765)
                         Firm Controls                                                    Y
                         Deal Specific Controls                                           Y
                         Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                      Y
                         R2                                                           41.96%
                         N                                                              7,029




                                                             69
Appendix Table 1. Specialized M&A staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns: Alternative Event
Window
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on specialized
M&A staff, acquirer-, and deal-specific characteristics. The dependent variable is market model adjusted CARs over the
[-1, +1] event window surrounding the M&A announcement date where the parameters of the market model are estimated
using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the acquisition announcement. Specialized M&A staff
equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development
managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com,
Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum
Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions
announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own
less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the
transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the
42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables.
T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                                          (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)
  Specialized M&A staff                                              0.631***       0.654***       0.602***         0.607***
                                                                       (5.077)        (4.767)        (3.976)          (4.003)
  Stock Price Runup                                                   0.360**          0.218           0.147            0.150
                                                                       (2.028)        (1.136)        (0.555)          (0.566)
  Sigma                                                                 9.677         12.159        30.840*          30.922*
                                                                       (0.799)        (0.951)        (1.716)          (1.720)
  Ln (Acquirer Size)                                                    -0.121         -0.097         -0.052           -0.133
                                                                      (-1.413)       (-1.005)       (-0.701)         (-1.586)
  Relative Size                                                         2.006          2.134         1.103*           1.085*
                                                                       (1.459)        (1.439)        (1.850)          (1.819)
  Private                                                            1.333***       1.403***       1.293***         1.280***
                                                                       (4.991)        (5.066)        (5.613)          (5.560)
  Subsidiary                                                         1.341***       1.349***       1.367***         1.353***
                                                                       (6.340)        (6.400)        (6.182)          (6.117)
  Hostile                                                               0.326          0.831           1.472            1.429
                                                                       (0.298)        (0.696)        (1.163)          (1.144)
  Book Leverage                                                         0.484          0.366           0.438            0.377
                                                                       (1.050)        (0.697)        (0.917)          (0.783)
  Tobin's Q                                                             0.014          -0.001         -0.017           -0.015
                                                                       (0.396)       (-0.029)       (-0.294)         (-0.272)
  ROA                                                                   -0.796         -0.930        1.686*           1.716*
                                                                      (-0.591)       (-0.672)        (1.664)          (1.691)
  Book-to-Market                                                        -0.151         -0.247         -0.297           -0.297
                                                                      (-0.876)       (-1.351)       (-1.391)         (-1.391)
  Cash Flows-to-Equity                                                  0.342          0.407        0.651**          0.662**
                                                                       (1.288)        (1.423)        (2.169)          (2.229)
  Top tier Advisor                                                      -0.107         -0.116          0.074            0.069
                                                                      (-0.422)       (-0.435)        (0.388)          (0.360)
  No of Advisors                                                        -0.068         -0.099         -0.106           -0.103
                                                                      (-0.425)       (-0.590)       (-0.771)         (-0.755)
  Payment-All Cash                                                      0.065          0.114          -0.029           -0.024
                                                                       (0.509)        (0.847)       (-0.200)         (-0.163)
  Payment-Includes Stock                                              -0.438*       -0.492**          -0.381           -0.372
                                                                      (-1.929)       (-2.016)       (-1.531)         (-1.493)

                                                              70
No of M&As (past 10 years)                0.007      0.007       0.007      0.009
                                         (1.250)    (1.053)    (0.755)    (0.884)
High Tech                                0.274*      0.267       0.152      0.157
                                         (1.737)    (1.564)    (0.860)    (0.891)
Diversifying                              -0.134     -0.085     -0.177     -0.175
                                        (-0.913)   (-0.485)   (-0.918)   (-0.903)
Institutional Ownership                   -0.293     -0.285     -0.056     -0.075
                                        (-1.644)   (-1.462)   (-0.220)   (-0.295)
Large Bidders (indicator)                                                   0.371
                                                                          (1.516)
Ln (Acquirer Size-squared)                                                  0.000
                                                                          (1.050)
Industry Fixed Effects                    Y           N          N            N
Year Fixed Effects                        Y           N          N            N
Industry*Year Fixed Effects               N           Y          Y            Y
CEO and Director Characteristics          N           N          Y            Y
R2                                      3.80%      11.52%     15.98%     16.02%
N                                       9,906       9,906      7,034        7,034




                                   71
Appendix Table 2. Specialized M&A staff and Acquisition Announcement Returns: Sample Splits
This table presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on specialized
M&A staff, acquirer-, and deal-specific characteristics. The dependent variable is market model adjusted CARs over the
[-2, +2] event window surrounding the M&A announcement date where the parameters of the market model are estimated
using CRSP value-weighted index over [-240, -41] days relative to the acquisition announcement. Specialized M&A staff
equals one if a firm has at least one corporate development manager, zero otherwise. Information on corporate development
managers is from Boardex of Management Diagnostic Limited Individual with supplementary data from LinkedIn.com,
Bloomberg, Reuters, and Marquis Who's Who databases. The M&A sample is drawn from the Thomson One Platinum
Securities Data Company M&A database (SDC) and includes a sample of U.S. public, private, and subsidiary acquisitions
announced over the period January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2017. We require M&As to be completed, the bidder to own
less than 50% of the target six months prior to M&A announcement and control more than 50% of the target following the
transaction, and the deal value to exceed $1 million and represent at least 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization on the
42nd trading day prior to the acquisition announcement date. Refer to the Appendix for a detailed description of variables.
T-statistics are in parentheses. Industry and year fixed effects are included. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                            2000-2008                     2009-2017
Specialized M&A staff                                               1.572***       1.478***       1.023***       1.097***
                                                                      (7.016)        (6.183)        (4.058)       (4.111)
Stock Price Runup                                                      -0.246         -0.274       -0.619*       -0.893**
                                                                     (-1.017)       (-1.083)       (-1.694)       (-2.165)
Sigma                                                                  -8.853       -13.301       -51.601*       -42.113*
                                                                     (-0.566)       (-0.787)       (-1.829)       (-1.734)
Ln (Acquirer Size)                                                 -0.314***      -0.328***       -0.336**         -0.237
                                                                     (-3.821)       (-3.701)       (-2.363)       (-1.546)
Relative Size                                                          0.342           0.344        4.488*         4.932*
                                                                      (0.707)        (0.715)        (1.928)       (1.943)
Private                                                             1.508***       1.521***       2.054***       2.314***
                                                                      (4.632)        (4.449)        (4.356)       (4.677)
Subsidiary                                                          1.436***       1.408***       2.367***       2.438***
                                                                      (4.518)        (4.179)        (5.843)       (5.687)
Hostile                                                                0.252           1.029          1.052         0.131
                                                                      (0.176)        (0.691)        (0.724)       (0.050)
Book Leverage                                                        1.405**        1.704**        1.622**          1.023
                                                                      (2.052)        (2.358)        (1.988)       (1.147)
Tobin's Q                                                              -0.049         -0.057          0.178         0.079
                                                                     (-1.053)       (-1.127)        (1.205)       (0.499)
ROA                                                                    1.852           1.661      -6.105**        -5.886*
                                                                      (1.357)        (1.143)       (-1.993)       (-1.864)
Book-to-Market                                                         0.194           0.214          0.049        -0.123
                                                                      (0.762)        (0.805)        (0.120)       (-0.292)
Cash Flows-to-Equity                                                   -0.027          0.042          0.783         1.363
                                                                     (-0.068)        (0.094)        (0.920)       (1.620)
Top tier Advisor                                                       0.259           0.312          0.166         0.010
                                                                      (0.828)        (0.954)        (0.363)       (0.021)
No of Advisors                                                         -0.073         -0.260         -0.172        -0.177
                                                                     (-0.329)       (-1.120)       (-0.651)       (-0.654)
Payment-All Cash                                                       0.278           0.367         -0.027         0.065


                                                              72
                                     (1.284)     (1.601)   (-0.112)   (0.249)
Payment-Includes Stock                -0.225      -0.161     -0.770    -0.885
                                    (-0.695)    (-0.482)   (-1.435)   (-1.521)
No of M&As (past 10 years)            -0.001       0.003    0.027*      0.018
                                    (-0.074)     (0.333)    (1.919)   (1.124)
High Tech                             0.222        0.326     -0.034    -0.120
                                     (0.769)     (1.071)   (-0.119)   (-0.397)
Diversifying                          -0.343      -0.295      0.008     0.048
                                    (-1.586)    (-1.297)    (0.026)   (0.127)
Institutional Ownership            -0.796***   -0.723**      -0.219    -0.053
                                    (-2.727)    (-2.292)   (-0.563)   (-0.128)
Industry Fixed Effects                  Y            N          N         N
Year Fixed Effects                      Y            N          N         N
Industry*Year Fixed Effects             N            Y          N         Y
R2                                    3.84%     11.50%       9.26%    18.88%
N                                     5,700        5,700      4,206     4,206




                              73
