                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE:
            CLIMATE ADAPTATION INDUCED BY EXISTING INSTITUTIONS

                                        Antonio Bento
                                        Noah S. Miller
                                      Mehreen Mookerjee
                                      Edson R. Severnini

                                      Working Paper 28783
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28783


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2021, Revised July 2021




We thank Max Auffhammer, Karen Clay, Michael Greenstone, Amir Jina, Matt Kahn, Andrea La
Nauze, Margarita Portnykh, Lowell Taylor, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon,
Columbia, Insper-Sao Paulo, Penn State, UC-Davis, UCLA, UCSD, University of Chicago--
EPIC, AERE Summer Conference, SEEPAC Research Workshop: Advances in Estimating
Economic Effects from Climate Change Using Weather Observations (SIEPR { Stanford
University), International Workshop on Empirical Methods in Energy Economics, and the
Northeast Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics, for invaluable comments
and suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Berkman fund,
Heinz College, and Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation at Carnegie Mellon
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Antonio Bento, Noah S. Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson R. Severnini. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Time is of the Essence: Climate Adaptation Induced by Existing Institutions
Antonio Bento, Noah S. Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson R. Severnini
NBER Working Paper No. 28783
May 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. D02,H23,K32,P48,Q53,Q54,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

This study conceptualizes and demonstrates empirically that existing non-climate policies can
induce climate adaptation. Adaptation involves adjusting to or coping with climatic change with
the goal of reducing our vulnerability to its harmful effects. We examine the impact of
temperature on ambient ozone concentration in the United States from 1980-2013. Ozone is
formed under warm temperatures, but regulated by the Clean Air Act. These air quality standards
may act as a buffer against extreme increases in ambient ozone concentration. Indeed, adaptation
in counties out of attainment with the standards is 107 percent larger than under attainment,
implying substantial regulation-induced adaptation.

Antonio Bento                                  Mehreen Mookerjee
Sol Price School of Public Policy              College of Business
and Department of Economics                    Zayed University
University of Southern California              Dubai 19282
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626                     United Arab Emirates
and NBER                                       mehreenmookerjee@gmail.com
abento@usc.edu
                                               Edson R. Severnini
Noah S. Miller                                 H. John Heinz III College
Sol Price School of Public Policy              Carnegie Mellon University
University of Southern California              4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
Los Angeles, CA 90089                          Pittsburgh, PA 15213
nsmiller@usc.edu                               and NBER
                                               ersevernini@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28783
                                            I.   Introduction

Understanding whether and how we can adapt to a changing climate is essential for individ-
uals and policymakers seeking to develop efficient climate policies. By definition, adaptation
involves adjusting to or coping with climatic change with the goal of reducing our vulner-
ability to its harmful effects. Existing non-climate policies may facilitate climate adapta-
tion, even if that is not their expressed or original purpose. This study conceptualizes and
demonstrates that possibility in the context of the production of pollution ­ the impact of
temperature on ambient "bad" ozone in the United States from 1980-2013. Ozone is formed
by a Leontief-like production function of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) under sunlight and warm temperatures; hence, affected by climate change.
Furthermore, ambient ozone is a pollution externality regulated by the Clean Air Act.
       There is a broad class of existing non-climate policies that may help us cope with the
consequences of climate change. They affect outcomes from major sectors of the economy
whose production function is indirectly related to climate such as health, habitation, and
safety.1 Publicly-funded health care may assist individuals with heat-related illnesses, re-
ducing mortality.2 Those working outdoors such as agriculture and construction workers
are particularly at risk. Housing policy that relocates households out of slums and informal
settlements may also incidentally decrease fatalities and property losses from floods or land-
slides. This is especially important in developing countries, where slums are a distinctive
feature of the urban landscape. Law enforcement and the military may also act as a buffer
against climate-related crime and conflict.3 These co-benefits of non-climate policy in terms
   1
     This is on top of the direct effects of the provision of public goods and other government programs
facilitating adaptation to climate change. Dell, Jones and Olken (2014) note that snowfalls that once in a
while disrupts Southern U.S. states have negligible effects in the Northeast, in part because of policy-induced
investments in snow removal. Similarly, around the world, governments have incentivized the development
of crop varieties that are better suited for a changing climate (e.g., Olmstead and Rhode, 2008, 2011a,b).
   2
     For evidence on the effects of extreme weather on mortality, see Deschenes and Moretti (2009); Deschenes
and Greenstone (2011); Barreca et al. (2016); Heutel, Miller and Molitor (forthcoming). Mullins and White
(2020) show that access to health care can indeed mitigate the effects of temperature on mortality.
   3
     Ranson (2014), for example, estimates large impacts of climate change on crime in the United States,
and Burke, Hsiang and Miguel (2015) review the broad literature on the links between climate and conflict.



                                                      1
of induced climate adaptation should be accounted for in the design and evaluation of public
policy.
       To understand the mechanism behind regulation-induced adaptation in our setting, con-
sider a location where emissions of ozone precursors are under control in the baseline. If
a rise in temperature leads to more intense ozone formation and the violation of the Na-
tional Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), economic agents will be pressured by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to adopt pollution abatement strategies to
reduce emissions of NOx and VOCs, and ultimately ambient ozone concentration. Since
those actions would have to be taken not because of higher ozone precursor emissions but
rather higher temperatures, we refer to the resulting decline in ozone levels as adaptation
to climate change induced by the ozone NAAQS regulations. At the end of the day, the
pollution shocks triggered by climate change may be attenuated by adjustments induced by
the existing Clean Air Act regulations.4
       The insight that existing policies established for reasons unrelated to climate change may
mimic key incentives of comprehensive climate policy goes to the heart of the second-best
theory (Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956; Harberger, 1964, 1971, 1974; Hines, 1999; Goulder and
Williams, 2003). When the outcome of interest arises from market failures, climate change
may exacerbate those failures (e.g., Goulder and Parry, 2008; Bento et al., 2014), but existing
non-climate policies will be there to smooth out the climate impacts.5 Although economic
theory provides clear guidance on addressing externalities, it has proven politically difficult
to create new policies to combat climate change, the most significant of all environmental
   4
     This is not a new use of the term climate adaptation. In the context of responses to natural disasters,
Kousky (2012) explains that "[t]he negative impacts of disasters can be blunted by the adoption of risk
reduction activities. (...) [T]he hazards literature (...) refers to these actions as mitigation, whereas in
the climate literature, mitigation refers to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. The already established
mitigation measures for natural disasters can be seen as adaptation tools for adjusting to changes in the
frequency, magnitude, timing, or duration of extreme events with climate change." (p.37, our highlights).
   5
     In contrast, and absent market failures, if government policy distorts private behavior, then individuals
and firms might abstain from adaptive behavior. Annan and Schlenker (2015), for example, show that
insured farmers may not engage in the optimal protection against extreme heat because crop losses are
covered by the federal crop insurance program. Similarly, Deryugina (2017) provides evidence suggesting
that non-disaster government transfers to disaster-prone areas ­ such as unemployment benefits ­ "may
counteract the natural tendencies for out-migration from those areas" (Dell, Jones and Olken, 2014).


                                                      2
externalities (Aldy, Barrett and Stavins, 2003; Nordhaus, 2019; Aldy and Zeckhauser, 2020;
Goulder, 2020). Thus, until first-best climate policy is enacted, it may be relatively easier
for existing policy to be modestly adjusted to maximize adaptation co-benefits.6
       Examining the degree of adaptation to climate change induced by existing air quality
standards regarding ambient ozone is an ideal setting to study regulation-induced adapta-
tion. Ambient "bad" ozone is not emitted directly into the air, but rather formed rapidly
by Leontief-like chemical reactions between NOx and VOCs in the presence of sunlight and
warm temperatures. Therefore, climate change will increase ozone concentration in the near
future (e.g., Jacob and Winner, 2009). Moreover, ambient ozone is regulated by the Clean
Air Act due to its effects on human health and the environment (e.g., Neidell, 2009; Moretti
and Neidell, 2011; Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; McGrath et al., 2015; Deschenes, Green-
stone and Shapiro, 2017), and such regulations may be effective in reducing ambient ozone
concentrations (e.g., Henderson, 1996; Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011; Deschenes, Green-
stone and Shapiro, 2017). Because ambient ozone concentration is the result of pollution
externalities generated by economic agents, these corrective policies not only address this
market failure, but also indirectly induce climate adaptation.
       We leverage a unifying approach to estimate climate impacts, and infer the empirical
importance of adaptation induced by existing regulations. We build on Bento et al. (2020),
and use variation in both weather and climate to uncover the effects of both short- and long-
run variation in the same estimating equation. Inspired by Dell, Jones and Olken (2009, 2012,
2014), our measure of adaptation is derived directly from the difference between the responses
to weather shocks and climatic changes; hence, unlike previous approaches, assessing its
statistical significance is straightforward. In addition, because those are responses by the
same economic agents, our unifying approach does not require extrapolation of weather
responses over time and space to infer adaptation. Indeed, analogous to the Lucas Critique
   6
    At the same time, economic agents may continue to rely on market forces to adjust to climate change.
Hornbeck (2012) and Hornbeck and Naidu (2014), for example, highlight migration out of affected areas;
and Barreca et al. (2016) call attention to the diffusion of existing technologies, such as air conditioning.



                                                     3
(Lucas, 1976), preferences may not be constant across time and space. In the end, our
measure of regulation-induced adaptation is the difference between adaptation in counties
in and out of attainment with the ozone NAAQS.7 This strategy is only possible because
once we recover a measure of adaptation from responses to weather shocks and longer-term
climatic changes by the same economic agents, then we can compare the degree of adaptation
across counties with different attainment status.
       Our results demonstrate that existing policies unrelated to climate change can indeed fa-
cilitate adaptation, and the magnitude of the effect is of economic significance. The estimate
of adaptation in nonattainment counties is about 107 percent larger than in attainment coun-
ties.8 This finding is robust to a wide variety of sample restrictions and specification checks,
such as accounting for alternative climate measurement, different periods of adjustment,
distance to the NAAQS threshold for nonattaiment, constant or switching nonattainment
status, and competing regulations for ozone precursors, among others.
       This study makes three main contributions to the literature. First, it provides the first
credible evidence that existing non-climate policy can be used as a buffer to climate shocks
and still induce climate adaptation. Previous work has shown that although government
programs may smooth out negative shocks associated with climate change, they might inad-
vertently inhibit adaptive behavior (e.g., Deryugina, 2017).9 Second, it demonstrates that
existing government policy may provide an alternative catalyst for adaptation to climate
change beyond market forces and private responses. Prior literature has highlighted, for
example, migration out of affected areas (e.g., Hornbeck, 2012; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014;
Deryugina and Molitor, 2020) and diffusion of existing technology (e.g., Barreca et al., 2016).
   7
     Counties violating the air quality standards are required to take costly action to reduce emissions of
ozone precursors to bring ozone levels below the standards, even when the violation may have been caused
by rising average temperatures. Thus, there may be more climate adaptation in counties out of attainment.
   8
     The magnitude of the regulation-induced adaptation associated with a 1 C increase in temperature is
roughly 0.33 parts per billion (ppb). Because the impact of a 1 C temperature shock on ambient ozone
concentration is approximately 2ppb in nonattainment counties, regulation-induced adaptation reduces that
impact by about 17 percent.
   9
     A notable exception is Mullins and White (2020), who find that the improved access to primary care
services provided by the publicly-funded Community Health Centers (CHCs) rolled out across U.S. counties
in the 1960s and 1970s moderates the heat-mortality relationship by 14.2 percent.


                                                    4
Third, it suggests that given the urgency to address climate change, existing policies can be
used as a means to work towards that goal. Previous studies have examined the design and
implementation of new regulations and policy, but have recognized their economic and po-
litical feasibility challenges (e.g., Aldy, Barrett and Stavins, 2003; Stavins, 2011; Nordhaus,
2019; Stavins, 2019; Aldy and Zeckhauser, 2020; Goulder, 2020).
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents a conceptual framework to understand
how existing government regulations and policy may affect adaptation to climate change.
Section III provides a background on the NAAQS for ambient ozone, ozone formation, and
the data used in our analysis. Section IV introduces the empirical strategy; Section V reports
and discusses the results; and Section VI concludes.


                               II.    Conceptual Framework


                              A.     Existing vs. New Regulations

The creation of new regulations can often prove politically or technologically infeasible,
but existing regulations may mimic key incentives of a new regulation. In the context of
climate change, several global climate policy architectures ­ basically new regulations ­
have been proposed over the years (e.g., Aldy, Barrett and Stavins, 2003; Stavins, 2011,
2019; Nordhaus, 2019; Aldy and Zeckhauser, 2020). Nevertheless, because of free-riding and
political polarization, it has proven difficult to induce countries to join into an international
agreement with significant emission reductions, or to enact federal legislation addressing
climate change.
   Recognizing the difficulty in implementing first-best climate policy, and the urgency
in tackling the challenges of climate change, Goulder (2020) advocates for considerations
of political feasibility and costs of delayed implementation in the choice of climate policy.
Second-best policies may be socially inefficient, but if they are politically feasible for near-
term implementation, they might move up in the ordering of the policies considered by the


                                                5
federal government (Goulder, 2020).10 In this study, we demonstrate that existing govern-
ment regulations are already providing incentives for producers and consumers to adapt to
climate change ­ much like a second-best policy ­ and argue that policymakers should take
these co-benefits into consideration when enforcing or revising them.
       Our study focuses on the existing Clean Air Act (CAA) regulations ­ specifically the
National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS). With the CAA Amendments of 1970,
the EPA was authorized to set up and enforce a NAAQS for ambient ozone.11 Since then, a
nationwide network of air pollution monitors has allowed EPA to track ozone concentrations,
and a threshold is used to determine whether pollution levels are sufficiently dangerous to
warrant regulatory action.12 Counties with ozone levels exceeding the NAAQS threshold are
designated as in "nonattainment" and the corresponding state is required to submit a state
implementation plan (SIP) outlining its strategy for the nonattainment county to reduce
air pollution levels in order to reach compliance.13 In cases of persistent nonattainment the
CAA mostly mandates command-and-control regulations, requiring that plants use the best
available emission control technology (BACT) in their production processes. Furthermore, if
pollution levels continue to exceed the standards or if a county fails to abide by the approved
plan, sanctions may be imposed on the county in violation, such as retention of funding for
transportation infrastructure.


                  B.   The Nature of Existing Regulations Inducing Adaptation

To understand how existing regulations such as the Clean Air Act's NAAQS may induce
climate adaptation, let us consider a simple formalization using the sufficient statistic ap-
  10
     Many other second-best policies have been implemented around the world. The economic rationale has
been laid out many decades ago (Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956). In the context of climate change, a prominent
example in the United States is the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) standards. A first-best policy
would be taxing tailpipe emissions directly.
  11
     For further details of the ozone NAAQS see Appendix A.1.
  12
     Exposure to ambient ozone has been causally linked to increases in asthma hospitalization, medication
expenditures, and mortality, and decreases in labor productivity (e.g., Neidell, 2009; Moretti and Neidell,
2011; Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017).
  13
     Appendix Table A1 details the current and historical thresholds used to determine "nonattainment"
status under the prevailing NAAQS.

                                                    6
proach (Harberger, 1964; Chetty, 2009; Kleven, forthcoming). Assume that firms produce
X units of a consumption good. They use G(X ) units of the numeraire Z , and generate P
units of pollution, assumed for simplicity to be proportional to X . Since we are focusing
on ozone pollution, and ozone formation depends on climate (C ) as well, then we define
P  F (X, C ) =  (C )X , with  (.) > 0 and C (.)   (.) > 0.14 Also, suppose that there is a
continuum of consumers with wealth Y and quasilinear utility U (X ) + Z - r (C )X , where
r is the marginal damage of ozone pollution.
       Under profit and utility maximization, it can be shown (see Appendix C) that welfare
(W ) can be improved by reducing production.15 This might be the case when the NAAQS for
ambient ozone are binding. Because dW  dW (C ) = -r (C )dX > 0 when dX < 0, these
marginal reductions in X ­ e.g., to keep ozone concentrations below the NAAQS ­ would
be welfare improving even in the case of a constant climate. In the case of climate change,
however, the welfare gains from such reductions would be even greater, as the amount of pol-
lution avoided by decreasing X would be proportionally larger. These further welfare gains,
which are the monetized value of "regulation-induced adaptation" C dX , can be interpreted
as a co-benefit of the NAAQS for ambient ozone:

                                          dW
                                             = -rC dX > 0.                                              (1)
                                          dC

       Therefore, absent direct first-best climate policy, when climate is an input in the produc-
tion of economic outcomes that arise from market failures such as ozone pollution, corrective
policies targeting those outcomes may also lead to climate adaptation. In fact, in this
second-best setting, policies correcting pre-existing market distortions may also address the
externality of climate change (e.g., Goulder and Parry, 2008; Bento et al., 2014; Jacobsen
et al., 2020). In the case of the NAAQS for ambient ozone, the standards not only deal with
the externality of local air pollution, but also generate regulation-induced adaptation.16
  14
     See Appendix A.2 for more details on ozone formation, and the role of climate.
  15
     Indeed, the private optimum is not Pareto efficient because of the negative externality ozone pollution
imposes on consumers. Hence, this is clearly a second-best setting (Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956).
  16
     In contrast, when climate is an input in production but the output is a marketable good or service,


                                                     7
    To make the concept of regulation-induced adaptation as clear as possible in the context
we are studying, we use the schematic representation depicted in Figure 1. In Panel A,
the y -axis represents the output ­ ozone formation ­ and the x-axis represents a composite
index I (.) of two inputs ­ NOx and VOCs ­ whose levels move along the production function
F (I (NOx,VOCs), Climate) represented by the upward-sloping black line. F (I (NOx,VOCs),
Climate) is equivalent to the F (X,C) in the formalization above. The blue horizontal line
represents the maximum ambient ozone concentration a county may reach while still com-
plying with the NAAQS for ozone. Above that threshold, a county would be deemed out
of compliance with the standards, or in nonattainment. Panel B illustrates the Leontief-like
production function of Ozone with respect to it's precursors, VOCs and NOx, on the x- and
y-axis respectively and resulting Ozone "isoquant" curves increasing up and to the right.
    Assume that an ozone monitor is sited in a county that is initially complying with the
standards, as in point A. Moreover, suppose for simplicity that emissions of ozone precursors
are initially under control, but then temperature rises. Because Panel A depicts a bidimen-
sional diagram representing ozone as a function of I (NOx,VOCs) ­ taking climate as given
­ an increase in temperature shifts the production function upward and to the left. This
new production function under climate change is represented by the red upward-sloping
line. Because we assumed emissions of ozone precursors were initially under control, an
increase in average temperature raises ozone concentration for the same level of the index
I (NOx,VOCs), reaching point B . Since the ozone concentration is now above the NAAQS
threshold, the county is designated as out of attainment, and firms are pressured to make
adjustments in their production process to comply with the air quality standards in the near
future, usually three years after a county receives the nonattainment designation.
policies considering output and/or input levels may not only distort economic agents' behavior and generate
deadweight loss, but also potentially affect adaptive behavior. Annan and Schlenker (2015) illustrate the case
of policies precluding adaptation: farmers may not engage in the optimal protection against harmful extreme
heat because the resulting crop losses are covered by the federal crop insurance program. On the other hand,
policies such as the federal air conditioning subsidies for low-income families would also generate deadweight
loss, but could induce adaptation to climate change (Barreca et al., 2016). In this case, policymakers could
weigh these costs and benefits in their decision process, in addition to equity considerations.



                                                      8
       Notice that firms need to respond to the regulation not because they were careless in
controlling emissions in the baseline, but rather because climate has changed. As they take
steps to reduce emissions to reach attainment, moving along the new production function
until point C as shown in both Panel A and B, those economic agents are in fact adjusting to
a changing climate. Thus, they are adapting to climate change because of the ozone NAAQS
regulation, that is, they are engaging in regulation-induced adaptation.17


                                III.    Data and Data Descriptions

Ambient ozone is one of the six criteria pollutants regulated under the existing Clean Air
Act. However, unlike other pollutants, it is not emitted directly into the air. Rather,
it is formed by Leontief-like chemical reactions between nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), under sunlight and warm temperatures. Because ambient ozone
is affected by both climate and regulations, and high-frequency data are available since 1980,
this is an ideal setting to study regulation-induced adaptation. In Appendix A, we provide
further details regarding the ozone standards, ozone formation and the data.


               A.   NAAQS, Ozone Pollution, and Climate: Background and Data


NAAQS data. For data on the Clean Air Act nonattainment designations associated with
exceeding the NAAQS for ambient ozone, we use the EPA Green Book of Nonattainment
Areas for Criteria Pollutants. We generate an indicator for nonattainment status for each
county-year in our sample. In our empirical analysis, we use the nonattainment status lagged
by three years because EPA gives counties with heavy-emitters at least three years to comply
  17
    Ambient ozone concentration is a negative externality. For completeness, public policy can also induce
adaptation to climate change in addressing positive externalities. Besides the social desirability of increasing
the level of those outcomes, such policies can create a co-benefit of adjusting to a changing climate. One
example is the Medicaid-covered influenza vaccination. Severe influenza seasons are likely to emerge with
global warming (Towers et al., 2013), but publicly-funded annual vaccination allows Medicaid beneficiaries
to cope with climatic changes. This is in addition to the herd-immunity impact of influenza vaccination
(White, forthcoming). Thus, the concept of policy-induced adaptation is quite broad, and incentives affecting
adaptive behavior are already in place in a variety of policies implemented around the world.


                                                       9
with NAAQS for ambient ozone (USEPA, 2004, p.23954).18
    Specifically, with regards to nonattainment status, if any monitor within a county exceeds
the NAAQS, EPA designates the county to be out of attainment (USEPA, 1979, 1997, 2004,
2008, 2015a). While the structure of enforcement is dictated by the CAA and the EPA, much
of the actual enforcement activity is carried out by regional- and state-level environmental
protection agencies, with local agencies having discretion over enforcement as long as they are
within attainment for the NAAQS. Regional EPA offices do, however, conduct inspections
to confirm attainment status and/or issue sanctions when a state's enforcement is below
required levels, and assist states with major cases. Thus, while there may be heterogeneity
in local enforcement for nonattainment counties, we would expect that those counties achieve
at least the minimum level of increased regulation mandated by the EPA.

    Ozone data. For ambient ozone concentrations, we use daily readings from the nationwide
network of the EPA's air quality monitoring stations. Following Auffhammer and Kellogg
(2011), in our preferred specification we use an unbalanced panel of ozone monitors, and
make only two restrictions to construct our analysis sample. First, we include only monitors
with valid daily information. According to EPA, daily measurements are valid for regulation
purposes only if (i) 8-hour averages are available for at least 75 percent of the possible hours
of the day, or (ii) daily maximum concentration is higher than the standard. Second, as
a minimum data completeness requirement, for each ozone monitor we include only years
for which at least 75 percent of the days in the typical ozone monitoring season (April-
September) are valid; years having concentrations above the standard are included even if
they have incomplete data.19 Our final sample consists of valid ozone measurements for a
total of 5,139,129 monitor-days.20
  18
     EPA allows nonattainment counties with polluting firms between 3 to 20 years to adjust their production
processes. Nonattainment counties are "classified as marginal, moderate, serious, severe or extreme (...) at
the time of designation" (USEPA, 2004, p.23954). They must reach attainment in: "Marginal ­ 3 years,
Moderate ­ 6 years, Serious ­ 9 years, Severe ­ 15 or 17 years, Extreme ­ 20 years" (USEPA, 2004, p.23954).
  19
     The typical ozone monitoring season around the country is April-September, but in fact it varies across
states. Appendix Table A2 reports the season for each state.
  20
     Appendix Figure A1 depicts the evolution of ambient ozone monitors over the three decades in our


                                                    10
    Weather data. For climatological data, we use daily measurements of maximum temper-
ature as well as total precipitation from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tions's Global Historical Climatology Network databse (NOAA, 2014). This dataset provides
detailed weather measurements at over 20,000 weather stations across the country. We use
information from 1950-2013, because we need 30 years of data prior to the period of analysis
to construct a moving average measure of climate.21 The weather stations are typically not
located adjacent to the ozone monitors. Hence, we match ozone monitors to nearby weather
stations using a straightforward procedure.22


   B.   Basic Trends in Pollution, Attainment Status, and Weather: Implications for the
                                   Importance of Regulations

To give a sense of the data, Figure 2 illustrates the evolution of ozone concentrations and
the proportion of counties in nonattainment over our sample period, while Figure 3 does the
same for our two components of daily temperature ­ climate norms and weather shocks.
    Ozone concentrations and nonattainment designations. Figure 2, Panel A, depicts the
annual average of the highest daily maximum ambient ozone concentration recorded at each
monitor from 1980-2013 in the United States. The sample is split according to whether
counties were in or out of attainment with the NAAQS for ambient ozone, established in
1979. Counties out of compliance with the NAAQS experienced, on average, a steeper
data, and illustrates the expansion of the network over time. Appendix Table A3 provides annual summary
statistics on the ozone monitoring network. The number of monitors increased from 1,361 in the 1980s to over
1,851 in the 2000s. The number of monitored counties also grew from roughly 585 in the 1980s to over 840
in the 2000s. While Muller and Ruud (2018) find that compliance with the NAAQS for ambient ozone is not
consistently associated with network composition, Grainger, Schreiber and Chang (2019) provide evidence
that local regulators do avoid pollution hotspots when siting new ozone monitors. Later, as a robustness
check, we show qualitatively similar results for a semi-balanced panel of ozone monitors.
  21
     Appendix Figure A2 presents the yearly temperature fluctuations and overall trend in climate for the
contiguous US as measured by these monitors, relative to a 1950-1979 baseline average temperature.
  22
     Using information on the geographical location of ozone monitors and weather stations, we calculate the
distance between each pair of ozone monitor and weather station using the Haversine formula. Then, for
every ozone monitor we exclude weather stations that lie beyond a 30-km radius. Moreover, for every ozone
monitor we use weather information from only the closest two weather stations within the 30-km radius.
Appendix Figure A3 illustrates the proximity of our final sample of ozone monitors to these matched weather
stations. Once we apply this procedure, we exclude ozone monitors that do not have any weather stations
within 30km. As will be discussed later, our results do not seem sensitive to these choices.


                                                    11
reduction in the daily maximum ozone levels than counties in compliance. We will argue
that part of that reduction is associated with regulation-induced adaptation.23
       Figure 2, Panel B, shows that as ambient ozone concentrations fell, the number of coun-
ties out of attainment also declined. Notice that when the 1997 NAAQS revisions were
implemented in 2004 after litigation, the share of our sample counties out of attainment
increased more than 50 percent. Such a jump is not observed in the implementation of
the 2008 revision, however. In this case, the share of counties in nonattainment remained
stable around 0.3. Appendix Figure A5 shows that most counties out of attainment were
first designated in nonattainment in the 1980's. The map displays concentrations of those
counties in California, the Midwest, and in the Northeast. Nevertheless, a nontrivial number
of counties went out of attainment for the first time in the 1990's and 2000's.

       Decomposing temperature into long-run climate norms and short-run weather shocks. In
order to disentangle variation in weather versus climate, we decompose average temperature
into a climate norm ­ a 30-year monthly moving average (MA) following (WMO, 2017), and
a weather shock ­ the daily deviation from the norm.24 Figure 3, Panel A, plots the annual
average of the 30-year MA in the dotted line, as well as a smoothed version of it in the
solid line; note that due to the nature of the MA, this takes into account information since
1950. Panel B plots the annual average of the shocks. Notice that the average deviations
from the 30-year MA are bounded around zero, with bounds relatively stable over time,
suggesting little changes in the variance of the climate distribution.25 Using our final sample,
  23
      Appendix Figure A4 further compares similar trends in ozone levels with the updated 1997, 2008, and
2015 NAAQS levels which, while much lower, are based instead on the observed 4th highest 8-hour average
ambient ozone concentration.
   24
      Our decomposition of meteorological variables into a 30-year moving average (norms) and deviations
from it (shocks) is a data filtering technique to separate the "signal" from the "noise." This should not be
confused with a moving-average model of climate change. We average temperature over 30 years because
it is how climatologists usually define climate normals, though other filtering techniques could be used. In
our robustness checks we examine the sensitivity of our results to both shortening the number of years over
which temperature is averaged, and by using a daily rather than monthly moving-average.
   25
      Appendix Figure A6 presents a similar illustration to Figure 3 using our final sample of weather monitors
once matched to ozone monitors. Appendix Table A4 reports the summary statistics for daily temperature
and our decomposed variables, for each year in our sample from 1980-2013.




                                                      12
not surprisingly Appendix Figure A7 shows that ambient ozone is closely related to both
components of temperature, which we examine more formally in the empirical analysis.


                               IV.   Empirical Framework

In the empirical analysis, we focus on estimating the extent to which ozone concentration is
affected by climate change under the NAAQS regulation, relative to a benchmark without
(or lower levels of) regulation. The goal is to recover C dX in Equation (1), the up-to-scale
measure of regulation-induced adaptation. Thus, with an estimate of r ­ the marginal dam-
age of ozone pollution ­ from the literature (e.g., Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017),
we are able to provide some back-of-the-envelope calculations regarding welfare changes.
   We build upon a unifying approach to estimating climate impacts (Bento et al., 2020)
which bridges the two leading approaches of the climate-economy literature ­ the cross-
sectional approach to estimate the impact of climate change on economic outcomes (e.g.,
Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw, 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher, 2005), and the
panel fixed-effects approach to estimate the impact of weather shocks (e.g., Deschenes and
Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) ­ identifying both weather and climate
impacts in the same equation. Inspired by Dell, Jones and Olken (2009, 2012, 2014), our
direct measure of adaptation is the difference between short-run weather responses, which are
approximately exclusive of adaptation, and long-run climate responses, which are potentially
inclusive of adaptation. Since they are estimated in the same equation, our method allows
for a straightforward test of the statistical significance of our measure of adaptation.
   Moreover, because our approach critically identifies adaptation by comparing how the
same economic agents respond to both weather and climate variation, we are able to recover
our measure of regulation-induced adaptation by comparing heterogeneous adaptation from
counties in and out of attainment with the NAAQS for ozone without needing to make as-
sumptions over preferences. In contrast, previous studies have inferred adaptation indirectly,
by flexibly estimating economic damages due to weather shocks ­ sometimes for different

                                              13
time periods and locations ­ then assessing climate damages by using shifts in the future
weather distribution predicted by climate models (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2011;
Barreca et al., 2016; Auffhammer, 2018; Carleton et al., 2019; Heutel, Miller and Molitor,
forthcoming). That implies an extrapolation of weather responses over time and space,
which requires preferences to be constant across those dimensions, an assumption that can
be challenging for reasons similar to the Lucas Critique (Lucas, 1976).
       Our approach has two key elements. The first is the decomposition of meteorological
variables into two components: long-run climate norms and transitory weather shocks, the
latter defined as deviations from those norms. This decomposition is meant to have eco-
nomic content. It is likely that individuals and firms respond to information on climatic
variation they have observed and processed over the years. In contrast, economic agents
may be constrained to respond to weather shocks, by definition. As mentioned above, our
measure of adaptation is the difference between those two responses by the same economic
agents. In practice, we decompose temperature into a monthly moving average incorporating
information from the past three decades, often referred to as climate normal, and a deviation
from that 30-year average. This moving average is purposely lagged in the empirical analysis
to reflect all the information available to individuals and firms up to the year prior to the
measurement of the outcome variables.26
       The second key element of our approach is identifying responses to weather shocks and
longer-term climatic changes in the same estimating equation. We are able to leverage
both sources of variation in the same estimating equation because of the properties of the
Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem (Frisch and Waugh, 1933; Lovell, 1963). The deseasonaliza-
tion embedded in the standard fixed-effects approach is approximately equivalent to the
construction of weather shocks as deviations from long-run norms as a first step. Further-
more, there is no need to deseasonalize the outcome variable to identify the impact of those
  26
   A graphical representation of our decomposition has been illustrated for Los Angeles county in 2013 in
Appendix A.3 Figure A8, and over the entire sample period of 1980-2013 in Figure A9.




                                                   14
shocks (Lovell, 1963, Theorem 4.1, p.1001).27 As a result, we do not need to saturate the
econometric model with highly disaggregated time fixed effects; thus, we are able to also ex-
ploit variation that evolves slowly over time to identify the impacts of longer-term climatic
changes.

       Estimating climate impacts. As a first step, we decompose the observed daily maximum
temperature into a norm and a shock. The norm is operationalized by the 30-year monthly
moving average (MA).28 The shock is merely the deviation of the observed temperature from
that norm. Because ozone formation is directly tied to temperature, as discussed in Section
III, the impact of temperature on ambient ozone is the focus of our analysis. Given that
decomposition, we estimate the following equation:

                     W
           Ozoneit = N (T empW                         C       C
                             it × N onattainc,y -3 ) + N (T empim × N onattainc,y -3 )

                      W
                    + A (T empW                     C       C
                              it × Attainc,y -3 ) + A (T empim × Attainc,y -3 )


                    + Xit  + is + rsy +        it ,                                                         (2)


where i represents an ozone monitor located in county c of NOAA climate region r, observed
on day t, month m, season s (Spring or Summer), and calendar year y . Our analysis focuses
on the most common ozone season in the U.S. ­ April to September, as mentioned in the
background section ­ over the period 1980-2013. Ozone represents daily maximum ambient
  27
      "Theorem 4.1: Consider the following alternative regression equations, where the subscript  indicates
that the data have been adjusted by the least squares procedure with D as the matrix of explanatory variables:
1. Y = Xb1 + Da1 + e1 2. Y = X b2 + e2 ... 4. Y = X b4 + e4 ... The identity b1 = b2 reveals that
inclusion of the matrix of seasonal dummy variables in the regression analysis is equivalent to working with
least squares adjusted time series. The identity b2 = b4 reveals that it is immaterial whether the dependent
variable is adjusted or not, provided the explanatory variables have been seasonally corrected " (Lovell, 1963).
   28
      To make this variable part of the information set held by economic agents at the time ambient ozone
is measured, we lag it by one year. For example, the 30-year MA associated with May 1982 is the average
of May temperatures for all years in the period 1952-1981. Therefore, economic agents should have had at
least one year to respond to unexpected changes in climate normals at the time ozone is measured. Later, we
discuss almost identical results for longer lags. Also, we use monthly MAs because it is likely that individuals
recall climate patterns by month, not by day of the year. Indeed, broadcast meteorologists often talk about
how a month has been the coldest or warmest in the past 10, 20, or 30 years, but not how a particular day
of the year has deviated from the norm for that specific day. Later, we discuss qualitatively similar results
when we use daily instead of monthly moving averages.



                                                      15
ozone concentration, T empW represents the weather shock, and T empC the climate norm.
Hence, the response of ambient ozone to the temperature shock  W represents the short-run
effect of weather, and the response to the climate norm  C reflects the long-run impact of
climate. N onattaincy denotes nonattainment designation, which is a binary variable equals
to one if a county c is not complying with the NAAQS for ambient ozone in year y . This
variable is lagged by three calendar years because EPA allows counties with heavy polluters at
least three years to comply with the ozone NAAQS, as discussed in the background section.
X represents time-varying control variables such as precipitation ­ similarly decomposed
into a norm and shock. Although less important than temperature, Jacob and Winner
(2009) point out that higher water vapor in the future climate may decrease ambient ozone
concentration.29  represents monitor-by-season fixed effects,  climate-region-by-season-by-
year fixed effects, and     an idiosyncratic term.30
       We exploit plausibly random, daily variation in weather, and monthly variation in climate
normals to identify the impact of climate change on ambient ozone concentration. Identifi-
cation of the weather effect is similar to the standard fixed effect approach (e.g., Deschenes
and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009), with the exception that because we
isolate the temperature shock as a first step, we do not need to include highly disaggregated
time fixed effects (Frisch and Waugh, 1933; Lovell, 1963). Identification of the climate effect
relies on plausibly random, within-season monitor-level monthly variation in lagged 30-year
MAs of temperature after flexibly controlling for regional shocks at the season-by-year level.
       To better understand the identification of climate impacts, consider the following thought
experiment that we observe in our data many thousands of times: take two months in
the same location and season (Spring or Summer). Now, suppose that one of the months
  29
     Although temperature is the primary meteorological factor affecting tropospheric ozone concentrations,
other factors such as wind and sunlight have also been noted as potential contributors. Later, we discuss
qualitatively similar results for a subsample with information on wind speed and sunlight.
  30
     In unreported analyses we examine specifications with alternative fixed effects structures, such as in-
cluding latitude and longitude interacted with season-by-year, or replacing region-by-season-by-year with
state-by-season-by-year. Estimates from our preferred, more parsimonious specification are similar in mag-
nitude and significance to each of these alternatives.



                                                    16
experiences a hotter climate norm than the other, after accounting for any time-varying
fluctuations in, e.g., atmospheric or economic conditions that affected the overarching climate
region at the season-by-year level. Our estimation strategy quantifies the extent to which
this difference in the climate norm affected the ozone concentrations observed on that month.
Therefore, this approach controls for a number of potential time-invariant and time-varying
confounding factors that one may be concerned with, such as the composition of the local
and regional atmosphere and technological progress.
   Our ultimate goal, however, is not just to identify adaptation via estimates of climate im-
pacts vis-`
          a-vis weather shocks, but to identify whether there is a different level of adaptation
in nonattainment versus attainment counties. As the EPA was given substantial enforce-
ment powers to ensure that the goals of the Clean Air Act were met, policy variation itself is
plausibly exogenous conditional on observables and the unobserved heterogeneity embedded
in the fixed effects structure considered in our analysis (see, e.g., Greenstone, 2002; Chay and
Greenstone, 2005). In order to reach compliance, some states initiated their own inspection
programs and frequently fined non-compliers. However, for states that failed to adequately
enforce the standards, EPA was required to impose its own procedures for attaining com-
pliance. The inclusion of monitor-by-season fixed effects allows us to control for the strong
positive association observed in cross-sections among location of polluting activity, high con-
centration readings, and nonattainment designations while preserving interannual variation
in attainment status for each individual monitor. Thus, the variation used in our analysis
comes from both cross-sectional differences in attainment status between counties and from
changes in status within the same county over time, as previously shown in Figure 2: from
attainment to nonattainment, or vice versa.

   Measuring regulation-induced adaptation. Once we credibly estimate the impact of the
two components of temperature interacted with county attainment status, we recover a mea-
sure of regulation-induced adaptation. The average adaptation in nonattainment counties
                                           W     C
is the difference between the coefficients N and N in Equation (2). If economic agents

                                              17
                                   C
engaged in full adaptive behavior, N would be zero, and the magnitude of the average adap-
tation in those counties would be equal to the size of the weather effect on ambient ozone
concentration (for a review of the concept of climate adaptation, see Dell, Jones and Olken,
2014). Indeed, under full adaptive behavior, any unexpected increase in the climate norm
would lead economic agents to pursue reductions in ozone precursor emissions to avoid an
increase in ambient ozone concentration of identical magnitude to the weather effect in the
same month of the following year.31 In other words, agents would respond to "permanent"
changes in temperature by adjusting their production processes to offset that increase in the
climate norm. Unlike weather shocks, which influence ozone formation by triggering chemi-
cal reactions conditional on a level of ozone precursor emissions, changes in the 30-year MA
should affect the level of emissions.
                                                                          W   C
       We can measure adaptation in attainment counties in the same way: (A - A ). This
adaptation could arise from technological innovations, market forces, or regulations other
than the NAAQS for ambient ozone. Sources of this type of adaptation would be, for
example, the adoption of solar electricity generation, which reaches maximum potential by
mid-day, when ozone formation is also at high speed, and other Clean Air Act regulations
related to ozone ­ for example, restrictions on the chemical composition of gasoline, intended
to reduce VOC emissions from mobile sources (Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011), and the NOx
Budget Trading Program (Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017).
       Once we have measured adaptation in both attainment and nonattainment counties, we
can express adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ambient ozone matching Equation (1) as

                   RIA  ( W -  C ) × (1N - 1A ) = (N
                                                   W   C
                                                     - N      W
                                                         ) - (A   C
                                                                - A ).                              (3)
                                C             dX

       An important advantage of this approach is to have all those coefficients estimated in
the same equation. Hence, we can straightforwardly run a test of this linear combination
  31
    Again, later we consider cases where economic agents can take a decade or two to adjust. Because EPA
may give counties with heavy emitters up to two decades to comply with ozone NAAQS, as discussed in the
background section, adaptive responses many years after agents observe changes in climate norms may be
plausible. Interestingly, we will find almost identical results.


                                                   18
to obtain a coefficient and standard error for the measure of regulation-induced adaptation
(RIA), and proceed with statistical inference.


                                       V.    Results

We begin by presenting our main findings on the impacts of temperature on ambient ozone
concentration, average adaptation, and adaptation induced by the existing NAAQS regula-
tion under the Clean Air Act ­ which we termed regulation-induced adaptation. We then
discuss the robustness of our results to the consideration of the distance of ozone concentra-
tions from the NAAQS threshold, and accounting for competing input regulations on ozone
precursors in the analysis. Following this, we discuss a number of additional robustness
checks regarding the measurement of climate, alternative timings for economic agents to
process changes in climate and engage in adaptive behavior, and further specification checks
and sample restrictions, among others. Finally, we examine heterogeneity in our recovered
measure of adaptive response by local (county-level) factors such as belief in climate change
or precursor-limited ambient atmosphere as well as over time and across the temperature
distribution.


         A.     The Role of Regulations for Inducing Adaptation to Climate Change

Table 1 reports our main findings on the role of existing government regulations and policy
in inducing climate adaptation. Before discussing the ozone NAAQS regulation-induced
adaptation, we present the average climate impacts and adaptation across all counties in our
sample. For this purpose, we run a simplified version of Equation (2), where the temperature
shock and norm are not interacted with attainment status. Column (1) shows that a 1 C
temperature shock increases average daily maximum ozone concentration by about 1.65ppb.
This can be seen as a benchmark for the ozone response to temperature because of the




                                             19
limited opportunities to adapt in the short run.32 A 1 C-increase in the 30-year MA, lagged
by one year and thus revealed in the year before ozone levels are observed, increases daily
maximum ozone concentration by about 1.16ppb, an impact that is significantly lower than
the response to a 1 C temperature shock, indicating adaptive behavior by economic agents.
Indeed, column (3) presents the measure of adaptation ­ 0.49ppb ­ which is economically
and statistically significant. If adaptation was not taken into consideration, the impact of
temperature on ambient ozone would be overestimated by roughly 42 percent.
    The estimates above represent average treatment effects. Because we are interested in
the role of regulations in potentially affecting adaptive behavior, we estimate heterogeneous
treatment effects by attainment status, as specified in Equation (2). Table 1, column (2),
reports the estimates disaggregated by whether the ozone monitors are located in attainment
or nonattainment counties. Given that attainment counties have cleaner air by definition,
on average their ozone responses to temperature changes are significantly lower. Column
(4) shows that adaptation in nonattainment counties is over 107 percent larger than in
attainment counties. As defined in Equation (3), the difference between those two adaptation
estimates ­ 0.33ppb ­ is our measure of regulation-induced adaptation, shown at the bottom
of column (4). Therefore, a regulation put in place to correct an externality ­ the NAAQS
for ambient ozone ­ generates a co-benefit in terms of adaptation to climate change, on top
of the documented impact on ambient ozone concentrations (Henderson, 1996).
    Although it is not the main focus of our study, it is imperative to discuss the degree of
adaptation in attainment counties. The second estimate in column (4) ­ 0.31 ppb ­ indicates
that adaptive behavior is also present in those jurisdictions. The underlying reasons might be
technological innovation and market forces, as highlighted in previous studies (e.g., Olmstead
and Rhode, 2011a,b; Hornbeck, 2012; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014; Barreca et al., 2016),
  32
     We see it as a benchmark because we assume that economic agents are not be able to respond to weather
shocks. In reality, there might be some opportunities to make short-run adjustments in the context of ambient
ozone. Although developed countries have usually not taken drastic measures to attenuate unhealthy levels
of ambient ozone because concentrations are generally low, developing countries have often constrained
operation of industrial plants and driving in days of extremely high levels of ozone.



                                                     20
other regulations affecting both attainment and nonattainment counties (e.g., Auffhammer
and Kellogg, 2011; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017), or even preventive responses
in counties with ozone readings near the threshold of the NAAQS for ambient ozone, as
explained below. In that sense, our measure of regulation-induced adaptation might represent
a lower bound of how ozone NAAQS encourage adaptive behavior.
   An example of adaptation triggered by innovation, market forces, and other regulations
in the context of ambient ozone arises from the adoption of solar panels for electricity gen-
eration. Higher temperatures lead to more ozone formation, but they also constrain the
operations of coal-fired power plants. Regulations under the Clean Water Act restrict the
use of river waters to cool the boilers when water temperature rises (e.g., McCall, Mack-
nick and Hillman, 2016). Because coal plants are important contributors of VOC and NOx
emissions, those constraints lead to a reduction in the concentration of ozone precursors. At
the same time, solar panels are more suitable for electricity generation in hotter areas, with
higher incidence of sunlight; thus, more extensively used in those places. Now, higher tem-
peratures combined with lower levels of ozone precursors ­ enabled by the adoption of solar
panels ­ may lead to lower levels of ambient ozone. Hence, adaptation driven by innovation,
market forces, and regulations other than the ozone NAAQS.


                                   B.   Robustness Checks


Estimates by distance of ozone concentrations to NAAQS threshold. One may ponder that
the ideal setting to identify regulation-induced adaptation would be to randomly assign
regulation, and compare the impact of climatic changes in regulated versus unregulated
jurisdictions. Nevertheless, this would work only if the regulation was unanticipated and
imposed only once. If regulations are anticipated, and can be assigned multiple times, in
multiple rounds, such as the Clean Air Act nonattainment designations, economic agents
may respond more similarly to the threat of regulation, even when it is randomly assigned.
They might be indifferent between making adjustments before or after being affected by the

                                             21
regulation if more rounds of regulatory action are on the horizon. The intuition for these
results is similar to the outcomes of finitely versus infinitely repeated games (or games that
are being repeated an unknown number of times). Consider the prisoner's dilemma game.
If played a finite number of times, defection in every game is the unique dominant-strategy
Nash equilibrium, following familiar backward-induction arguments. But if played an infinite
(or an unknown) number of times, now the preferred strategy is not to play a Nash strategy
of the stage game, but to cooperate and play a socially optimum strategy.
       In the case of the Clean Air Act, EPA designates counties out of compliance with NAAQS
if their pollution concentrations are above a known threshold. Such designations may change
over time depending on the adjustments made by economic agents in those jurisdictions. For
counties whose pollution concentration is around the threshold, economic agents may have
incentives to make efforts to comply with NAAQS no matter whether those counties are just
above or just below the threshold. If counties are even a little above the standards, EPA
mandates them to adopt emissions control technologies and practices to reduce pollution,
which is costly. If counties are a little under the standards, they may want to keep it that
way to avoid regulatory oversight. As a result, they may end up making efforts to maintain
the area under attainment. This somewhat similar adaptive behavior around the ozone
standards may reduce the estimates for regulation-induced adaptation near the NAAQS
threshold.33
       Table 2 reports estimates recovered by interacting our main specification with monitor-
level indicators for whether the daily ozone concentration fell within 20 percent, above or
below, the NAAQS threshold in Panel A, between 20-40 percent away from the threshold in
Panel B, and over 40 percent away from the threshold in Panel C. The observations within
20 percent of the NAAQS threshold comprise about 13 percent of the overall sample. As
  33
    It is important to mention that before the 1990 CAA amendments, EPA used a "too close to call"
nonattainment category with minimal requirements for areas just violating the NAAQS. Areas in this cat-
egory (with ozone levels up to 138ppb, hence above the threshold of 120ppb) were not subject to full SIP
requirements, but rather watched closely to see if their air quality was getting worse (Krupnick and Farrell,
1996). This malleability in enforcement may also reduce the estimate for regulation-induced adaptation near
the NAAQS threshold.


                                                     22
expected, the empirical evidence we provide for this subset indicates limited differential adap-
tation across attainment and nonattainment counties, but still of nontrivial magnitude. The
estimate for regulation-induced adaptation, which is the difference between the adaptation
estimates in columns (2) and (4), is still economically and statistically significant.
   For the observations of ambient ozone concentration within 20-40 percent of the NAAQS
threshold (25 percent of the overall sample), and over 40 percent away from the threshold (62
percent of the overall sample), we cannot rule out that the estimates of regulation-induced
adaptation reported in column (5) are similar to our main estimate. Given that together
these observations make up 87 percent of the overall sample, it is fair to say that most of the
regulation-induced adaptation arises from monitors with ozone readings relatively far from
the NAAQS threshold.

   Estimates considering input regulation for ozone precursors. During our period of anal-
ysis (1980-2013), three other policies aiming at reducing ambient ozone concentrations were
implemented in the United States: (i) regulations restricting the chemical composition of
gasoline, intended to reduce VOC emissions from mobile sources (Auffhammer and Kellogg,
2011), (ii) the NOx Budget Trading Program (Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017),
and (iii) the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) NOx and SOx emissions
trading program (Fowlie, Holland and Mansur, 2012). Because our focus in this study is to
estimate climate adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ambient ozone, it is imperative to
examine the sensitivity of our estimates of regulation-induced adaptation when taking into
account these input regulations targeted at ozone precursors.
   Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) demonstrate that the 1980s and 1990s federal regula-
tions restricting the chemical composition of gasoline, intended to curb VOC emissions, were
ineffective in reducing ambient ozone concentration. Since there was flexibility regarding
which VOC component to reduce, to meet federal standards refiners chose to remove com-
pounds that were cheapest, yet not so reactive in ozone formation. Beginning in March
1996, California Air Resources Board (CARB) approved gasoline was required throughout

                                              23
the entire state of California. CARB gasoline targeted VOC emissions more stringently than
the federal regulations. These precisely targeted, inflexible regulations requiring the removal
of particularly harmful compounds from gasoline significantly improved air quality in Cal-
ifornia (Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011). Therefore, we re-estimate our analysis removing
the state of California from 1996 onwards. The results reported in Table 3 reveal that the
estimate for regulation-induced adaptation in column (2), derived from column (1) estimates
of the impact of temperature shocks and norms on ambient ozone concentration, is remark-
ably close to our overall estimate of regulation-induced adaptation. Hence, it appears that
VOC regulations in California do not drive our estimate of climate adaptation induced by
the NAAQS for ozone. This is not surprising because the regulation was extended to all
counties in California ­ attainment and nonattainment counties.
    Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro (2017) and Fowlie, Holland and Mansur (2012) both
find a substantial decline in air pollution emissions and ambient ozone concentrations from
the introduction of an emissions market for nitrogen oxides (NOx), another ozone precur-
sor. The NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP) examined by Deschenes, Greenstone and
Shapiro (2017) operated a cap-and-trade system for over 2,500 electricity generating units
and industrial boilers in the eastern and midwestern United States between 2003 and 2008.
Thus, we re-estimate our analysis excluding the states participating in the NBP, from 2003
onwards.34 The RECLAIM NOx and SOx trading program examined by Fowlie, Holland
and Mansur (2012) similarly operated a cap-and-trade system at 350 stationary sources of
NOx for the four California counties within the South Coast Air Quality Management Dis-
trict (SCAQMD) starting in 1994. Thus, we again re-estimate our analysis, excluding the
SCAQMD counties from 1994 onwards.35 Table 3 reports the results excluding NBP states
in columns (3) and (4), and excluding RECLAIM counties in columns (5) and (6). The
   34
      NBP participating states include: Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Mary-
land, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, and Washington, DC. The NBP operated
only in northeastern states on May 1 of 2003, and expanded to the other states on May 31 of 2004 (Deschenes,
Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017).
   35
      Participating counties include: Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Orange.


                                                    24
estimate for regulation-induced adaptation in columns (4) and (6) are quite similar to our
overall estimate of regulation-induced adaptation. Despite being effective in reducing NOx
and ozone concentrations, the NBP and RECLAIM programs do not seem to affect climate
adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ozone. Again, this is not surprising because they
affected both attainment and nonattainment counties.

   Other robustness checks and sample restrictions. We further examine the sensitivity of
our results to a host of additional robustness checks in Appendix B. Table B1 varies our
moving average measure of climate to investigate whether measurement error may be of
concern, potentially arising from our decomposition of meteorological variables using a 30-
year MA. Alternatively, there may be concern with our choice of a 1-year lagged 30-year
MA in our preferred specification, implying that agents adapt within one year ­ or the
assumption that agents are constrained to adapt in the short-run. To investigate the first
concern we repeat our analysis using a 10-year and 20-year lag in place of the 1-year lag,
with results presented in columns (1) and (2) of Table B2. To address the second concern we
make use of a widespread "Ozone Action Day" alert policy, whereby the local air pollution
authority would release a public alert, typically a day or two in advance, that meteorological
conditions are expected to be especially conducive to ozone formation. To the extent that
agents are adapting to contemporaneous weather shocks, we would be most likely to observe
an adaptive response on these high impact days, especially considering the prior warning.
Table B3 explores further specification checks ­ using a daily rather than monthly MA, or
including other meteorological controls, and sample restrictions ­ constraining the estimating
sample to a semi-balanced panel; while Table B4 examines additional sample restrictions ­
splitting the sample into counties that maintained the same NAAQS designation across the
entire sample period, and those that switched their NAAQS designation at least once.
   Furthermore, we provide results using a variety of alternative matching rules between
ozone monitors and weather stations in Table B5: varying the distance cut-off, the number
of monitors in the matching, and the averaging procedure. Estimates in all of the above

                                             25
analyses are relatively stable across the alternative approaches. Additionally, although it
has been shown that, e.g., manufacturing plants have relocated in response to ozone nonat-
tainment designations (Henderson, 1996; Becker and Henderson, 2000), results in Table B6
suggest that firms are not responding differentially based on climatic variables. Lastly, ob-
serve that our standard errors are clustered at the county level. Since the 30-year MAs
and temperature shocks could be considered generated regressors, we also provide standard
errors block bootstrapped at the county level for our main estimates in Appendix Table
B7. Bootstrapped standard errors are all within 6% of those estimated via clustering at
the county level. Because the changes were usually relatively minor, for simplicity we use
clustered standard errors at the county level in the remainder of the analysis.


                   C.   Heterogeneity in Regulation-Induced Adaptation

Once we have recovered a measure of regulation-induced adaptation from the differential
responses to weather shocks and longer-term climatic changes in nonattainment and attain-
ment counties, we are then able to explore heterogeneity in the degree of adaptation across
other dimensions. Specifically, we examine heterogeneity along four dimensions: local belief
in climate change, local atmospheric composition, across time, and across the temperature
distribution.

   Adaptation by local climate beliefs and local atmospheric composition. So far we have
demonstrated that existing government regulations and policy can be effective in inducing
climate adaptation. Now, we examine whether local climate change beliefs, or the underlying
composition of the local atmosphere may alter the effectiveness of such policies. In the
absence of direct climate policy at the national and international stage, action driven by
local culture may help address the challenge of climate change (Stavins et al., 2014). At the
same time, the underlying composition of precursor emissions in the local atmosphere may
also play an important role.
   Table B8 in Appendix B.2 examines this first point, using the results of a relatively recent

                                              26
county-level survey regarding residents' beliefs in climate change (Howe et al., 2015). We
create county-level indicators for terciles of high, medium, and low belief, and interact the
indicators for high- and low-belief counties with our temperature and control variables, taking
the median-belief tercile of counties as the baseline.36 Our results suggest that climate beliefs
may significantly affect the level and channel of regulation-induced adaptation: high-belief
counties are associated with approximately 45% higher adaptation when in nonattainment,
but are no different from baseline counties when in attainment; conversely, low-belief counties
are associated with approximately 44% lower adaptation when in attainment, but maintain
a similar level of adaptation as baseline counties when in nonattainment.37
    Similarly, Table B11 in Appendix B.2 examines the second point. Due to the Leontief-like
production function of ozone, counties may find themselves with an atmospheric composition
that is "limited" in either precursor component ­ VOCs or NOx. We create county-level
indicators, at 5-year intervals, for whether a county is, in general, VOC- or NOx- limited and
interact these indicators with our temperature and control variables, taking the counties with
non-limited atmosphere as the baseline. Our results suggest that while counties without a
precursor-limited atmosphere still observe regulation-induced adaptation, the effect is almost
quadrupled in VOC-limited counties and doubled in NOx-limited counties, though the latter
is statistically imprecise.

    Adaptation across time and temperature. While the above analyses examine heterogeneity
in adaptive response across inherently spatial dimensions, areas with different beliefs or
different underlying atmospheric conditions, one may wonder how adaptation varies across
other dimensions, such as time or the temperature distribution itself. When we examine
the estimates by decade, as reported in Appendix Table B12, the magnitude of regulation-
  36
     Appendix Figure A10 depicts the evolution of ozone concentration for these three sets of counties from
1980-2013. While the pattern for low- and median-belief counties track quite similarly, high-belief counties
began with higher ozone concentrations, on average, but have now mostly converged with the other counties.
Additionally, Table B9 provides summary statistics of basic demographic characteristics across these three
county groupings using data from the 2006-2010 5-year American Community Survey.
  37
     As a placebo check on these findings, we also examine the heterogeneity in our results when separating
counties into low- median- and high-belief regarding "preferences" for single-parenthood in Table B10.


                                                    27
induced adaptation in the 1980's is marginally larger, declining somewhat in the 1990's, and
further still in the 2000's ­ for all three decades, however, estimates of regulation-induced
adaptation are not statistically different from our central result. Examining the estimates
across the temperature distribution, in Tables B13a and B13b, we see an almost doubling of
regulation-induced adaptation above 30 C, and almost tripling above 35 C, relative to days
where temperature was below 30 C ­ in line with the idea that nonattainment counties may
be especially focusing adaptive efforts on those hottest months where they would be most
likely to exceed the NAAQS threshold.


    D.   Climate Adaptation Co-Benefits from Existing Regulations: Some Calculations

Having presented our main findings, we now provide some back-of-the-envelope calculations
on the co-benefits of the existing Clean Air Act associated with climate adaptation induced by
the NAAQS for ambient ozone. Following the sufficient statistic approach (Harberger, 1964;
Chetty, 2009; Kleven, forthcoming) as outlined in Section II, these calculations combine our
main estimates from Table 1 with climate projections from the U.S. Fourth National Climate
Assessment (Vose et al., 2017), and the social benefits of ozone reductions from Deschenes,
Greenstone and Shapiro (2017). As detailed in Equation (3), all of these elements can be
mapped directly into the components of Equation (1), allowing us to interpret the resulting
values as welfare changes. Additionally, we also discuss how these co-benefits are affected
by the projected changes in climate over the 21st century.
   Formally, we map the components of Equation (1) to each of these three "sufficient statis-
tics," summing across every county n in the set of counties ever designated as nonattainment
(N A) within our sample period:

                           W  -                   r   C Xn Cn ,                           (4)
                                         nN A
                                                DGS   T able1   V ose

where r is treated as a fixed value, approximately equal to $1.75 million (2015 US) per
county per year, following Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro (2017). The value of C


                                             28
varies depending on the chosen climate projection from Vose et al. (2017), while C X
varies depending on whether, and which type, of adaptation is being calculated, following
directly from our central results in columns (2) and (4) of Table 1.38
       Table 4 presents the costs of climate change, the savings from overall adaptation, and
particularly the savings from regulation-induced adaptation ­ the co-benefit of the CAA
which is the focus of this study. We focus on the 509 counties most affected by the NAAQS
for ambient ozone (nonattainment counties), representing about two thirds of the U.S. popu-
lation. The row labeled costs "without adaptation" uses the estimated effects of temperature
                          W
shocks on ambient ozone ­ N ­ and the one labeled "with adaptation" uses the estimated
                                                           C
impacts of changes in climate norms (lagged 30-year MAs) ­ N . These are the main results
reported in Table 1 ­ the estimated coefficients for nonattainment counties from column (2).
In addition, the row labeled savings "from adaptation" report the difference between the
                                    W   C
costs with and without adaptation ­ N - N ­ and the row labeled "regulation-induced
adaptation" displays the portion of the adaptation due to the NAAQS for ambient ozone ­
RIA as in Equation (3).
       Table 4, column (1), reports the costs associated with increased ambient ozone, and
potential savings from adaptation, from a 1 C increase in temperature ­ C = 1. The costs
arising from additional ambient ozone amount to approximately $1.77 billion (2015 USD)
per year when we use the benchmark effect of temperature shocks that do not take into
account adaptation. They reduce to approximately $1.2 billion using the impact of changes
in climate norms, which does incorporate adaptive behavior. The difference of $567 million
per year is the total potential savings from adaptation, 52 percent of which is induced by the
NAAQS for ambient ozone. The portion induced by the NAAQS represents the co-benefits
of the Clean Air Act in terms of climate adaptation, and can be interpreted as additional
societal welfare gains from that existing regulation, as informed by Equation (1). In the
next four columns, all estimates are scaled up with the temperature projections from Vose
  38
    As defined in Equation (1), emissions are taken as proportional to X ; thus, although Equation (4) focuses
on changes in ozone concentration, for simplicity and consistency we represent it here as X .


                                                     29
et al. (2017) ­ e.g., C = 1.4 in column (2). Regulation-induced adaptation, in particular,
reaches the range of $412-471 million per year by mid-century, and $824-1,412 million by the
end of the century. These are nontrivial additional welfare gains brought about by the air
quality standards regarding ambient ozone.


                                     VI.     Concluding Remarks

This study conceptualized and presented the first credible estimates of regulation-induced
adaptation. In the absence of new international agreements or new federal legislation to
tackle climate change directly, we have demonstrated conceptually and empirically that ex-
isting government regulations and policy established for reasons unrelated to climate change
may be already inducing adaptation to climate change. We examined the impact of tem-
perature changes on ambient ozone concentration in the United States from 1980-2013, and
measured the role of regulation-induced adaptation. Our main finding was that adaptation
in counties out of attainment with air quality standards was 107 percent larger than in
counties under attainment, implying substantial regulation-induced adaptation.
       By establishing that government regulations and policy unrelated to climate change are
enhancing climate adaptation, our study points to an alternative set of incentives encourag-
ing adaptive behavior besides innovation and market forces, which have been highlighted in
previous research.39 At the same time, our findings reveal a different role for public policy
relative to a few other studies which caution that government actions intended to protect the
public may reduce the incentive to engage in private self-protection.40 Our results differ from
these studies because, in our case, the regulation we examined corrects a market failure ­ an
air pollution externality ­ whereas the government programs examined in prior work may
  39
     Olmstead and Rhode (2008, 2011a,b) highlighted crop choice and biological innovation in agriculture;
Hornbeck (2012), Hornbeck and Naidu (2014), and Deryugina and Molitor (2020) pointed to migration; and
Barreca et al. (2016) called attention to changes in the use of existing technologies, such as air conditioning.
  40
     Annan and Schlenker (2015) found that the federal crop insurance program deterred farmers from en-
gaging in optimal protection against extreme heat. Similarly, Deryugina (2017) showed that social safety
nets not specifically targeting areas affected by extreme weather events may have discouraged out-migration.



                                                      30
have distorted private behavior. Again, the insight here goes to the heart of the second-best
theory. When the outcome of interest is the result of market failures, climate change can
exacerbate the magnitude of the local unpriced externality. Nevertheless, existing regula-
tions created for reasons unrelated to climate change can mimic incentives of nonexistent
or incomplete climate policy, and induce climate adaptation.41 It is imperative to reiterate,
however, that our findings do not imply that efforts to enact comprehensive climate policy
should be undermined. Rather, existing regulations such as this should be recognized as
potentially valuable stepping stones towards reducing the cost of inaction (Stavins, 2019;
Goulder, 2020).
       To the best of our knowledge, we are among the first to provide direct estimates of
incidental benefits of current public policy in terms of climate adaptation. Because we
are studying climate change, the first-best policy fostering adaptation should be carbon
pricing. When that option is politically infeasible, however, a second-best solution can be
implementing or strengthening policies correcting market failures associated with outcomes
that depend on climate. The NAAQS for ambient ozone ­ the focus of our study ­ not only
address an externality but also stimulate adaptation because climate is an input in ozone
formation.
       Our findings may contribute to the design of pollution control policy as well. The EPA
has recently reviewed the NAAQS for ambient ozone, and decided to maintain the current
threshold of 70ppb (USEPA, 2020), but will revisit the standard again in 2025. According
to the 2015 EPA's Final Ozone NAAQS Regulatory Impact Analysis (USEPA, 2015b), the
annual nationwide costs to reduce the ambient ozone standards by 1ppb were approximately
$296 million (2015 USD).42 Now, under the RCP 4.5 climate change scenario for mid-century
  41
     Another example of regulation-induced adaptation may arise in the context of the Clean Water Act
(Keiser and Shapiro, 2019a,b). The cleaning of the rivers might allow drought-prone locations to have
alternative sources of drinking water. Think of the western region of the United States, where droughts may
become more frequent with climate change. Water shortages may be addressed by the rivers cleaned up by
the establishment of the Clean Water Act.
  42
     For reference, the 1997 NAAQS for ambient ozone (implemented in 2004 due to lawsuits) was 80ppb.
That was revised downward to 75ppb in 2008, and 70ppb in 2015. Also, ozone-only benefits reflect short-term
exposure impacts, and as such are assumed to occur in the same year as ambient ozone reductions.


                                                    31
United States, regulation-induced adaptation from the projected 1.4 C increase in average
temperature would reduce the climate impact on ozone concentration by 0.46ppb. This
represents an additional $412 million in indirect adaptation-related benefits for the 509
counties that had been ever out of attainment with the ozone NAAQS in the period of our
analysis, accounting for about two thirds of the U.S. population. Thus, further reductions to
the NAAQS threshold, while incurring additional costs, would also likely incur additional co-
benefits as more counties, now facing nonattainment designation under the lowered standard,
engage in regulation-induced adaptation. Based on our back of the envelope calculations, the
regulation-induced adaptation co-benefit alone may be enough to offset the cost of marginal
reductions in the NAAQS. Therefore, it is urgent that EPA takes climate change into account
in regulatory impact analyses of ambient ozone standards.




                                             32
                                       References

Aldy, Joseph E., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2020. "Three Prongs for Prudent Climate
 Policy." NBER Working Paper #26991.
Aldy, Joseph E., Scott Barrett, and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. "Thirteen Plus One:
 A Comparison of Global Climate Policy Architectures." Climate Policy, 3(4): 373­397.
Annan, Francis, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2015. "Federal Crop Insurance and the Disin-
 centive to Adapt to Extreme Heat." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
 105(5): 262­66.
Auffhammer, Maximilian. 2018. "Climate Adaptive Response Estimation: Short and
 Long Run Impacts of Climate Change on Residential Electricity and Natural Gas Con-
 sumption Using Big Data." NBER Working Paper #24397.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. "Clearing the Air? The Effects of
 Gasoline Content Regulation on Air Quality." American Economic Review, 101(6): 2687­
 2722.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and
 Joseph S. Shapiro. 2016. "Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the
 US Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the Twentieth Century." Journal of Political
 Economy, 124(1): 105­159.
Becker, Randy, and Vernon Henderson. 2000. "Effects of Air Quality Regulations on
 Polluting Industries." Journal of Political Economy, 108(2): 379­421.
Bento, Antonio, Daniel Kaffine, Kevin Roth, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins.
 2014. "The Effects of Regulation in the Presence of Multiple Unpriced Externalities: Ev-
 idence from the Transportation Sector." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 6(3): 1­29.
Bento, Antonio, Noah Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson Severnini. 2020.
 "A Unifying Approach to Measuring Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation." NBER
 Working Paper #27247.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. "Climate and
 Conflict." Annual Review of Economics, 7(1): 577­617.
Carleton, Tamma, Michael Delgado, Michael Greenstone, Trevor Houser,
 Solomon Hsiang, Andrew Hultgren, Amir Jina, Robert Kopp, Kelly McCusker,
 Ishan Nath, James Rising, Ashwin Rode, Hee Kwon Seo, Justin Simcock,
 Arvid Viaene, Jiacan Yuan, and Alice Zhang. 2019. "Valuing the Global Mortality
 Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs and Benefits." Uni-
 versity of Chicago Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper No. 2018-51.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evi-
 dence from the Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376­424.
Chetty, Raj. 2009. "Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
 and Reduced-Form Methods." Annual Review of Economics, 1: 451­488.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2009. "Temperature
 and Income: Reconciling New Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates." American Economic
 Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99(2): 198­204.


                                            33
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. "Temperature
  Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century." American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3): 66­95.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. "What Do We
  Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature." Journal of Economic
  Literature, 52(3): 740­798.
Deryugina, Tatyana. 2017. "The Fiscal Cost of Hurricanes: Disaster Aid versus Social
  Insurance." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 168­98.
Deryugina, Tatyana, and David Molitor. 2020. "Does When You Die Depend on Where
  You Live? Evidence from Hurricane Katrina." American Economic Review, 110(11): 3602­
  33.
Deschenes, Olivier, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. "Extreme Weather Events, Mortality,
  and Migration." Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 659­681.
Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. "The Economic Impacts of Cli-
  mate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather."
  American Economic Review, 97(1): 354­85.
Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. "Climate Change, Mortality, and
  Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US." American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4): 152­85.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2017. "Defensive
  Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program."
  American Economic Review, 107(10): 2958­89.
Fowlie, Meredith, Stephen P Holland, and Erin T Mansur. 2012. "What do emis-
  sions markets deliver and to whom? Evidence from Southern California's NOx trading
  program." American Economic Review, 102(2).
Frisch, Ragnar, and Frederick V. Waugh. 1933. "Partial Time Regressions as Compared
  with Individual Trends." Econometrica, 1(4): 387­401.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 2020. "Timing Is Everything: How Economists Can Better Address
  the Urgency of Stronger Climate Policy." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
  14(1): 143­156.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W.H. Parry. 2008. "Instrument Choice in Environ-
  mental Policy." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(2): 152­174.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Roberton C. III Williams. 2003. "The Substantial Bias
  from Ignoring General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden, and a Practical
  Solution." Journal of Political Economy, 111(4): 898­927.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2012. "The Impact of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity." American Economic Review, 102(7): 3652­3673.
Grainger, Corbett, Andrew Schreiber, and Wonjun Chang. 2019. "Do Regulators
  Strategically Avoid Pollution Hotspots when Siting Monitors? Evidence from Remote
  Sensing of Air Pollution." Mimeo.
Greenstone, Michael. 2002. "The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
  Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census


                                          34
  of Manufactures." Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1175­1219.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1964. "The Measurement of Waste." American Economic Review
  Papers & Proceedings, 54(3): 58­76.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1971. "Three Basic Postulates for Applied Welfare Economics: An
  Interpretive Essay." Journal of Economic Literature, 9(3): 785­797.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1974. Taxation and Welfare. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
  Press.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1996. "Effects of Air Quality Regulation." American Economic
  Review, 86(4): 789­813.
Heutel, Garth, Nolan H. Miller, and David Molitor. forthcoming. "Adaptation and
  the Mortality Effects of Temperature Across U.S. Climate Regions." Review of Economics
  and Statistics.
Hines, James, R. 1999. "Three Sides of Harberger Triangles." Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 13(2): 167­188.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-
  and Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." American Economic Review,
  102(4): 1477­1507.
Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. "When the Levee Breaks: Black Migra-
  tion and Economic Development in the American South." American Economic Review,
  104(3): 963­990.
Howe, Peter D., Matto Mildenberger, Jennifer R. Marlon, and Anthony Leis-
  erowitz. 2015. "Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local
  scales in the USA." Nature Climate Change, 5(6): 596­603.
Jacob, Daniel J., and Darrel A. Winner. 2009. "Effect of Climate Change on Air
  Quality." Atmospheric Environment, 43(1): 51­63.
Jacobsen, Mark R., Christopher R. Knittel, James M. Sallee, and Arthur A. van
  Benthem. 2020. "The Use of Regression Statistics to Analyze Imperfect Pricing Policies."
  Journal of Political Economy, 128(5): 1826­1876.
Keiser, David A., and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2019a. "Consequences of the Clean Water Act
  and the Demand for Water Quality." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1): 349­396.
Keiser, David A., and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2019b. "US Water Pollution Regulation
  over the Past Half Century: Burning Waters to Crystal Springs?" Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 33(4): 51­75.
Kleven, Henrik J. forthcoming. "Sufficient Statistics Revisited." Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics.
Kousky, Carolyn. 2012. "Informing Climate Adaptation: A Review of the Economic Costs
  of Natural Disasters, Their Determinants, and Risk Reduction Options." Resources for the
  Future Discussion Paper 12-28.
Krupnick, Alan J., and Deirdre Farrell. 1996. "Six Steps to a Healthier Ambient Ozone
  Policy." Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 96-13.
Lipsey, R. G., and Kelvin Lancaster. 1956. "The General Theory of Second Best."
  Review of Economic Studies, 24(1): 11­32.


                                           35
Lovell, Michael C. 1963. "Seasonal Adjustment of Economic Time Series and Multiple
  Regression Analysis." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58(304): 993­1010.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1976. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1: 19­46.
McCall, James, Jordan Macknick, and Daniel Hillman. 2016. "Water-Related Power
  Plant Curtailments: An Overview of Incidents and Contributing Factors." National Re-
  newable Energy Laboratory (NREL) Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-67084.
McGrath, Justin M., Amy M. Betzelberger, Shaowen Wang, Eric Shook, Xin-
  Guang Zhu, Stephen P. Long, and Elizabeth A. Ainsworth. 2015. "An Analysis of
  Ozone Damage to Historical Maize and Soybean Yields in the United States." Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(46): 14390­14395.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. "The Impact
  of Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis." American Economic Review,
  84(4): 753­71.
Moretti, Enrico, and Matthew Neidell. 2011. "Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behav-
  ior: Evidence from the Ports of Los Angeles." Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154­75.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Paul A. Ruud. 2018. "What Forces Dictate the Design of
  Pollution Monitoring Networks?" Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 23(1): 1­14.
Mullins, Jamie T., and Corey White. 2020. "Can access to health care mitigate the
  effects of temperature on mortality?" Journal of Public Economics, 191: 104259.
Neidell, Matthew. 2009. "Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of
  Ozone on Asthma Hospitalizations." Journal of Human Resources, 44(2): 450­78.
NOAA, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration. 2014. "National Oceanic
  and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Global Historical Climatology Network."
  ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ghcn/daily/by year/, accessed on November 30, 2014.
Nordhaus, William. 2019. "Climate Change: The Ultimate Challenge for Economics."
  American Economic Review, 109(6): 1991­2014.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. 2008. Creating Abundance: Biological In-
  novation and American Agricultural Development. New York, NY: Cambridge University
  Press.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. 2011a. "Adapting North American wheat
  production to climatic challenges, 1839­2009." Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 108(2): 480­485.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. 2011b. "Responding to Climatic Challenges:
  Lessons from U.S. Agricultural Development." In The Economics of Climate Change:
  Adaptations Past and Present. , ed. Gary D. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, Chapter 6,
  pp. 169­194. Chicago, IL:University of Chicago Press.
Ranson, Matthew. 2014. "Crime, Weather, and Climate Change." Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, 67(3): 274­302.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear Temperature Effects
  Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change." Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594­98.


                                            36
Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. "Will
  U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the
  Hedonic Approach." American Economic Review, 95(1): 395­406.
Stavins, R., J. Zou, T. Brewer, M. Conte Grand, M. den Elzen, M. Finus, J.
  Gupta, N. Hohne, M.-K. Lee, A. Michaelowa, M. Paterson, K. Ramakrishna,
  G. Wen, J. Wiener, and H. Winkler. 2014. "International Cooperation: Agreements
  and Instruments." In Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution
  of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
  Climate Change. , ed. O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner,
  K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S.
  Schl¨
      omer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx. Cambridge, United Kingdom and
  New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, Chapter 13, pp. 1001­1082.
Stavins, Robert N. 2011. "The Problem of the Commons: Still Unsettled after 100 Years."
  American Economic Review, 101(1): 81­108.
Stavins, Robert N. 2019. "The Future of U.S. Carbon-Pricing Policy." NBER Working
  Paper #25912.
Towers, Sherry, Gerardo Chowell, Rasheed Hameed, Matthew Jastrebski,
  Maryam Khan, Jonathan Meeks, Anuj Mubayi, and George Harris. 2013.
  "Climate Change and Influenza: The Likelihood of Early and Severe Influenza Sea-
  sons Following Warmer Than Average Winters." PLoS Currents Influenza, 5: ecur-
  rents.flu.3679b56a3a5313dc7c043fb944c6f138.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1979. "Revisions to the National
  Ambient Air Quality Standards for Photochemical Oxidants: Final Rulemaking." Federal
  Register, 44(28): 8202­8237. February 8, 1979.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1997. "National Ambient Air Qual-
  ity Standards for Ozone: Final Rule." Federal Register, 62(138): 38856­38896. July 18,
  1997.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2004. "Final Rule To Implement
  the 8-Hour Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standard ­ Phase 1." Federal Register,
  69(84): 23951­24000. April 30, 2004.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. "National Ambient Air Qual-
  ity Standards for Ozone: Final Rule." Federal Register, 73(60): 16435­16514. March 27,
  2008.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2015a. "National Ambient Air Qual-
  ity Standards for Ozone: Final Rule." Federal Register, 80(206): 65291­65468. October
  26, 2015.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2015b. "Regulatory Impact Analysis
  of the Final Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground-Level
  Ozone." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Ra-
  diation and Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, EPA-452/R-15-007.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2020. "Review of the Ozone National
  Ambient Air Quality Standards ­ Final Action." Federal Register, 85(251): 87256­87351.
Vose, R.S., D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, A.N. LeGrande, and M.F. Wehner.

                                           37
 2017. "Temperature Changes in the United States." In Climate Science Special Report:
 Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I. , ed. D.J. Wuebbles, D.W. Fahey, K.A.
 Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock, Chapter 6, pp. 185­206. Wash-
 ington, DC:U.S. Global Change Research Program.
White, Corey. forthcoming. "Measuring Social and Externality Benefits of Influenza Vac-
 cination." Journal of Human Resources.
WMO. 2017. WMO guidelines on the calculation of climate normals. World Meteorological
 Organization Geneva, Switzerland.




                                          38
             Figure 1: Conceptual Framework on Regulation-Induced Adaptation
                        Panel A. Ozone, Ozone Precursors, and Climate




                               Panel B. Ozone Precursors (Inputs)




Notes: This figure provides a schematic representation of the conceptual framework used in our analysis.
In the top panel, the y -axis represents the output ­ ozone formation ­ and the x-axis represents a com-
posite index I (.) of two inputs ­ NOx and VOCs ­ whose levels move along the linear production function
F (I (NOx,VOCs), Climate) represented by the upward-sloping black curve. The blue horizontal line repre-
sents the maximum ambient ozone concentration a county may reach while still complying with the NAAQS
for ambient ozone. In point A, a county is complying with the standards. When average temperature rises,
the chemical production function shifts upward and to the left, and is now represented by the red upward-
sloping curve. For the same level of the index I (NOx,VOCs), ozone concentration increases to point B .
Because the county is now out of compliance with the the NAAQS, they are required to make adjustments
in their production processes to comply with the standards. As they take steps to reduce emissions of ozone
precursors to reach attainment, moving along the new chemical production function curve until point C ,
those economic agents are in fact adjusting to a changing climate. In fact, as Panel B shows, agents must
reduce the production of ozone precursors in order to reach point C . NOx and VOCs are complements in
the production of ozone. RIA stands for regulation-induced adaptation, and represents the adaptation to
climate change triggered by the existing NAAQS regulation under the Clean Air Act.
                                                    39
  Figure 2: Evolution of Maximum Ozone Concentration and Counties in Nonattainment
                                                   Panel A. Maxiumum Ozone Concentration by Attainment Status                                                                     Panel B. Proportion of Monitored Counties in Nonattainment
                                            160                                                                                                                             1



                                                                                                                                                                                   1979 NAAQS                                   1997 NAAQS     2008 NAAQS




                                                                                                                             Share of Monitored Counties in Nonattainment
                                                                                                                                                                                   Implemented                                  Implemented    Implemented
  Daily Maximum Ozone Concentration (ppb)




                                                                                                                                                                            .8
                                            140



                                                                                                                                                                            .6

                                                                                                              1979 NAAQS
                                            120


                                                                                                                                                                            .4



                                            100
                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                  1980                1990                 2000                      2010                                                        1980                  1990                    2000             2010

                                                                   Attainment Counties      Nonattainment Counties                                                                                                   National Average




Notes: This figure displays the evolution of maximum ambient ozone concentrations in the United States
over the period 1980-2013 and the evolution of the proportion of counties violating the ambient ozone
standards among the counties with ozone monitors. Panel (A) depicts daily maximum 1-hour ambient ozone
concentrations over time (annual average), split by counties designated as in- or out- of attainment under the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The 1979 NAAQS for designating a county's attainment
status was based on an observed 1-hour maximum ambient ozone concentration of 120 parts per billion (ppb)
or higher. Here we contrast this attainment status cutoff with the maximum yearly ozone concentrations of
attainment and nonattainment counties. Appendix Figure A4 further compares these heterogeneous trends
in ozone levels with the updated 1997 (implemented in 2004 due to lawsuits), 2008, and 2015 NAAQS levels.
Panel (B) depicts the share of monitored counties that were out of attainment with the NAAQS for ozone
during each year of our sample period. As can be clearly seen, this proportion has declined over time as the
NAAQS regulations took effect. Also, observe that the policy change in 2004 resulted in many additional
counties falling out of attainment, indicating that there was a nontrivial number of counties with average
ozone levels at the margin of nonattainment.




                                                                                                                            40
       Figure 3: Climate Norms and Shocks Over the Period of Analysis (1980-2013)

                                                     Panel A. Average Climate Norm Over Time
                                            26.20



                                            26.15
            30-year Moving Average
               (Temperature C°)




                                            26.10



                                            26.05



                                            26.00



                                            25.95

                                                    1980                  1990                 2000   2010



                                              1.5 Panel B. Average Temperature Shock Over Time



                                              1.0
            Deviation from Moving Average
                   (Temperature C°)




                                              0.5



                                              0.0



                                             -0.5



                                               -1
                                                    1980                  1990                 2000   2010



Notes: This figure depicts US temperature over the years in our sample (1980-2013), decomposed into their
climate norm and temperature shock components. The climate norm (Panel A) and temperature shocks
(Panel B) are constructed from a complete, unbalanced panel of weather stations across the US from 1950
to 2013, restricting the months over which measurements were gathered to specifically match the ozone
season of April­September, the typical ozone season in the US (see Appendix Table A2 for a complete list of
ozone seasons by state). Recall that the climate norm represents the 30-year monthly moving average of the
maximum temperature, lagged by one year, while the temperature shock represents the difference between
daily observed maximum temperature and the climate norm. The solid line in Panel (A) smooths out the
annual averages of the 30-year moving averages, and the horizontal dashed lines in Panel (B) highlights that
temperature shocks are bounded in our period of analysis.




                                                                                    41
                  Table 1: Climate Impacts on Ambient Ozone and Adaptation
                                         Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)               Implied Adaptation
                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)             (4)

 Temperature Shock                          1.648***
                                           (0.058)
 Climate Norm                               1.161***                                0.487***
                                           (0.049)                                 (0.036)

 Nonattainment x Shock                                          1.990***
                                                               (0.079)
 Nonattainment x Norm                                           1.351***                            0.639***
                                                               (0.067)                             (0.054)

 Attainment x Shock                                             1.263***
                                                               (0.027)
 Attainment x Norm                                              0.956***                            0.308***
                                                               (0.035)                             (0.029)

 Regulation Induced                                                                                 0.332***
                                                                                                   (0.056)

 Nonattainment Control                        Yes                 Yes
 Precipitation Controls                       Yes                 Yes
 Fixed Effects:
     Monitor-by-Season                        Yes                 Yes
     Region-by-Season-by-Year                 Yes                 Yes

 Observations                             5,139,529           5,139,529
 R2                                         0.428               0.434
Notes: This table reports our main findings regarding the climate impacts on ambient ozone concentrations
(in parts per billion ­ ppb) over the period 1980-2013, as well as the implied estimates of adaptation, in
particular regulation-induced adaptation. Column (1) reports climate impact estimates (national average),
with daily temperature decomposed into climate norms and temperature shocks. Recall that the climate
norm represents a 30-year monthly moving average of temperature, lagged by 1 year, while the temperature
shock reflects the daily difference between observed temperature and this norm. In column (2) we interact
the climate norm and temperature shock with indicators for whether counties have been designated as in-
or out- of attainment under the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ambient ozone, to
estimate heterogeneous effects across attainment and nonattainment counties, as specified in Equation (2).
The attainment status is lagged by 3 years, because EPA allows at least this time period for counties to return
to attainment levels. The last two columns report our adaptation estimates. By comparing the impacts of
climate norm and temperature shock from column (1), we obtain our estimate of overall adaptation in column
(3). Similarly, in column (4) we report the adaptation in attainment and nonattainment counties separately,
which we obtain by comparing the impacts of climate norm and temperature shock reported in column (2).
As defined in Equation (??), the difference between adaptation in nonattainment and attainment counties
is our measure of regulation-induced adaptation. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, **,
and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.


                                                      42
        Table 2: Results by Distance of Ozone Concentrations to NAAQS Threshold
                                 Panel A. Ozone (ppb) Within 20% of NAAQS Threshold
                                Non-Attainment                       Attainment                Induced
                          Ozone (ppb)       Adaptation      Ozone (ppb)      Adaptation      Adaptation
                                (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)

 Temperature Shock            0.610***                          0.382***
                             (0.024)                           (0.014)
 Climate Norm                 0.539***         0.071**          0.395***      -0.013            0.084***
                             (0.033)          (0.034)          (0.017)         (0.014)         (0.029)

                             Panel B. Ozone (ppb) Within 20% - 40% of NAAQS Threshold
 Temperature Shock            0.758***                          0.300***
                             (0.077)                           (0.011)
 Climate Norm                 0.484***         0.274***         0.264***        0.036**         0.238***
                             (0.061)          (0.036)          (0.025)         (0.018)         (0.043)

                              Panel C. Ozone (ppb) Over 40% away from NAAQS Threshold
 Temperature Shock            1.225***                          0.772***
                             (0.123)                           (0.024)
 Climate Norm                 0.673***         0.552***         0.479***        0.293***        0.259***
                             (0.063)          (0.076)          (0.038)         (0.028)         (0.089)

 All Controls                                                    Yes
 Observations                                                 5,139,209
 R2                                                             0.709

Notes: This table reports results from our main specification in Equation (2) including interactions with
indicator variables for ozone monitor readings over the period 1980-2013 with concentrations falling within
20 percent of the NAAQS threshold in Panel (A), within 20-40 percent of the threshold in Panel (B), and
over 40 percent away from the threshold in Panel (C). Note that all reported estimates for Nonattainment
and Attainment counties reported in Columns (1) and (3) come from a single estimating equation. Columns
(2) and (4) represent the implied measures of adaptation, while Column (5) reports the resulting measure of
regulation-induced adaptation as the difference of Column (4) from column (2). Recall that the climate norm
is the 30-year monthly MA of temperature lagged by 1 year, and the temperature shock is the difference
between the observed temperature and the norm. The full list of controls are the same as in the main model,
depicted in column (2) of Table 1. For reference, the 1979 NAAQS for designating a county's attainment
status was based on an observed 1-hour maximum ambient ozone concentration of 120ppb or higher, while
the 1997 amendment (implemented in 2004 due to lawsuits) changed this to an observed maximum 8-hour
average ambient ozone concentration of 80ppb or higher, and the 2008 update further reduced this to 75ppb.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%,
respectively.




                                                    43
                        Table 3: Accounting for Competing Input Regulations Aiming at Ambient Ozone Reductions
                                                  VOC Regulations                                   NOx Regulations
                                                (Excluding California)           (Excluding NBP States) (Excluding RECLAIM Counties)
                                              Ozone (ppb)      Adaptation       Ozone (ppb)      Adaptation       Ozone (ppb)           Adaptation
                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                  (6)

      Nonattainment x Shock                     2.032***                           2.050***                          1.987***
                                               (0.092)                            (0.090)                           (0.082)
      Nonattainment x Norm                      1.370***          0.662***         1.430***         0.620***         1.320***              0.667***
                                               (0.061)           (0.064)          (0.080)          (0.062)          (0.055)               (0.061)

      Attainment x Shock                        1.275***                           1.267***                          1.263***
                                               (0.028)                            (0.031)                           (0.027)
      Attainment x Norm                         0.970***          0.305***         0.978***         0.290***         0.946***              0.317***
                                               (0.034)           (0.028)          (0.041)          (0.034)          (0.033)               (0.029)
44




      Regulation Induced                                          0.358***                          0.331***                               0.349***
                                                                 (0.065)                           (0.063)                                (0.062)

      All Controls                                 Yes                               Yes                               Yes
      Observations                              4,631,413                         4,338,183                         5,008,323
      R2                                          0.432                             0.443                             0.439
     Notes: This table reports results from our main specification in Equation (2) but excluding locations with competing regulations ­ input regulations
     aimed at reducing ambient ozone concentrations via reductions in ozone precursors (VOCs and NOx). Three of these regulations were implemented in
     the United States over our sample period 1980-2013: (i) regulations restricting the chemical composition of gasoline, intended to reduce VOC emissions
     from mobile sources (Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011), (ii) the NOx Budget Trading Program (Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017), and (iii) the
     Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) NOx and SOx emissions trading program (Fowlie, Holland and Mansur, 2012). Because our goal
     is to estimate climate adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ambient ozone, here we examine the sensitivity of our estimates of regulation-induced
     adaptation when accounting for these input regulations. Column (1) excludes California from 1996 onwards, when stringent VOC regulations were in
     place. Column (3) excludes the states participating in the NBP from 2003 onwards, when the program was in effect. Column (5) excludes the four
     California counties within the South Coast Air Quality Management District from 1994 onwards, when the RECLAIM was in operation. The implied
     adaptation estimates presented in columns (2), (4), and (6), are derived from the estimates reported in columns (1), (3), and (5), respectively. Recall
     that the climate norm represents a 30-year monthly moving average of temperature, lagged by 1 year, while the temperature shock reflects the daily
     difference between observed temperature and this norm. The full list of controls are the same as in the main model, depicted in column (2) of Table
     1. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                 Table 4: Implied Impacts of Ambient Ozone Climate Penalty
                                                              Nonattainment Counties
                                              1 C Increase      RCP 4.5 Scenario       RCP 8.5 Scenario
                                                                 2050        2100       2050        2100
                                                    (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)

 Costs (Millions 2015 USD/year)
     Without Adaptation                            1,766         2,473       4,946       2,826       8,479

      With Adaptation                              1,199         1,679       3,357       1,918       5,755

 Savings (Millions 2015 USD/year)
     From Adaptation                                 567           794       1,589         908       2,723

      Regulation Induced Adaptation                  294           412         824         471       1,412
Notes: This table reports some back-of-the-envelope calculations on a class of co-benefits of the existing
Clean Air Act regulations ­ climate adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ambient ozone. The calculations
are derived from the main estimates in Table 1 and the costs associated with those climate penalties on
ambient ozone in the United States, for all 509 counties ever in nonattainment in our sample, under a variety
of climate scenarios. The social costs of ozone increases are inferred from the estimated willingness to pay
(WTP) for a 1 ppb decrease in the mean 8-hour summer ozone concentration in the states participating in
the U.S. NOx Budget Program ­ about $1.7 million (2015 USD) per county per year (Deschenes, Greenstone
and Shapiro, 2017, p.2985, Table 6, Panel D, Column 5). Column (1) reports the impacts of a 1 Celsius
increase in temperature as a baseline effect, while columns (2) and (3) extend these effects to match the
expected temperature increases under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 climate scenario
at mid- and late- century. Similarly, columns (4) and (5) extend the effects out to mid- and late- century
under the more damaging RCP 8.5 climate scenario. Temperature projections are based on global models
and downscaled products from CMIP5 (Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5) using a suite of
RCPs. The annual average temperature of the contiguous United States is projected to rise throughout the
century. Increases for the period 2021-2050 relative to 1976-2005 are projected to be about 1.4 C (2.5 F)
for a lower scenario (RCP4.5) and 1.6 C (2.9 F) for the higher scenario (RCP8.5). In other words, recent
record-breaking years may be "common" in the next few decades. By late-century (2071-2100), the RCPs
diverge significantly, leading to different rates of warming: approximately 2.8 C (5.0 F) for RCP4.5, and
4.8 C (8.7 F) for RCP8.5 (Vose et al., 2017, p.195). In this table, the first row reports the expected effect
of the relevant temperature increase by using the estimate of temperature shock from column (2) of Table 1.
The second row then reports what these impacts would be after including adaptation by instead using the
estimate of climate norm from the same column of Table 1. Row three displays the implied savings, simply
reflecting the difference between the first two rows. Further, by taking the difference between the measures
of adaptation in nonattainment and attainment counties from Table 1, column (4), row four reports the
component of these savings that can be attributed to adaptation induced by the NAAQS for ambient ozone,
which we termed regulation-induced adaptation.




                                                     45
