                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MERGER OR ACQUISITION? INTRODUCTION TO
                     THE HANDBOOK OF HISTORICAL ECONOMICS

                                         Alberto Bisin
                                       Giovanni Federico

                                      Working Paper 28786
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28786


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




Prepared for the Handbook of Historical Economics, edited by Alberto Bisin and Giovanni
Federico, Elsevier, forthcoming 2021. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alberto Bisin and Giovanni Federico. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Merger or Acquisition? Introduction to the Handbook of Historical Economics
Alberto Bisin and Giovanni Federico
NBER Working Paper No. 28786
May 2021
JEL No. B40,N00

                                         ABSTRACT

The relationship between history and economics as academic disciplines is methodologically
subtle and sociologically contested. If the Cliometric revolution can be characterized as an
acquisition of economics by history, the most recent trends in Historical Economics appear to
turn this relationship on its head. In this Introduction we read the chapters of the Handbook as a
forceful argument in favor of a merger between the two disciplines rather than the acquisition of
one by the other; a merger which combines, notably, the detailed knowledge of historical sources,
the capability of distilling complex historical processes into a model, and the statistical/
econometric skills for identification and estimation.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Giovanni Federico
Social Science Building (A5)
NYU Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Campus
PO Box 129188
Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates
gf63@nyu.edu
1        Historical Economics
Economists have always looked at history for insights. Adam Smith used historical
evidence so extensively in the Wealth of Nations that "on top of being the founder
of modern economic thinking, [he] could also be regarded as one of the first modern
economic historians" [Manioudis and Milonakis (2020)]. However, the study of eco-
nomic history became an established academic field only about a century later and
for most of the 20th century it remained an historical discipline.
        Historical Economics was born arguably in the 1960s, with the so-called Cliomet-
ric revolution; Margo (2021). We think of Cliometrics as an acquisition of economics
by history in the sense that historians trained in economics started to use formal
economic reasoning and statistical testing to tackle big issues, such as the efficiency
of slavery (Conrad and Meyer, 1958; Fogel and Engerman, 1974); or the contribution
of railways to American economic growth; Fogel (1964). In the following decades,
Historical Economics spread quickly in the United States and more slowly in Europe;
Cioni et al. (2021). Now, arguably, a second revolution is unfolding, as the field is
attracting the renewed interest of economists. It is generally difficult to identify the
orgins of a change of paradigm in a field, but in this case we should certainly cite
the early contributions of Douglas North (North and Thomas (1973)) and Avner
Greif (Greif, 1989, 1993) on institutions, as an inspirational trait d'union with the
pathbreaking empirical approach in e.g., La Porta et al. (1998) and Acemoglu et al.
(2001).1
        The most evident novelty in Historical Economics at this turn, the sense in
which we think of this as an acquisition of history by economics, lies in the radical
shift in the research questions: the Cliometricians studied the economic past for
the sake of its knowledge, while most recently Historical Economists often search in
the past the answer to questions about current economic conditions. This general
research agenda, which is referred to as Persistence Studies, has flourished recently,
tackling on issues ranging from the effects of the colonial forced labour in Peru (Dell,
2010) to those of location of portage sites (transhipment between different means of
transportation) on urban geography of the United States (Li et al., 2012). At the
same time modern work in Historical economics is also characterized by resorting to
state-of-the-art econometrics to identify causal relationships and by a more explicit
    1
    Robert Townsend's book on general equilibrium modeling of the econonomy of an English
manor (Townsend, 1993) can also be considered an early gem in Historical Economics, though it
arguably had less of an impact in the development of the field.


                                             1
relationship between empirical analysis and theoretical models. The essence of the
new wave is well represented by the work of Daron Acemoglu, James Robinson and
co-authors on the role of institutions in economic growth. On the one hand, their
pioneering study in the field, Acemoglu et al. (2001), aims at identifying the causal
effects of a past historical event (the different types of colonial institutions) on a
current outcome (GDP per capita in 1995). The Instrumental variable approach
they adopt, and the clever choice of the instrument (settlers' mortality), have been
wildly popular in later work in Historical economics.2 On the other hand, their work
on institutions has been supported by a conspicuous effort in developing theoretical
models about institutional change - surveyed in (Acemoglu et al., 2021) - which also
has spurred a lot of work in the discipline.
       Finally, one other perhaps less prominent but nevertheless essential feature of im-
portant aspect of recent work in Historical Economics is the expansion of the bound-
aries of the discipline beyond economic themes as traditionally intended.3 Historical
Economists have dealt with political science issues such as the effect of compulsor-
ing voting on political participation (Bechtel et al., 2016), the determinants of the
rise to power of Nazi party in Germany (Adena et al., 2015; Satyanath et al., 2017;
Voigtländer and Voth, 2014) and of the Fascist party in Italy (Acemoglu et al., 2020),
or the effects of American bombings in Vietnam (Dell and Querubin, 2018).4
       In the meanwhile, scholars have continued to pursue the more traditional post-
Cliometric research agenda. First and foremost, they have greatly enhanced our
knowledge of past economies but they have also gained new insights tackling "tradi-
tional questions" in history by exploiting suitable advances in economics, economet-
rics and computing power. For instance, Becker and Woessmann (2009) have given a
new interpretation to the Weber thesis about the positive consequences of the Refor-
mation on economic growth of Prussia. He argued that the Protestant ethic fostered
development, while Becker and Woessman show that the Reformation increased hu-
man capital becuase Protestants were asked to read the Bible by themselves instead
of relying on the clergy's interpretation.5
   2
      The turn of Historical Economics towards causal analysis is consistent with the recent empirical
turn in economics and is largely prevalent in the recent work, even if formal dynamical models are
used as well (Nunn, 2020).
    3
      This is also consistent with a trend in economics - which is at times accused of an "imperialist
attitude" towards social sciences in general.
    4
      Some years ago, some of these Persistent Studies have been collected in a book evocatively
titled The long economic and political shadow of history, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2017).
    5
      Other interesting examples of new takes on traditional questions include: Alesina et al. (2013a)



                                                  2
    In short, Historical Economics is a lively broad field of study with a glorious past
and an exciting and challenging future. This Handbook tries to present the current
frontier and to serve as a guide for future research on the field. We aim at offering
a balanced view of the field, with its peculiarities, its scientific achievements, but
also its shortcomings. In the end, the specific comparative advantages of history and
economics which in our opinion the chapters distill and identify provide a forceful
argument in favor of a merger between the disciplines along these lines.
    The first three chapters (Part One of the Handbook) outline the evolution of
the discipline as sketched out in this Introduction (Margo, 2021; Cioni et al., 2021;
Nunn, 2021). Part Two deals with Sources, Methods, and Models of Historical Eco-
nomics. A few of the chapters collected here illustrate and discuss the data sources
researchers are developing and using in the field, including e.g., the new uses of tra-
ditional sources, such as censuses and maps (Giuliano and Matranga, 2021), archeo-
logical (Pascali and Matranga, 2021) and anthropological data (Lowes, 2021). Other
chapters in Part Two focus on the use in Historical Economics of statistical and
econometric methods for causal analysis developed in economics (Valencia, 2021;
Cantoni and Yuchtman, 2021; Voth, 2021; Bisin and Moro, 2021; Hansen et al.,
2021; Monnet and Velde, 2021). These chapters highlight the variety of methods
successfully exploited in the field, from causal inference (Regression discountinu-
ity, Instrumental Variable analysis, Natural Historical Experiments, ..) to formal
structural methods. Part Two contains also a series of chapters on the theoretical
analysis of institutional change. As we already noticed and will discuss later in this
Introduction, institutions have been at the core of Historical Economics and much
empirical work has been devoted to this issue. But the study of institutions in histor-
ical analysis is very complex - how are they defined, how they change, how they are
measured - and it requires analytical frameworks of reference which theoretical work
is attempting to provide. Five chapters in this section of the book (Acemoglu et al.,
2021; Bowles et al., 2021; Levine and Modica, 2021; Persson and Tabellini, 2021;
who confirm Ester Boserup's thesis regarding the origins of gender role differences in different forms
of agriculture practiced traditionally (specifically, shifting and plough cultivation); Juhász (2018)
who finds strong evidence for the classic hypothesis that industry protection reduces technological
adoption by studying the effects on the development of the French cotton industry of the differential
effectiveness of Napoleonâs continental blockade on the North and the South of France; Squicciarini
and Voigtländer (2015) who document a strong relationship between economic growth and endow-
ment of high end human capital in early 19th century France (measured with the subscriptions
to the Encyclopedie), as predicted by traditional growth theory in economics (Barro et al., 1995;
Acemoglu, 2012).



                                                  3
Bisin and Verdier, 2021) provide a careful and comprehensive survey of the different
approaches and results. Part Three of the Handbook contains a selection of results of
Historical Economics. Of course it would have been impossible to cover all (or even
most) results in the field. More modestly, the chapters in Part Three aim at giving a
flavor of the recent work in Historical Economics. It contains, in the tradition of the
Handbook series, several surveys of some major field of research: the development
of commodity markets (Federico, 2021), the economic history of Africa (Frankema,
2021), the economic history of religion (Becker et al., 2021), the consequences of for-
eign intervention after WWII (Matis et al., 2021), and monetary policy and banking
(Monnet and Velde, 2021). It also includes four interpretative essays, which build
on the authors' previous work (Ashraf et al., 2021; Broadberry, 2021; Clark, 2021;
Mokyr, 2021) and a few case studies of new research work (Hall and Sargent, 2021;
Stasavage, 2021; Greenwood et al., 2021). We have selected these latter not only
for the historical relevance of the topics (respectively, the historical origins of the
state, the funding of wars in United States history, the socio-economic effects of the
diffusion of contraceptive technology); but also as examples of the range of method-
ologies used in Historical Economics - from the statistical and econometric analysis
of historical series (Hall and Sargent, 2021) and spatial cross-sections (Stasavage,
2021) to the calibration of a dynamic structural model (Greenwood et al., 2021).


2     Sources, methods, models, topics
In this section we turn to a brief discussion of the chapters in the Handbook, to pro-
vide the reader with a more detailed roadmap of the various contributions it collects.



2.1   Part one: The Evolution of the Discipline
Margo (2021) outlines the origins and the development of Historical Economics from
an institutional point of view, stressing the consequences for the profession. The
Cliometric revolution was a reaction to the decline in standing of economic history
after the mathematization of economics . Cliometricians tried to stave off this decline
by adopting the approach and the methods of economics. They wanted to maintain
the 'economic history' as a subfield of economics, as labor or development economics,
as such they taught it in most undergraduate and graduate programs in economics.
Their success was only temporary, and in the 1980s and 1990s the decline resumed.

                                          4
Nowadays, economic history as such as has all but disappeared in (almost) all PhD
programs in economics. In constrast, the recent wave of Historical Economics is
spearheaded by economists who deal with economic history issues, but as we said,
are not necessarily interested in historical knowledge .
       Cioni et al. (2021) provide quantitative evidence with regards to this narrative.
They trace the success of the Cliometric revolution and of the new wave of Histor-
ical economics by looking at the publication record in top field journals, measuring
the status of economic history as the share of all articles in the major economics
journals. In a companion paper (Cioni et al., 2019) these authors document the
large differences between top economics and top field journals in terms of issues and
patterns as well as of citation numbers. Above all, they show that there is limited
overlapping between the new wave of Historical Economics and the more traditional
(post-Cliometric) economic history, and not only in the research questions. Even
if all Historical Economists share the same methodological approach, few of them
publish in both top field and general interest economics journals.6
       The chapter by Nathan Nunn (Nunn, 2021) foresees the innovation of Historical
Economics as pushing for a novel interpretation of historical phenomena. He argues
that history should be interpreted along with a theory of biological and cultural
evolution. This theory is well-developed in terms of formal models and Nunn (2021)
argues that it provides for sharp implications in terms of our understanding of hu-
man capital, innovation, gender roles, the consequences of warfare, the effects of
market competition, and more. Most generally, the theory of biological and cultural
evolution has great explanatory power with with respect to the historical persistence
of several socio-economic phenomena and hence it may be useful to address at its
core the fundamental question of economic development, why is sustained economic
growth often so elusive.

2.2      Part Two: Sources, Methods, and Models
The development and discovery of new data sources are a fundamental component
of the contributions of Historical Economics. In recent years, scholars have col-
lected and estimated a large number of new economic series, with a major effort
to make them internationally comparable and easily available. On-line data-bases
   6
    These differences will play a central role in our critical analysis of Historical Economics as a
discipline, in Section 3, where we will explicitly make a distinction between "economic historians"
and "economists" tout court.



                                                 5
provide data on trade by country at constant and current prices since 1800 (Federico
and Tena-Junguito, 2019) and on bilateral trade at current prices since the 1830s
(Dedinger and Girard, 2017) Following the seminal work by Robert Allen (Allen,
2001) and (Allen, 2019), real wages are now routinely expressed in welfare ratios
a simple and intuitive measure which can be compared across time and countries.
Arguably, the most relevant contribution is the so called Maddison project, which
continues the pioneering work by Angus Maddison (Bolt and Van Zanden, 2014; Fou-
quet and Broadberry, 2015; Broadberry, 2021) He started to collect series of national
income since the 1980s (Maddison, 1991) and later converted them in 1990-PPP dol-
lars (Maddison et al., 1995). Economic historians have since substantially increased
the number of countries and have extended the series back in time to the Middle
Ages. The work is going on, and new or revised series are added as soon as they
available. In recent times Historical economists have widened the range of available
data, as shown in the chapter by Giuliano and Matranga (2021). First, they show
how modern technology has charged new versions of traditional sources, such as cen-
suses and maps. Censuses have always been used as sources of aggregate data but
the use of records was limited by their sheer size.7 The great increase in computing
power has all but abolished this constraint, allowing researchers to link records from
multiple U.S. censuses and trace the life pattern of individuals; see Abramitzky et al.
(2019b,a). Similarly, geo-referencing has transformed maps from a visual static help
into a source of information and variables for regression analysis. But Giuliano and
Matranga (2020) show also the potential of 'new' qualitatively different sources, to
address new research questions. Scientific research, for instance, offers a lot of new
information on climate via tree rings and glaciers (Guiot et al., 2010) and on eco-
nomic activity via lead deposits in glaciers (McConnell et al., 2018, 2019), even if
publication in science journals might reduce their impact on the scholarly debate.
      Matranga and Pascali (2021) provide a review of the data and the empirical
methodologies developed to study the persistent effects of the very distant past on
e.g., present-day living conditions and economic prosperity. Much of recent research
in Historical Economics argues that these effects manifest themselves in local insti-
tutions and cultural traits which go back millennia. The scarcity of written records,
as we move back in time, has pushed Historical Economists to study archaeological
and paleoanthropological data. In this respect, Matranga and Pascali (2021) show
  7
    The pioneering Gallman-Parker sample, for instance, was widely used in the early work on
slavery but referred to only 405 cotton-producing counties from the 1860 U.S. Census.



                                             6
e.g., how archeological data have been successfully used to shed light on Neolithic
revolution, the origins of state, and long-distance trade.8
    For a number of reasons, the geographic coverage of archeological research is
patchy: there are very many sites in Europe and the Mediterranean, some in Asia,
but few in the America and very few in Sub-Saharian Africa. Furthermore, even
when available, the archeological sources cannot document a wide range of activi-
ties, institutions and beliefs. Thus, scholars have widely resorted to ethnographic
data, as Lowes (2021) shows and discusses in her chapter. The most notably source is
Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock (1967)), which collects information about
primitive, historical, and contemporary societies, mostly from Africa and Northern
America. More recently, Lowes (2021) reports, several economists working in His-
torical Economics have resorted to collect their own ethnographic data, following
the practice and methods of anthropologists in the field; see e.g., De la Sierra et al.
(2014), Lowes et al. (2017), and Lowes and Montero (2020).
    Besides new sources, Historical Economics has brought new statistical and econo-
metric methods to historical analysis, borrowing them from the causal inference lit-
erature in e.g., labor and development economics; see Angrist and Pischke (2008,
2014) and Cunningham (2021) for book treatments of this literature. The iden-
tification of causal relationships across history is central to Historical Economics,
especially in the case of Persistence studies. The empirical focus of these studies
centers, in the jargon of the causal inference literature, on the effects of a treatment
variable taken-up in the historical past but whose effects persists in the present; e.g.,
high-quality norms or institutions. An exogenous historical factor may be available
that directly affects the treatment variable and can be exploited as an instrument
to identify causal effects. Form the point of view of formal statistical and economet-
ric theory and practice, these exogenous historical factors can be studied with the
use distinct methodologies; notably, Regression discountinuity design, Instrumental
Variable analysis, and Natural Historical Experiments.
    The chapter by Valencia (2021) surveys the research in Historical Economics
employing either a Regression discountinuity design or Instrumental Variables, dis-
tinguishing between the seminal articles published from 2001 to 2011 and those be-
longing to second wave of studies, from 2012 to today (2020), which have introduced
   8
     Archeological sources are also widely used in the current revival of Roman economic history, af-
ter having long been crippled by the disappearance of archives during barbaric invasions (Erdkamp,
2016).



                                                 7
various refinements of these causal identification strategies . The studies surveyed
in this chapter are quite impressive in terms of their breadth, studying the effects
of several historical phenomena like the development of independent city-states in
Italy from the 12th century, the historical variation in land tenure patterns in colo-
nial India, the redrawing of African national boundaries, the operation of the "Mita"
forced labor system in colonial Peru and Bolivia, the invention and spread of the
printing press, the role of media in support of democratic institutions, the bomb-
ing and counterinsurgency operations in Vietnam, the introduction of the steamship
during the first wave of trade globalization.
       Cantoni and Yuchtman (2021) survey instead the literature on Natural Historical
Experiments.9 Consistently with the reading of Historical Economics we have given
in this Introduction, they provide a useful taxonomy distinguising experiments i) to
understand history - a traditional staple of economic historians, revised with the tools
of modern econometrics; and experiments ii) to understand economics - where history
supplies observations to test some economic theory to understand contemporary
outcomes - i.e., Persistence Studies focusing on the effects of specific events in the
past rather than on general economic characteristics.10 The breadth of the analyses
and results surveyed in this chapter is also impressive: from the effects of historical
phenomena like the Neolithic Revolution, the Columbian Exchange, the Marshall
Plan, colonialism and slavery; to tests of the efficacy of infant industry protection,
the existence of urban agglomeration effects, the incorporation of news in asset prices.
       The chapters by Voth (2021) and Bisin and Moro (2021) take up the method-
ological challenge of extending the statistical and econometrics methods of causal
inference to Historical Economics, and to Persistence Studies in particular.
Voth (2021) makes two major points. The first is that persistence studies differ ac-
cording to the similarity between the (current) outcomes and the (past) treatment .
The causal inference is strong when the two measure the same feature ("apples and
apples"), such as anti-semitism, which inspired Middle Ages pogroms in Germany
   9
     See Diamond et al. (2010) for an interesting divulgative account of this method, containing
various interesting examples. More generally, one can think of the current interest Natural Historical
Experiments as an evolution of comparative history, whereby the exogeneity of the experiment is
more formally addressed. An interesting example in this respect is the article by O'Rourke on the
"Grain Invasion" of the European economy of the 1880s O'Rourke (1997). A sharp drop in transport
costs caused the supply prices of American wheat all over Europe to collapse but European countries
reacted differently. Some kept import free while others imposed heavy duties. O'Rourke estimates
the impact of protection with a structural CGE model by comparing potential (under free trade)
and actual (with protection) changes in functional distribution of income.
  10
     See also Cantoni and Yuchtman (2020) for a complementary survey of this literature.


                                                  8
and 20th century Holocaust. However, many studies ("apples and oranges"), relate
different (past) treatments and (current) outcomes and thus their statistical results
are more convincing if supported by modelling ("apples and oranges with theory").
Then Voth (2021) addressess the forceful critique of Persistence Studies recently put
forth by Morgan Kelly (Kelly, 2019), arguing that it overstates the concerns about
spatial correlation. Voth (2021) shows that most of the papers which Kelly (2019)
quotes do control for spatial correlation by adding fixed geographical effects in at
least one specification, without causing the results to become insignificant.
   Bisin and Moro (2021) look at different methodological aspects of Persistence
Studies. More specifically, they analyze the implications of allowing for heteroge-
neous treatment effects in Persistence Studies. More specifically, when treatment
effects are heterogeneous, the research design identifies a Local Average Treatment
Effect (LATE), rather than the Average (subject-level) Treatment Effect (ATE); see
Angrist and Imbens (1995). Explicit models of the causal relationships to be studied
in the context of the specific empirical analysis, help to clarify the interpretation
of the identified causal effects and to put forward relevant new sets of questions,
which can be addressed empirically, possibly with new data. In this respect Bisin
and Moro (2021) propose minimal abstract models that help interpret results and
guide the development of empirical strategies to uncover the mechanisms generating
the effects, bridging causal inference studies and structural estimation methods in
economics; along the lines, notably, of Heckman and Urzua (2010).
   The explanatory power of structural models is particularly promising, Bisin and
Moro (2021) suggest, in the study of the role of institutions on economic prosperity.
As we already noticed, institutions have been at the core of Historical Economics;
and much empirical work has been indeed devoted to the study of their effect on
economic growth and prosperity, starting from the seminal papers by Acemoglu
et al. (2001), Acemoglu et al. (2002). While this empirical work does not yet exploit
structural models, a large theoretical literature has developed to address several
fundamental questions which arise naturally in the empirical study of institutions in
Historical Economics. Several chapters in this Handbook are devoted to surveying
this theoretical literature.
   Acemoglu et al. (2021) illustrate the issues involved in understanding institutional
persistence and change by means of a simple conceptual game-theoretic framework
which encompasses much of the authors' and others' theoretical work on the subject.
This conceptual framework illustrates the strategic stability of institutions by identi-


                                           9
fying the forces behind âinstitutional stasisâ and the potential drivers of institutional
change. Importantly, the theoretical analysis exemplified in this chapter provides an
important justification for much of the empirical work on the Historical Economics
of institutions by providing the rationale for why current institutions are shaped by
past institutional choices, thus exhibiting âpath-dependent changeâ whereby initial
conditions determine both the subsequent trajectories of institutions and how they
respond to shocks.
   In the class of "top-down" models studied by Acemoglu et al. (2021) institutional
change is deliberately implemented by political elites either acting as a centralized
authority or interacting with other competing political groups. In contrast Bowles
et al. (2021) survey the "bottom-up" models, where changes in cultures and/or
conventions are the result of the unintended and uncoordinated actions of a large
numbers of actors with sparse information. This type of institutional change is akin
to the transition from one equilibrium to another in an evolutionary equilibrium
selection process. The dynamics in this class of models is illustrated by Bowles et al.
(2021) with applications to a series of historic cases, including the emergence of
private property and of the national bureaucratic state and the demise of serfdom.
Most notably, they explore a key issue in world history, the Neolithic revolution â
i.e., the transition from foraging to agriculture. This epoch-making change could be
easily explained if agriculture were more productive and population was growing, as
in the âstandard modelâ ((Weisdorf, 2005; Brooke, 2014), or if climate change made
it more productive (Dow et al., 2009; Matranga, 2017). Bowles et al. (2021) aim
to explain the stability of foraging societies and, above all, transition if agriculture
were not more productive than foraging. They argue that, under some well defined
conditions, societies shifted to agriculture because it offered better defined property
rights and thus reduced internal conflicts.
   Levine and Modica (2021) also study models of institutional dynamics or, more
generally, of social organizations. They however concentrate their analysis on the
long run changes brought about by one specific, but historically very important,
mechanism: external competition and conflict. Indeed, historically, institutional suc-
cess has occurred in the aftermath of invasion, warfare, and other form of conflict.
The chapter by Levine and Modica (2021) then provides an analysis of models of con-
flict driven evolutionary theory, centered on their dynamic and stochastic properties,
used to motivate the analysis of a broad range of historical phenomena. Evolution-
ary models are useful to select which of many feasible institutions and arrangements


                                           10
are persistent and hence observed in the long-run. They show, for instance that the
simplest configuration resulting from conflict is a hegemony of the winner, with a
single society ruling over an isolated geographical area. This is because of a form of
complementarity of success in conflict: conquering a city or a province strengthens
the winner and weakens the loser. They then argue that i) hegemonies have in fact
been more common and persistent in the last two millennia than one would expect;
ii) where and when they have not been prevalent (e.g., in Europe and India), outsider
societies have played a decisive role. Furthermore, the models studied by Levine and
Modica (2021) have explanatory power to distinguish conditions under which, in the
absence of hegemony, competing societies are extractive or rather inclusive.
   While several earlier empirical studies in Historical Economics appeared to run
races between the explanatory power of institutions and culture (as well as history,
geography, and other factors) for economic growth and prosperity, it is now more
common to stress the importance of the interaction between institutions and culture
to this effect. Both Persson and Tabellini (2021) and Bisin and Verdier (2021) take
this view in their chapters. They define culture as individual values and preferences
and model its dynamics in a society as the outcome of evolutionary selection mech-
anism, along the lines of the models of the models surveyed by Bowles et al. (2021).
Both chapters also consider institutional change as the result of the interactions be-
tween elites and other political groups, along the lines of the models surveyed instead
by Acemoglu et al. (2021). Persson and Tabellini (2021) construct their survey grad-
ually building layers of complex interactions on one specific simple model of political
agency. It highlights the joint effects of culture and institutions on policy outcomes
by studying the mechanisms politicians adopt to extract rents from the political
process at the voters expense. More specifically, in this context, institutions are
represented by formalized rules of the socio-economic interaction between political
groups, such as the rules for political and judicial procedures.
   Bisin and Verdier (2021) take instead a more abstract approach to the study of
the interaction of culture and institutions, showing how the combination of models of
institutional dynamics with models of cultural dynamics can generally be projected
into a useful representation of these interactions, as a system of differential/difference
equations represented by a phase diagram. They focus on some general properties of
these system which matter for the comparative dynamics of culture and institutions
and for the response of the system to exogenous shocks, e.g., natural historical exper-
iments. Indeed, Bisin and Verdier (2021) show how these general properties depend


                                           11
in a fundamental way on whether culture and institutionas are complementary or
substitutes in the dynamical system. The chapter also illustrates these methods and
concepts by means of a simple analytical example from Bisin and Verdier (2017),
studied and solved in some detail. it singles out conditions under which the cultural
and institutional dynamics, between groups with different propensities to act vio-
lently in a conflictual society, favor or hinder the development of a legal system for
the protection of property rights.
      It would be easy to conclude from our discussion up to this point that structural
estimation methods are still not as extensively used in Historical Economics as they
are e.g., in several sub-fields of economics, from industrial organization (Reiss and
Wolak, 2007) and labor economics (Keane, 2010); to political economy (Merlo, 2005).
On the contrary, the realm of applications of structural methods in Historical Eco-
nomics is quite vast in the context of traditional dynamic macroeconomic questions.
Early pathbreaking attempts, such as the books by Jeffrey Williamson on Ameri-
can economic growth and inequality in Britain (Williamson et al., 1974; Williamson,
1985) might have had relatively little following, methodologically. But in more recent
times Historical economists have used structural estimation and calibration methods,
exploiting constructed historical datasets. These work shed new light on important
historical episodes by using diagnostic methods that help identify potential classes
of models for evaluating important historical events and by quantifying the impact
of different shocks on macroeconomic activity during historical periods. The chap-
ter by Hansen et al. (2021) surveys these methods, with two important historical
episodes as examples of their applicability: the Industrial Revolution and the U.S.
economy from 1889-1929, forty crucial years which featured World War I, two major
financial panics, the diffusion of electricity and the internal combustion engine and
the `Roaring Twenties", which immediately preceded the Great Depression.
      In their chapter, Monnet and Velde (2021) survey the applications of Historical
Economics to the study of money, banking, and financial intermediation, a sub-field
where structural models are prevalent. They construct a straw man of Historical
Economics as dominated by causal inference, lacking structural methods, and ar-
gue that this is not - and should not be - the case in their sub-field. The study of
the effects of monetary policy, in particular, is mostly about identifying the data
generating process over time, that is, typically a stochastic dynamic general equilib-
rium model, rather than identifying marginal effects of specific events.11 Monnet and
 11
      They grant Friedman and Schwartz (1963) with the early formulation of their methodological


                                               12
Velde (2021) notably highlights the evolution of the literature, especially on financial
development and financial crises. Recent works display trend towards understanding
the diversity of development models and financial systems and the microeconomic
sources of aggregate fluctuations. Structural models appear particularly central in
their review of the literature on the roots of high inflation in the 1970s.

2.3    Part Three: Topics
There are dozens of interesting and exciting topics in Historical Economics worthy
of a survey in the Handbook. In an attempt to avoid expanding the size of the
Handbook well above the reasonable, we have selected just a few which we deem
representative of the different strains of the field and of their distinctive methods.
Furthermore, we have selected topics which have not been recently surveyed in other
published material - to which we explicitly refer here instead:12 Meissner (2014) on
globalization and growth, Deng (2014) on China, Johnson and Koyama (2017) on
state capacity, Abramitzky and Boustan (2017) on immigration in United States,
and Crafts and Woltjer (2020) on productivity growth.
    The chapter on development of markets (Federico, 2021) bridges two literatures:
the well-established one on trade and trade policies and the fast growing one on
market integration. So far they have remained separate and indeed they are the
subject of two separate chapters in the Handbook of Cliometrics ((Lampe and Sharp,
2015; Federico, 2019). In the chapter for this Handbook, Federico (2021) argues that
these two literatures deal with the same process with different measures, depending
on available sources, respectively quantities or prices. He also argues that these
literatures share strengths and weaknesses. For instance, we know a lot about trends
(for trade, only since about 1800) and we have identified the causes of important
changes in the process of development of markets, e.g., technological progress in
transportation and political decisions about trade, but we have made few inroads
about the effects of these changes. Conventional wisdom argues that development
of markets and specialization have been a major source of (Smithian) growth but
scholar are still struggling to find a way to measure their dynamic benefits.
    After many decades of neglect by economic historians, Africa has become a hot
take on monetary history.
  12
     The massive Handbook of Cliometrics (Haupert and Diebolt (2019)) surveys almost all major
subjects in economic history (and also some minor ones), but it pays comparatively little attention
to Persistence Studies and to non economic issues in the Historical Economics literature



                                                13
issue in Historical Economics. Several Persistence Studies deal with the long term
effects of historical events such as the slave trade (Nunn and Wantchekon (2011))
and the diffusion of missions (Nunn (2014)). Other study the effects of culture and
institutions on socio-economic development, e.g., in the Kuba Kingdom (Lowes et al.
(2017). The survey by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2020) and the chapter by
Fourie et al. (2019) in the Handbook of Cliometics, deal extensively with this litera-
ture. The chapter by Frankema (2021) brings a different perspective. He questions
the African exceptionalism which ultimately motivates much of Persistence Studies.
The recent economic history literature has shown that Sub-Saharian Africa was not
uniformly poor and stagnant and has stressed the agency role of local population as
opposed to the Eurocentric view of earlier works.
      Becker et al. (2021) show how much Judaism, Christianity and Islam have shaped
the economic and social life of Europe and the Middle East. The study of the
socio-economic effects of religion is a booming field in Historical Economics, with a
strong empirical turn, but the literature is "eclectic" and "fractionalized" (Becker
et al. (2021)). Becker et al. (2021) in their survey stress the multiple interactions
between religion and politics at the roots of differences in economic performance
among religions and consequently among regions. The list of potential channels of
transmission in this respect is quite varied: prosperity of Jews, Jewish persecutions,
Protestant-Catholic differences, Muslim-Christian differences, human capital devel-
opment, cultural attitudes, doctrinal differences, legal development, and financial
development. In this respect, various recent contributions in Historical Economics
pertain to the study of the causes of the "Long Divergence" between Middle Eastern
and Western European economies from about the year 1000CE. In this respect, e.g.,
Kuran (2012) stresses the inability of the Muslim world to create or adopt those fun-
damental commercial and financial institutions which were responsible for significant
socio-economic growth in the West, such as banking, the corporation (and corporate
law), and institutions supporting impersonal exchange; Rubin (2017) centers on the
use of Islamic religion by Middle Eastern rulers to consolidate their power stifling
innovation (most notably the printing press) and economic growth.13
      Last but not least, the chapter by Matis et al. (2021) is an example of the in-
terdisciplinary bent of much of recent Historical Economics. As the authors note,
interventions have been studied in "comparative politics, international relations, de-
velopment economics, and political economy" - but historical economics offers some-
 13
      See also, Blaydes and Chaney (2013) and Bisin et al. (2019, 2020).


                                                 14
thing additional. They focus on a clear research question (was foreign intervention
a failure) and conclude that, although failures were very frequent, they were not the
pre-determined outcome of interventions. The more pessimistic conventional wisdom
depends to some extent on methodological flaws of some quantitative studies.
   A series of other chapters we have selected to be added to this part of the Hand-
book offer topical reinterpretations of key topics in Historical Economics.
   The research agenda of outlined in Ashraf et al. (2021) is a novel (some would
say provocative) and controversial version of Persistence Studies. They argue that
economic performance has been ultimately determined, in substantial part, by ge-
netic heritage. They substantiate this claim by studying two historical drivers of
genetic evolution. First of all, they show that migration of early humans out of
Africa determined the amount of genetic diversity of different ethnic groups and
hence of the different regions these ethnicities established themselves in. They then
identify a causal relationship between genetic diversity and economic performance
in the present. They argue that an intermediate level of diversity maximizes the
chances of economic growth: too much diversity reduced trust, too little impacts
negatively on the potential for innovation. The second driver of evolution studied by
Ashraf et al. (2021) is the Neolithic revolution. After the birth of agriculture, natural
selection favored individuals with pro-growth genetic characteristics who were more
likely to survive and have many offsprings. They argue that this selection mecha-
nism has favored various traits - e.g., a predisposition towards child quality, time
preference, loss aversion, and entrepreneurial spirit, which in turn contributed to
differential paths of technological progress, human-capital formation, and economic
development across societies.
   The chapter by Gregory Clark Clark (2021) is also an analysis of pro-growth
behavior in societal development. Even though Clark refrains from a strictly genetic
interpretation of behavior, a key component of his interpretation of the escape from
Malthusian structures of pre-industrial society stands on the effects of differential
fertility (Clark, 2007). The focus of his chapter Clark (2021) is on social mobility
and, in this respect, the higher fertility of the rich has contrasting effects: it is
good for the economy at large, because it increases the proportion of pro-growth
individuals in the population; but it is not necessarily good for the offspring of the
rich, as it made difficult for all of them to keep the high status of their forebears -
i.e., it caused downward social mobility for the former elites. To better understand
this process Clark (2021) measures social mobility with the diffusion of rare (elite)


                                           15
surnames. He finds that this diffusion has been much slower than commonly assumed
and has not accelerated after the Industrial revolution (Clark, 2014). But, as shown
in this chapter, the process did work in the very long run: 'surnames of Norman
origin, for example, had high status in England still in 1200-1400, but now are just
slightly above average social status'.
   The Industrial Revolution constitutes the second major watershed in world his-
tory, after the Neolithic revolution, and hence it represents one of the most intensely
studied and interesting topics in economic history; see Crafts and Woltjer (2020) for
a recent survey. The Handbook offers three different views of its origins.
   Broadberry (2021), building on his earlier estimate of English GDP in the very
long term Broadberry et al. (2015), highlights two peculiaties of England. It did not
experience, unlike the rest of Europe (except Holland), a fall in GDP per capita when
population recovered from the Black Death and the onset of the Industrial Revo-
lution in the late 18th century was preceded by at least a century of slow growth
in GDP per capita and of structural change, with a massive shift of occupation to-
wards manufacturing and services: industrialization before the industrial revolution.
Mokyr (2021) looks for the intellectual roots of the revolution in the early diffusion
of the scientific method in Europe, which resulted in the subjection of all conven-
tional wisdom to empirical testing. He argues that this intellectual approach was
not just the prerogative of a small number of scientists, but it extended to practical
inventors ("tweakers"). These latter were able to implement their ideas thanks to a
large number of skilled artisans, trained in a quite efficient apprenticeship system.
   The Industrial Revolution (1770-1867) is the key watershed of the narrative in
Allen (2021), relating changes in technology, wages and the functional income distri-
bution in the very long run. Allen (2021) argues that the high pre-industrial wages
(relative to the cost of coal) stimulated labour-saving and energy-intensive techno-
logical change, which increased profits while wages stagnated. Then the tide turned,
and for about a century capital-intensive technological progress in manufacturing
raised wages for all workers. In the latest half a century, the rise of low-productivity
low-wage services shifted again the distribution against workers, with exception at
the very top of skill distribution. We have selected the three final research chapters
to highlight the wide range of issues and methodologies of research in Historical
Economics.
   Hall and Sargent (2021) explore the sources of government financing for eight
American wars and two insurrections, between 1812 and 1975, by the decomposing


                                          16
the changes in debt/GDP ratio between tax, debt (i.e., future taxation) and money
creation (i.e., ultimately a reduction in the ex-post real returns to debt). They look
at the data very closely through the eyes of two classic formal models of optimal
government financing of (more or less permenet) surges of government expenditures.
The two models (Barro, 1979; Lucas and Stokey, 1983) differ in terms of the set
of financing instruments the government is assumed to have access to and have
different implications regarding the composition of tax collection, adjustment of ex-
post returns to government creditors and quantities of government debt, which are
optimal after a fiscal shock: Barro (1979) requires an increase in both tax and debt
(in fractions which depend on how permanent is the fiscal shock) but constant ex-post
real returns; while in Lucas and Stokey (1983) all the adjustment operates through
ex post returns to government creditors. By and large, the U.S. adopted an optimal
tax smoothing policy (increase debt during wars and pay it later with taxation)
and without affecting the returns to bondholders, in line with Barro (1979). But
the U.S. has also seen negative wartime bond returns followed by positive postwar
returns in the War of 1812, the Civil War, World War I and the Korean War as
prescribed by Lucas and Stokey (1983). In conclusion Hall and Sargent (2021) give us
a positive view of the explanatory power of even stylized formal economic models as
narratives for how "policy makers over two centuries confront[...] their predicaments
by combining their recollections of histories with their theories, [... how they...]
struggle over and over again with the same economic and political forces.
    The chapter by Stasavage (2021) on the origins of state is a typical example of
the empirical turn in Historical Economics. The origin of the state is one of the
oldest topics in history, but historians have not gone much beyond narratives with
some plausible generalizations, such as states developed where agricultural surplus
was greater. Stasavage (2021) instead contrasts a well-defined hypotheses of the
origin of the state, the prevalence of storable cereals as main food staple which gives
rise to the fundamental economic potential to support the economy of the state
(Mayshar et al., 2019), with the invention, adoption, and diffusion of writing, as
a technology central to governance ability.14 He finds that both hypothesis have
explanatory power as factors for the origin of state, increasing roughly by the same
amount (10-15%) the likelihood of having a state. The main conclusion is that
economic potential and governance ability have been complementary factors in the
 14
    Writing is believed to have originated independently in Ancient Sumeria, among the Olmecs in
Mesoamerica, and in China under the Shang dynasty.



                                              17
formation and development of states, from the earliest to modern nation-states.
         Last but not least Greenwood et al. (2021) is a great example of the power
of formal economic models in tracing the dynamics of the effects of technological
changes on various socio-economic aspects of human life. The ramifications of the
effects of large technological shocks are generally far from confined to strict realm
of economics.15 These complicated chain of effects call for "quantitative-theoretical
history," that is, the use of structural models allowing for an analysis of both the
qualitative and the quantitative effects of technological shocks.16 The chapter by
Greenwood et al. (2021) illustrates this line of research exploring specifically the ef-
fects of the transformation in contraceptive technologies and their take up from 1900
to 2000. This transformation has led to a sexual revolution, which witnessed a rise
in premarital sex and out-of-wedlock births, and a decline in marriage. These demo-
graphic phenomena in turn have had important effects on many aspect of social and
economic interactions, e.g., in labor markets. The calibrated model fits well various
empirical moments, including e.g., the decline of proportion of married people, the
increase in out-of-wedlock births, and the rise in the share of sexually active single
females.


3         The Challenges of Historical economics
In the previous discussion we aimed to show how methodologically rigorous and
innovative the field of Historical Economics is and how interesting and promising its
results are. However there are sizeable differences in topics and attitude to research
between "economic historians" in the Cliometric tradition and the new wave of
"historical economists" (or "economists" tout court) engaging in economic history
(especially in Peristence Studies). In this section we better delineate these differences
so that we can suggest strategies to bridge them.
    15
     The Second Industrial Revolution (which brought electricity, the petrochemical industry, and
the internal combustion engine) at the beginning of the twentieth century, for instance, arguably
encouraged the rise of cities and suburbs and allowed women to enter the labor force, providing a
catalyst for women's rights. A similar narrative applies regarding the advent of the Information
age; see Greenwood (1997).
  16
     Greenwood et al. (2021) refer to an extensive literature in "quantitative-theoretical history;" it
suffices to cite Greenwood et al. (2005) on secular decline in fertility; Hansen and Prescott (2002)
on the transition from the pre-industrial to the industrial era, from land- intensive to capital-
intensive production technologies; Kopecky and Suen (2010) on the impact of the automobile on
suburbanization between 1910 and 1970; and the literature surveyed by Hansen et al. (2021) in this
Handbook.



                                                  18
   Economic historians tend to be inward looking: even when they take up im-
portant questions and issues, they tend to deal with them as part of the ongoing
discourse within the discipline which seldom resonates outside it. A good example is
the debate on Allen's view of England as a 'high wage economy', which is the corner-
sone of his interpretation of the causes of the industrial revolution Allen (2021). The
hypothesis has triggered a lively debate among economic historians about the level
of wages (Humphries, 2013; Allen, 2015), which has attracted very little interests
among economists, in spite of its implications for a major issue in economic history.
Economists on the other hand tend to favor big questions with clear present-day
relevance. Some of their work spans literally thousands of years (Ashraf and Ga-
lor, 2013) and puts forward broad generalizations. As a consequence, they expose
themselves to the criticisms to neglect the historical context while designing natural
experiments (Dippel and Leonard, 2020) and to âcompress historyâ (Austin, 2008),
viewing it as just a repository of events and/or as a source of instruments.
   The sociology of history and economics as academic disciplines has amplified this
cleavage between economic historians and historical economists, giving rise to what
we have interpreted as attempts at the methodological acquisition of one discipline
by the other. This cleavage played out most evidently in defining the study of insti-
tutions (Acemoglu et al., 2005b; Ogilvie and Carus, 2014). Institutions have been
a main concern of economic historians since its beginning in the 19th century, with
two widely different approaches. Some scholars described, with as many details as
possible given the sources, the rules and the evolution of specific institutions, guilds,
merchant companies etc. Others, more often than not inspired by Marxism, put for-
ward broad generalizations about economics and politics. The early Cliometricians
disliked both approaches, respectively as antiquarian and not scientific, and retreated
towards strictly economic issues. Douglass North, himself a prominent member of
the Cliometrician group, brought institutions back to the limelight, with two books
(North and Thomas, 1973; North, 1981). His call for action was only slowly heeded by
economic historians. They were reluctant to use quantitative methods for the study
of institutions, arguably because they felt it very difficult to translate broad gen-
eralizations (e.g., extractive/inclusive, particularized/generalized institutions) and
models of institutional change in terms of source-compatible research questions. In-
deed, many original documents on institutions have been lost and anyway written
sources are unlikely to shed light on key features (tacit knowledge, network effects,
cultural influences etc.). Economic historians thus preferred a softer rhetoric, based


                                           19
on general statements supported by selected examples. If pressed to generalize, they
painted broad historical canvases. Economists, on the contrary, often deemed the
price in terms of historical accuracy worth paying if the evidence is consistent with
theoretical generalizations. A good example is the analysis of origin of the economic
decline of the Venetian Republic (the Serenissima), which Acemoglu and Robinson
(2012) see in its turn into a oligarchic institutional system from the Serrata del Gran
Consiglio (1297). While consistent with theory of the role of the extractive/inclusive
institutions dichotomy to explain economic growth Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2005b),
this narrative is in contrast with the evidence that the institutions of the Serenis-
sima lead its transition from a commercial to an industrial power in the Seventeen
century (Rapp, 1976).17 Another significant example of the difference is the debate
on guilds, a quintessential economic institution of pre-industrial European cities.
Guilds were formal associations of merchants or craftsmen which enjoyed monopoly
of a specific activity (wholesale trade or production of goods and services for con-
sumers). Conventional wisdom since the Enlightenment and Adam Smith was that
their monopoly was economically harmful. Avner Greif (Greif, 1989, 1993) disagreed
and argued that merchant guilds performed some useful tasks and buttressed this
claim with the analysis of business practices of the (Jewish) Maghribi traders in
medieval Cairo and Genoese merchants. He argues that the Maghribi traders were a
closely-knit group who enforced contracts via reputational effects, contrasting them
with Genoese traders, who settled business controversies in courts. Ogilvie contested
Greif's general views on merchant guilds in a book (Ogilvie, 2011) and his recon-
struction of the business practices of the Maghribi traders in an article (Edwards and
Ogilvie, 2012); Greif refuted the criticism and presents additional pieces of evidence
supporting his analysis (Greif, 2012). Oglivie and Greif use the same set of business
letters, but Greif looks at the general pattern in the documents, guided by his the-
oretical structure, while Edwards and Ogilvie focus on the details of interpretation
of some of them.
    Without taking a stand, we would like to highlight how this debate points to
a silver lining in the cleavage between different approaches we have identified. In-
deed there are a promising signs of methodological convergence - a path to a fruitful
methodological merger of disciplines. For instance, while in her earlier book Ogilvie
  17
     The origin of the decline of Venice can then be identified with the plague of 1630, which hit
Northern Italy with special strength (Alfani, 2013; Alfani and Murphy, 2017). Another competing
narrative has the discovery of the Americas as a fundamental cause of the decline of the economic
power of Venice (Borlandi, 1964; Braudel, 1972; O'Rourke and Williamson, 2009).


                                               20
relies, in the traditional approach to institutions taken by economic historians, on
generalizations supported by anecdotal evidence, in her more recent book on ar-
tisanal corporations (Ogilvie, 2019), she has made an admirably massive effort to
collect qualitative and quantitative information on the rules and activities of these
institutions, a total of over 17,000 pieces. She is thus able to construct systematic ta-
bles of statistics. which may fall short of the requirements for econometrics analysis
but are much more convincing for an economist than a single example.18
       More generally, beyond this instance, the economists' demand for quantification
of institutions (and not only of institutions) is pushing economic historians out of
their comfort zone, with very promising results. For instance, they have succeeded
to measure the influence of Parliaments in Medieval and early modern Europe. They
were assemblies of representatives of the elites, which had some power to authorize
the ruler(s) to impose new taxes, and thus could act as a constraint to the executive.19
Van Zanden et al. (2012) measure the Parliaments' power with the number of years
of their meeting per century and find a positive relation with economic growth, as
measured by city growth. Their proxy shows that power of parliaments grew all
over Europe until the 16th century, while afterwards it continued to rise in North-
Western Europe and declined sharply elsewhere (the French Etats Generaux were
not convened from 1688 to 1789). Henriques and Palma (2019) use a more precise
measure of parliamentary activity, as well as information on fiscal conditions of the
state, to compare England with Spain and Portugal. They find, in contrast with
Acemoglu et al. (2005a), that English institutions were not better than Spanish and
Portuguese ones until the late 17th century. The case of the Polish parliament (Seijm)
shows that too much constraint to the executive may be counterproductive as well
(Malinowski, 2019): since 1652, each member had a veto power and this progressively
paralyzed the legislative activity of the parliament. The uncertainty in property
rights reduced the integration of domestic market, with negative consequences for the
economy. The Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth became politically and militarily
weaker and weaker in the 17th and 18th centuries and was ultimately carved between
Russian, Prussian and Habsburg empires.
  18
      Nonetheless, this does open issue of representativeness: Paris had 100 guilds in 1261-71 and
133 in 1766; if all information referred to Paris guilds only, which is clearly not the case, it would
amount to one piece every four years.
   19
      Notably, North and Weingast (1989) argued that the conditions imposed by the English Com-
mons to the new king William III in 1688 marked a watershed in protection of property rights and
the credibility of state commitments and that this institutional change fostered the development of
financial system and of the military power of the kingdom.


                                                 21
   Economists, on their part, have been very creative and innovative in the use of
interesting variables as instruments (formally and metaforically) for their analysis
of the effects institutional change. In this respect, the real game changer has been
the publication of Acemoglu et al. (2001) who came from different traditions. They
were not surely the first to argue that colonial institutions had an important ef-
fect on economic growth, especially in Africa, nor they buttressed this claim with
any structural modeling. The real novelty was the use of econometrics to test their
claim - and especially of an Instrumental Variable approach to tackle the issue of
endogeneity. The Instrumental Variable they used is `settlers' mortality,' a measure
of the pattern of settlement of Western colonists which determined the quality of
colonial institutions. In their interpretation, higher settlers' mortality encodes for
low-quality (extractive) institutions. This combination of wide ranging plausible hy-
pothesis and empirical testing with panel regression has become the standard in the
recent work by historical economists on institutional change, with the introduction
of an innovative and interesting series of instruments, including: genetic diversity
for social conflict and trust in Ashraf and Galor (2013), pogroms for anti-semitism
in Voigtländer and Voth (2012), plow-suitability of the terrain for gender roles in
Alesina et al. (2013b), and the list could continue a long way. Not all the instruments
and data used by economists would pass a stringent test for historical accuracy, but
this work should constitute at least valuable food for thought for more traditional
economic historians (Dippel and Leonard, 2020).
   The issue of quantity and quality of data emerges from this sketch as the key
challenge for historical economists. Without data, you cannot address a lot of highly
significant questions for the interpretation of the past and of its effect on the present
and thus all historical economists agree that some compromise about their quality
is necessary. However, economic historians tend to be more knowledgeable about
the limitation of specific data. The most egregious example is the Atlas of World
Population History (Jones, 1978), which is still widely and often a-critically used in
Historical economics. It reports crude estimates, with almost no support reference,
at long term intervals. By the time of publication it was a bold venture: we still
have very limited and crude data on population before the 19th century for advanced
countries and before the second half of the 20th for most of the others. However, at
least for some countries, we have more fine-grained and reliable data. For instance,
Broadberry et al. (2015) estimate a yearly series of the British population from 1270
onwards, based on twelve benchmark estimates between 1250 and 1522 and on the


                                           22
monumental work by Wrigley and Schofield (1981) from 1541.
   Economic historians would call for some caution in using two other standard
sources, the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and the data-base for Global Agro-
economic zones, built by FAO and IIASA (Fischer et al., 2012). As said, the data
from Ethnographic Atlas have been essential for many recent works on Africa. Lowes
(2021) reports the positive and reassuring results of some attempts to validate its in-
formation (most notably on the mapping of ethnic groups) with independent sources.
However, this work leaves out other reasons for caution, most notably the lack of
knowledge about who was collecting the information (Western travelers vs. pro-
fessional anthropologists), for which purposes (scholarly endeavours versus tax col-
lection) and how common were substantial forms of misunderstanding or outright
misleading on the part of surveyed populations. Just to take an extreme example,
would a village head disclose to a British colonial administrator their slave holding,
knowing that slavery was strongly disapproved or even forbidden? The GAEZ maps
the suitability of world soils to different crops at very high geographical detail and
thus is widely used as totally exogenous instrument in historical analysis (Alesina
et al., 2013b; Galor and Özak, 2014; Nunn and Qian, 2014). It is a really impres-
sive work. It relies on data on temperature, amount of water, quality of soil, slopes
and so on to estimate the suitability under five systems of water provision, rain-fed,
rain-fed with conservation and three different irrigation systems. The low-input is
meant to refer to traditional technology, without fertilizers or machinery and thus it
is used in Historical Economics. As Giuliano and Matranga (2021) correctly point
out, the present-day low input technology may not be representative of past one: the
historical varieties of seeds could be less (more) suitable to a given environment. One
might add that millennia of cultivation and specific investments might have altered
some features of the soil and the present-day climate might not be representative of
the past one. During the Younger Dryas (about 12900 to 11700 before present), cli-
mate was decidedly cooler than nowadays (Bowles and Choi, 2019) and thus GAEZ
is bound to overstate the suitability of land during the Neolithic transition.
   The issue of reliability of data extends to proxies, which are widely used in all
Historical Economics literature. In his chapter Federico (2021) discusses at length the
potential bias from using distance as proxy for transport costs and the ratio of custom
revenues to imports as proxy for protection in gravity model of trade. The former
assumes constant transport cost, while the latter tends to understate protection.
Taken jointly, they give relatively more weight to technology than to policy decisions


                                          23
in determining barriers to trade. Another example is the use of urbanization rates
as proxy for GDP in pre-industrial societies, as popularized by Acemoglu et al.
(2005a). The relation was indeed positive until 1910, but it seems rather unstable in
its strength between the Sixteen and the Nineteen centuries (Jedwab and Vollrath,
2015).20
    In general, assessing the reliability of any specific set of data and keeping abreast
of the fast progress in historical research is difficult. In a seminal and unfortunately
overlooked paper, Feinstein and Thomas (2002) argued that producers of historical
series should attach to their figures an explicit assesment of margin of errors. Fol-
lowing this advice, Federico and Tena-Junguito (2019) estimate the overall margin
of error of their series of world trade as sum of the (independent) variance of indi-
vidual country-series. Also, Broadberry (2021) gives some examples for estimates
of GDP per capita from the Maddison project, with margin of errors ranging from
the almost negligible (Netherlands 1650-1750) to the humongous (Japan 750-1150).
In our opinion any systematic effort along these lines, requiring the joint work of
economic historians and historical economists, would be extremely valuable for the
discipline.


4      Conclusions
Historical Economics is a very promising and important field. As all interdisciplinary
endeavors, it differs from its parent-fields. It differs from economic history for the
breadth of research questions, which include political and social issues, and above
all for its statistical methods, which rely heavily on causal inference and at times
on structural modeling. Historical Economics differs also from economics in that
the availability of data is a serious constraint. Economists have showed remarkable
ingenuity in overcoming the constraint, but they could be more aware of the fun-
damental trade-off: dealing with `large' issues with weak (to say the least) data vs
limiting oneself to `small' issues with accurate and reliable data.
    The obvious winning strategy is a merger of disciplines, putting together economists,
political scientists, and economic historians (as well as, in specific instances, anthro-
pologists, sociologists, evolutionary biologists). Good Historical Economics needs
a combination of the knowledge of sources and detailed historical events and phe-
  20
     The relationship has become negative after World War Two, with cities growing relatively more
in poorer countries, but this has no relevance for the use of the proxy, for pre-industrial times.



                                               24
nomena, the capability of distilling complex historical processes into a model to put
forward alternative testable hypotheses, the statistical/econometric skills for identi-
fication, causal inference, structural estimation, and testing, the detailed knowledge
of specific political and socio-economic institutions, an understanding of the role of
cultural traits, e.g., ethnic/religious, and of their evolution.
   This book is a step in this direction, and this Introduction written jointly by an
economist and an historian, discussing the pitfalls of their own disciplines, should
serve as a suggestion that the merger can be done, leaving aside acquisition attempts.




                                           25
References
Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Boustan (2017) "Immigration in American economic
  history," Journal of economic literature, Vol. 55, No. 4, pp. 1311­45.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J Feigenbaum,
  and Santiago Pérez (2019a) "Automated linking of historical data," National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Elisa Jácome, and Santiago Pérez (2019b)
  "Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants in the US over Two Centuries,"Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Acemoglu, Daron (2012) "Introduction to economic growth," Journal of economic
  theory, Vol. 147, No. 2, pp. 545­550.

Acemoglu, Daron, Giuseppe De Feo, and Giacomo Davide De Luca (2020) "Weak
  states: Causes and consequences of the Sicilian Mafia," The Review of Economic
  Studies, Vol. 87, No. 2, pp. 537­581.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2021) "Institutional change
  and institutional persistence," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Hand-
  book of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2005a) "The rise of Europe:
  Atlantic trade, institutional change, and economic growth," American economic
  review, Vol. 95, No. 3, pp. 546­579.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson (2001) "The colonial
  origins of comparative development: An empirical investigation," American Eco-
  nomic Review, Vol. 91, No. 5, pp. 1369­1401.

        (2002) "Reversal of fortune: Geography and institutions in the making of
  the modern world income distribution," The Quarterly journal of economics, Vol.
  117, No. 4, pp. 1231­1294.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson (2005b) "Institutions as
  a fundamental cause of long-run growth," Handbook of economic growth, Vol. 1,
  pp. 385­472.


                                          26
Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson (2012) Why nations fail: The origins of
  power, prosperity, and poverty : Currency.

Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina
  Zhuravskaya (2015) "Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 130, No. 4, pp. 1885­1939.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013a) "On the origins of gender
  roles: Women and the plough," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 128,
  No. 2, pp. 469­530.

        (2013b) "On the origins of gender roles: Women and the plough," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 128, No. 2, pp. 469­530.

Alfani, Guido (2013) "Plague in seventeenth-century Europe and the decline of Italy:
  an epidemiological hypothesis," European Review of Economic History, Vol. 17,
  No. 4, pp. 408­430.

Alfani, Guido and Tommy E Murphy (2017) "Plague and lethal epidemics in the pre-
  industrial world," the Journal of economic History, Vol. 77, No. 1, pp. 314­343.

Allen, Robert C (2001) "The great divergence in European wages and prices from
  the Middle Ages to the First World War," Explorations in economic history, Vol.
  38, No. 4, pp. 411­447.

        (2015) "The high wage economy and the industrial revolution: a restate-
  ment," The Economic History Review, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 1­22.

        (2019) "Poverty and the Labor Market: Today and Yesterday," Annual Re-
  view of Economics, Vol. 12.

Allen, Robert Carson (2021) "The Interplay among Wages, Technology, and Glob-
  alization: The Labour Market and Inequality, 1620-2020," in Bisin, Alberto and
  Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier
  North Holland.

Angrist, Joshua D and Guido W Imbens (1995) "Identification and estimation of
  local average treatment effects,"Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.



                                        27
Angrist, Joshua D and Jörn-Steffen Pischke (2008) Mostly harmless econometrics:
  An empiricist's companion : Princeton university press.

        (2014) Mastering'metrics: The path from cause to effect : Princeton Univer-
  sity Press.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor (2013) "The 'Out of Africa' hypothesis, human
  genetic diversity, and comparative economic development," American Economic
  Review, Vol. 103, No. 1, pp. 1­46.

Ashraf, Quamrul H., Oded Galor, and Marc Kemp (2021) "The Evolutionary Origins
  of the Wealth of Nations," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook
  of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Austin, Gareth (2008) "The âreversal of fortuneâthesis and the compression of his-
  tory: Perspectives from African and comparative economic history," Journal of
  International Development: The Journal of the Development Studies Association,
  Vol. 20, No. 8, pp. 996­1027.

Barro, Robert J (1979) "On the determination of the public debt," Journal of political
  Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5, Part 1, pp. 940­971.

Barro, Robert J, Xavier Sala-i Martin et al. (1995) "Economic growth."

Bechtel, Michael M, Dominik Hangartner, and Lukas Schmid (2016) "Does com-
  pulsory voting increase support for leftist policy?" American Journal of Political
  Science, Vol. 60, No. 3, pp. 752­767.

Becker, Sascha O., Jared Rubin, and Ludger Woessmann (2021) "Religion in His-
  torical Economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of
  Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Becker, Sascha O and Ludger Woessmann (2009) "Was Weber wrong? A human
  capital theory of Protestant economic history," The quarterly journal of economics,
  Vol. 124, No. 2, pp. 531­596.

Bisin, Alberto and Andrea Moro (2021) "LATE for History," in Bisin, Alberto and
  Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier
  North Holland.



                                          28
Bisin, Alberto, Jared Rubin, Avner Seror, and Thierry Verdier (2020) "Culture,
  Institutions and the Long Divergence," New York University, mimeo.

Bisin, Alberto, Avner Seror, and Thierry Verdier (2019) "Religious legitimacy and
  the joint evolution of culture and institutions," in Advances in the Economics of
  Religion : Springer, pp. 321­332.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2017) "On the joint evolution of culture and
  institutions," Working Paper 23375, National Bureau of Economic Research.

        (2021) "Phase Diagrams in Historical Economics: Culture and Institutions,"
  in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics,
  Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Blaydes, Lisa and Eric Chaney (2013) "The feudal revolution and europe's rise:
  Political divergence of the christian west and the muslim world before 1500 ce,"
  American Political Science Review, Vol. 107, No. 1, pp. 16­34.

Bolt, Jutta and Jan Luiten Van Zanden (2014) "The M addison P roject: collabora-
  tive research on historical national accounts," The Economic history review, Vol.
  67, No. 3, pp. 627­651.

Borlandi, Franco (1964) "L'età delle scoperte e la rivoluzione economica nel secolo
  XVI," Nuove questioni di Storia moderna.

Bowles, Sam, Sung-ha Hwang, Jung-Kyoo Choi, and Suresh Nadu (2021) "How in-
  stitutions and cultures change: a bottom-up perspective," in Bisin, Alberto and
  Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier
  North Holland.

Bowles, Samuel and Jung-Kyoo Choi (2019) "The Neolithic agricultural revolution
  and the origins of private property," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 127, No.
  5, pp. 2186­2228.

Braudel, Fernand (1972) La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen à l'Epoque de
  Philippe II (1949) [The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of
  Philip II] : New York: Harper.




                                        29
Broadberry, Stephen (2021) "The Industrial Revolution and the Great Divergence:
  Recent Findings from Historical National Accounting," in Bisin, Alberto and Gio-
  vanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North
  Holland.

Broadberry, Stephen, Bruce MS Campbell, Alexander Klein, Mark Overton, and Bas
  Van Leeuwen (2015) British economic growth, 1270­1870 : Cambridge University
  Press.

Brooke, John L (2014) Climate change and the course of global history: a rough
  journey : Cambridge University Press.

Cantoni, Davide and Noam Yuchtman (2020) "Historical Contingencies, Econometric
  Problems: The Analysis of Natural Experiments in Economic History," working
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

           (2021) "Historical Natural Experiments: Bridging Economics and Economic
  History," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical
  Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Cioni, M, G Federico, and M Vasta (2021) "The two Revolutions in Economic His-
  tory," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Eco-
  nomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Cioni, Martina, Giovanni Federico, and Michelangelo Vasta (2019) "Three Differ-
  ent Tribes: How the Relationship between Economics and Economic History Has
  Evolved in the 21st Century."

Clark, Gregory (2007) "The long march of history: Farm wages, population, and
  economic growth, England 1209­1869 1," The Economic History Review, Vol. 60,
  No. 1, pp. 97­135.

           (2014) "The industrial revolution," in Handbook of economic growth, Vol. 2:
  Elsevier, pp. 217­262.

           (2021) "Social Mobility in Historical Economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Gio-
  vanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North
  Holland.



                                           30
Conrad, Alfred H and John R Meyer (1958) "The economics of slavery in the ante
  bellum South," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 66, No. 2, pp. 95­130.

Crafts, Nicholas and Pieter Woltjer (2020) "Growth accounting in economic history:
  findings, lessons and new directions," Journal of Economic Surveys.

Cunningham, Scott (2021) Causal inference: The mixtape : Yale University Press.

Dedinger, Béatrice and Paul Girard (2017) "Exploring trade globalization in the long
  run: The RICardo project," Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and
  Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 30­48.

Dell, Melissa (2010) "The persistent effects of Peru's mining mita," Econometrica,
  Vol. 78, No. 6, pp. 1863­1903.

Dell, Melissa and Pablo Querubin (2018) "Nation building through foreign interven-
  tion: Evidence from discontinuities in military strategies," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, Vol. 133, No. 2, pp. 701­764.

Deng, Kent (2014) "A survey of recent research in Chinese economic history," Journal
  of Economic Surveys, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 600­616.

Diamond, Jared, James A Robinson et al. (2010) Natural experiments of history :
  Harvard University Press.

Dippel, Christian and Bryan Leonard (2020) "Not-So-Natural Experiments in His-
  tory."

Dow, Gregory K, Clyde G Reed, and Nancy Olewiler (2009) "Climate reversals and
  the transition to agriculture," Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp.
  27­53.

Edwards, Jeremy and Sheilagh Ogilvie (2012) "Contract enforcement, institutions,
  and social capital: the Maghribi traders reappraised 1," The Economic History
  Review, Vol. 65, No. 2, pp. 421­444.

Erdkamp, Paul (2016) "Economic growth in the Roman Mediterranean world: An
  early good-bye to Malthus?" Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 60, pp. 1­20.

Federico, Giovanni (2019) "Market Integration," in Diebolt, Claude and Mike Hau-
  pert eds. Handbook of Cliometrics, Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer.

                                         31
        (2021) "The Development of Commodity Markets in History," in Bisin, Al-
  berto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam:
  Elsevier North Holland.

Federico, Giovanni and Antonio Tena-Junguito (2019) "World trade, 1800-1938: a
  new synthesis," Revista de Historia Económica-Journal of Iberian and Latin Amer-
  ican Economic History, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 9­41.

Feinstein, Charles H and Mark Thomas (2002) "A plea for errors," Historical Meth-
  ods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp.
  155­165.

Fischer, Günther, Freddy O Nachtergaele, Sylvia Prieler, Edmar Teixeira, Géza
  Tóth, Harrij Van Velthuizen, Luc Verelst, and David Wiberg (2012) "Global agro-
  ecological zones (GAEZ v3. 0)-model documentation."

Fogel, Robert William (1964) Railroads and American economic growth : Johns Hop-
  kins Press Baltimore.

Fogel, Robert William and Stanley L Engerman (1974) Time on the cross: The
  economics of American Negro slavery, Vol. 1: WW Norton & Company.

Fouquet, Roger and Stephen Broadberry (2015) "Seven centuries of European eco-
  nomic growth and decline," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp.
  227­44.

Fourie, Johan, Nonso Obikili et al. (2019) "Decolonizing with data: The cliometric
  turn in African economic history," Handbook of Cliometrics, pp. 1­25.

Frankema, Ewout (2021) "Africa In Flux! A Critical Assessment of the Renaissance of
  African Economic History," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook
  of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J Schwartz (1963) A Monetary history of the US 1867-
  1960 : Princeton University Press.

Galor, Oded and Ömer Özak (2014) "DP10122 The Agricultural Origins of Time
  Preference."




                                        32
Giuliano, Paola and Andrea Matranga (2020) "Historical Data: Where to Find Them,
  How To Use Them," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of
  Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

         (2021) "Historical data: where to find them, how to use them," in Bisin, Al-
  berto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam:
  Elsevier North Holland.

Greenwood, Jeremy (1997) The third industrial revolution: Technology, productivity,
  and income inequality, No. 435: American Enterprise Institute.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner, and Karen Kopecky (2021) "The Wifeâs Protec-
  tor: The Effect of Contraception on Marriage during the 20th Century," in Bisin,
  Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amster-
  dam: Elsevier North Holland.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke (2005) "The
  baby boom and baby bust," American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1, pp. 183­
  207.

Greif, Avner (1989) "Reputation and coalitions in medieval trade: evidence on the
  Maghribi traders," The journal of economic history, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 857­882.

         (1993) "Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade:
  The Maghribi traders' coalition," The American economic review, pp. 525­548.

         (2012) "The Maghribi traders: a reappraisal? 1," The Economic History
  Review, Vol. 65, No. 2, pp. 445­469.

Guiot, Joel, Christophe Corona et al. (2010) "Growing season temperatures in Europe
  and climate forcings over the past 1400 years," PloS one, Vol. 5, No. 4, p. e9972.

Hall, George and Thomas Sargent (2021) "Debt and Taxes in Eight U.S. Wars and
  Two Insurrections," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of
  Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Hansen, Gary D and Edward C Prescott (2002) "Malthus to solow," American eco-
  nomic review, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 1205­1217.




                                         33
Hansen, Gary, Lee Ohanian, and Jaeyoung Jang (2021) "Structural methods in his-
  torical macroeconomics: New perspectives on long-run growth and fluctuations,"
  in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics,
  Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Haupert, Michael J and Claude Diebolt (2019) Handbook of Cliometrics : Springer.

Heckman, James J and Sergio Urzua (2010) "Comparing IV with structural models:
  What simple IV can and cannot identify," Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 156, No.
  1, pp. 27­37.

Henriques, Antonio and Nuno Pedro G Palma (2019) "Comparative European Insti-
  tutions and the Little Divergence, 1385-1800."

Humphries, Jane (2013) "The lure of aggregates and the pitfalls of the patriarchal
  perspective: a critique of the high wage economy interpretation of the British
  industrial revolution," The Economic History Review, Vol. 66, No. 3, pp. 693­714.

Jedwab, Remi and Dietrich Vollrath (2015) "Urbanization without growth in histor-
  ical perspective," Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 58, pp. 1­21.

Johnson, Noel D and Mark Koyama (2017) "States and economic growth: Capacity
  and constraints," Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 64, pp. 1­20.

Jones, Colin McEvedy (1978) "Richard. Atlas of World Population History."

Juhász, Réka (2018) "Temporary protection and technology adoption: Evidence from
  the napoleonic blockade," American Economic Review, Vol. 108, No. 11, pp. 3339­
  76.

Keane, Michael P (2010) "Structural vs. atheoretic approaches to econometrics,"
  Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 156, No. 1, pp. 3­20.

Kelly, Morgan (2019) "The standard errors of persistence," Working Paper DP13783,
  CEPR.

Kopecky, Karen A and Richard MH Suen (2010) "A quantitative analysis of subur-
  banization and the diffusion of the automobile," International Economic Review,
  Vol. 51, No. 4, pp. 1003­1037.



                                        34
Kuran, Timur (2012) The long divergence: How Islamic law held back the Middle
  East : Princeton University Press.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny
  (1998) "Law and finance," Journal of political economy, Vol. 106, No. 6, pp. 1113­
  1155.

Lampe, Markus and Paul Sharp (2015) "Cliometric approaches to international
  trade," Handbook of cliometrics, pp. 295­330.

Levine, David and Salvatore Modica (2021) "State Power and Conflict Driven Evo-
  lution," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Eco-
  nomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Li, Xiaoyun, Chris J Bleakley, and Wojciech Bober (2012) "Enhanced beacon-enabled
  mode for improved IEEE 802.15. 4 low data rate performance," Wireless Networks,
  Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 59­74.

Lowes, Sara (2021) "Ethnographic Data and Field Experiment in Historical Eco-
  nomics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Eco-
  nomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Lowes, Sara and Eduardo Montero (2020) "Concessions, violence, and indirect rule:
  Evidence from the congo free state,"Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Lowes, Sara, Nathan Nunn, James A Robinson, and Jonathan L Weigel (2017) "The
  evolution of culture and institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom," Econo-
  metrica, Vol. 85, No. 4, pp. 1065­1091.

Lucas, Robert E Jr and Nancy L Stokey (1983) "Optimal fiscal and monetary policy
  in an economy without capital," Journal of monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1,
  pp. 55­93.

Maddison, Angus et al. (1995) "Monitoring the world economy, 1820-1992."

Maddison, Angus (1991) Dynamic forces in capitalist development: A long-run com-
  parative view : Oxford University Press, USA.




                                        35
Malinowski, Mikolaj (2019) "Economic Consequences of State FailureâLegal Capac-
  ity, Regulatory Activity, and Market Integration in Poland, 1505­1772," The Jour-
  nal of Economic History, Vol. 79, No. 3, pp. 862­896.

Manioudis, Manolis and Dimitris Milonakis (2020) "Smithâs Wealth of Nations and
  the economic past: setting the scene for economic history?" The European Journal
  of the History of Economic Thought, pp. 1­22.

Margo, Robert (2021) "The Economic History of Economic History: The Evolution
  of a Field in Economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook
  of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Matis, Matt, Pablo Querubin, and Shanker Satyanath (2021) "Persistent Failure?
  International Interventions Since World War II," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni
  Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Hol-
  land.

Matranga, Andrea (2017) "The Ant and the Grasshopper: Seasonality and the In-
  vention of Agriculture."

Matranga, Andrea and Luigi Pascali (2021) "Archaeological Data in Historical Eco-
  nomics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Eco-
  nomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav, Zvika Neeman, and Luigi Pascali (2019) "The Origin
  of the State: Land Productivity or Appropriability?"Technical report, mimeo,
  Hebrew University of Jerusalem, University of Warwick, Tel-Aviv âS.

McConnell, Joseph R, Nathan J Chellman, Andrew I Wilson, Andreas Stohl, Mon-
  ica M Arienzo, Sabine Eckhardt, Diedrich Fritzsche, Sepp Kipfstuhl, Thomas Opel,
  Philip F Place et al. (2019) "Pervasive Arctic lead pollution suggests substantial
  growth in medieval silver production modulated by plague, climate, and conflict,"
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 116, No. 30, pp. 14910­
  14915.

McConnell, Joseph R, Andrew I Wilson, Andreas Stohl, Monica M Arienzo, Nathan J
  Chellman, Sabine Eckhardt, Elisabeth M Thompson, A Mark Pollard, and Jør-
  gen Peder Steffensen (2018) "Lead pollution recorded in Greenland ice indicates



                                        36
  European emissions tracked plagues, wars, and imperial expansion during antiq-
  uity," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 115, No. 22, pp.
  5726­5731.

Meissner, Christopher M (2014) "Growth from globalization? A view from the very
  long run," in Handbook of economic growth, Vol. 2: Elsevier, pp. 1033­1069.

Merlo, Antonio (2005) "Whither political economy? Theories, facts and issues."

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2017) The Long Economic and Po-
  litical Shadow of History Volume I. A Global View : Centre for Economic Policy
  Research.

        (2020) "Historical legacies and African development," Journal of Economic
  Literature, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 53­128.

Mokyr, Joel (2021) "Attitudes, Aptitudes, and the roots of the Great Enrichment,"
  in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics,
  Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Monnet, Eric and Fracois R. Velde (2021) "Money, Banking, and Old-School His-
  torical Economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of
  Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Monnet, Eric and Francois Velde (2021) "Monetary Policy and Good Old Historical
  Economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical
  Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Murdock, George Peter (1967) "Ethnographic atlas."

North, Douglass C and Robert Paul Thomas (1973) The rise of the western world:
  A new economic history : Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C and Barry R Weingast (1989) "Constitutions and commitment:
  the evolution of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century Eng-
  land," The journal of economic history, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 803­832.

North, Douglass Cecil (1981) Structure and change in economic history : Norton.

Nunn, Nathan (2014) "Historical development," in Handbook of economic growth,
  Vol. 2: Elsevier, pp. 347­402.

                                            37
           (2020) "The historical roots of economic development," Science, Vol. 367,
  No. 6485.

           (2021) "History as evolution," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds.
  Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian (2014) "US food aid and civil conflict," American
  Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 6, pp. 1630­66.

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2011) "The slave trade and the origins of
  mistrust in Africa," American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 7, pp. 3221­52.

Ogilvie, Sheilagh (2011) Institutions and European trade: Merchant guilds, 1000­
  1800 : Cambridge University Press.

           (2019) The European guilds: An economic analysis : Princeton University
  Press.

Ogilvie, Sheilagh and André W Carus (2014) "Institutions and economic growth
  in historical perspective," in Handbook of economic growth, Vol. 2: Elsevier, pp.
  403­513.

O'Rourke, Kevin H (1997) "The European grain invasion, 1870-1913," Journal of
  Economic History, pp. 775­801.

O'Rourke, Kevin H and Jeffrey G Williamson (2009) "Did Vasco da Gama matter
  for European markets? 1," The Economic History Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp.
  655­684.

Pascali, Luigi and Andrea Matranga (2021) "The use of archaeological data in histori-
  cal economics," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical
  Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2021) "Culture, Institutions, and Policy,"
  in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics,
  Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Rapp, Richard Tilden (1976) "Industry and Economic Decline in Seventeenth-
  Century Venice, Cambridge, Mass."



                                          38
Reiss, Peter C and Frank A Wolak (2007) "Structural econometric modeling: Ratio-
  nales and examples from industrial organization," Handbook of econometrics, Vol.
  6, pp. 4277­4415.

Rubin, Jared (2017) Rulers, Religion, and Riches: Why the West got rich and the
  Middle East did not : Cambridge University Press.

Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtländer, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2017) "Bowling for
  fascism: Social capital and the rise of the Nazi Party," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, Vol. 125, No. 2, pp. 478­526.

De la Sierra, Raul Sanchez et al. (2014) "On the origin of states: Stationary bandits
  and taxation in eastern congo," Chicago: University of Chicago.

Squicciarini, Mara P and Nico Voigtländer (2015) "Human capital and industri-
  alization: Evidence from the age of enlightenment," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, Vol. 130, No. 4, pp. 1825­1883.

Stasavage, David (2021) "Biogeography, Writing, and the Origins of the State," in
  Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Am-
  sterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Townsend, Robert M (1993) The medieval village economy: A study of the Pareto
  mapping in general equilibrium models : Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ.

Valencia, Felipe (2021) "Historical Econometrics: Instrumental Variables and Regres-
  sion Discontinuity Designs," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook
  of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Van Zanden, Jan Luiten, Eltjo Buringh, and Maarten Bosker (2012) "The rise and
  decline of European parliaments, 1188­1789 1," The Economic History Review,
  Vol. 65, No. 3, pp. 835­861.

Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth (2012) "Persecution Perpetuated: The
  Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany*," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, No. 3, pp. 1339­1392, URL: http://dx.doi.
  org/10.1093/qje/qjs019, DOI: 10.1093/qje/qjs019.

Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth (2014) "Highway to hitler," National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research.

                                         39
Voth, Joaquim (2021) "Persistence - Myth and Mystery," in Bisin, Alberto and Gio-
  vanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North
  Holland.

Weisdorf, Jacob L (2005) "From foraging to farming: explaining the Neolithic Rev-
  olution," Journal of Economic surveys, Vol. 19, No. 4, pp. 561­586.

Williamson, Jeffrey G et al. (1974) Late nineteenth-century American development:
  a general equilibrium history : CUP Archive.

Williamson, Jeffrey G (1985) Did British capitalism breed inequality? : Allen and
  Unwin.

Wrigley, E Anthony and Roger S Schofield (1981) "The population of England 1541­
  1871­a reconstruction," London, Arnold.




                                        40
