                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW IS COVID CHANGING THE GEOGRAPHY OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP? EVIDENCE
               FROM THE STARTUP CARTOGRAPHY PROJECT

                                        Catherine E. Fazio
                                         Jorge Guzman
                                           Yupeng Liu
                                           Scott Stern

                                       Working Paper 28787
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28787


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We would like thank John Haltiwanger for useful comments and feedback. This work is part of
the Startup Cartograpy Project (Andrews, et al, 2020), and we thank the generous support of the
Kauffman Foundation through its Uncommon Methods and Metrics grant program. All errors
and omissions are our own. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28787.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Catherine E. Fazio, Jorge Guzman, Yupeng Liu, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How is COVID Changing the Geography of Entrepreneurship? Evidence from the Startup
Cartography Project
Catherine E. Fazio, Jorge Guzman, Yupeng Liu, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 28787
May 2021
JEL No. L26,R12,R23

                                          ABSTRACT

Leveraging data from eight U.S. states from the Startup Cartography Project, this paper provides
new insight into the changing nature and geography of entrepreneurship in the wake of the
COVID pandemic. Consistent with other data sources, following an initial decline, the overall
level of state-level business registrations not only rebounds but increases across all eight states.
We focus here on the significant heterogeneity in this dynamic pattern of new firm formation
across and within states. Specifically, there are significant differences in the dynamics of new
business registrants across neighborhoods in terms of race and socioeconomic status. Areas
including a higher proportion of Black residents, and more specifically higher median income
Black neighborhoods, are associated with higher growth in startup formation rates between 2019
and 2020. Moreover, these dynamics are reflected in the passage of the major Federal relief
packages. Even though legislation such as the CARES Act did not directly support new business
formation, the passage and implementation of relief packages was followed by a relative increase
in start-up formation rates, particularly in neighborhoods with higher median incomes and a
higher proportion of Black residents.

Catherine E. Fazio                               Yupeng Liu
Boston University                                Jones Graduate School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue                          Rice University
Boston, MA 02215                                 1900 Rice Boulevard
cfazio@bu.edu                                    Houston, TX 77005
                                                 yl210@rice.edu
Jorge Guzman
Columbia Business School                         Scott Stern
Uris Hall, 711                                   MIT Sloan School of Management
116th St & Broadway                              100 Main Street, E62-476
New York, NY 10027                               Cambridge, MA 02142
jag2367@gsb.columbia.edu                         and NBER
                                                 sstern@mit.edu




The Startup Cartography Project is available at https://www.startupcartography.com/home
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28787
   I.      Introduction

   In the early months of 2020, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic ushered in an
unprecedented wave of economic lockdowns, as well as restrictions on movement, social
interaction, and travel. The U.S. economy shrank swiftly and dramatically in response. Between
February and April 2020, U.S. unemployment increased from 3.5 to 14.7 percent, the S&P 500
contracted by more than 34%, and second-quarter 2020 U.S. GDP dropped by more than 32% on
an annualized basis (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020, 2021). The United States economy has
improved significantly since this decline. Notwithstanding unprecedented fiscal policy to
reactivate the economy, notably the CARES Act enacted in late March 2020 and the
supplemental relief package in December 2020, both the level of economic activity and the level
of overall employment remain below their pre-pandemic peaks as of March 2021 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2021).

   While rising economic aggregates indicate an overall rebound in the U.S. economy, there is
significant heterogeneity in the composition of gains made, including important differences
across geography, race and socioeconomic status. Unemployment rates in New York, for
example, followed starkly different patterns than those in Utah. By May 2020, the
unemployment rate in New York City had soared to more than 20%, recovering to only 8.2% by
the end of the year (New York Dept. of Labor, 2021). By contrast, Utah experienced only a
short and modest increase in unemployment in May 2020 (peaking at just above 10%), and
closed the year with historically low levels of unemployment (below 4%) (Utah Dept. of
Workforce Services, 2021). Perhaps more saliently, the economic (and health) impact of the
COVID pandemic has been realized very unevenly across different races, education and income
levels. The black-white unemployment gap stood at 5.3 percentage points in June 2020, the
widest it had been in 5 years. Employment gains in the U.S. recovery appear to be coming more
slowly to Black adults. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Black unemployment rate hovered at
nearly double that of the white unemployment rate (9.9% vs. 5.8%), with the gap between them
narrowing only by just over 1 percentage point (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2021). The
pandemic likewise had a more direct impact on the employment and incomes of low-income
workers and neighborhoods. Multiple studies find that "low-wage workers in America have
suffered the worst economic pain of the pandemic" (Kinder and Ross, 2020). Unemployment

                                                                                                1
rates in lower-wage industries like retail and hospitality/leisure were especially high (ranging
from 17-39%). The least educated (those with less than a high school degree) confronted
unemployment at more than twice the rate of college graduates. Accounting for these significant
sources of variation is critical not only for understanding the ongoing impact of the pandemic but
also for targeting effective policy responses to craft an inclusive recovery.

   Entrepreneurship offers an important lens through which to view the response of individuals
to the pandemic, and also serves as a potential economic channel to alleviate the COVID-
induced recession. Founding a new enterprise, particularly amid an economic downturn and a
high level of uncertainty, reflects both a choice and a capability on the part of an individual: a
choice to seek an economic return and the ability to navigate an uncertain environment (Gans et
al, 2021). Assessing the dynamics of business formation as well as the nature and geography of
new firms founded can generate insight into the choices being made by individuals in response to
an unprecedented contraction of the economy. Such an analysis can also reveal opportunities for
catalyzing economic recovery. As a key foundation of economic dynamism, entrepreneurship
can play a pivotal role in a region's economic recovery. Though the dynamics and drivers of the
post-COVID economic recovery may be distinct relative to prior downturns, a wide body of
evidence demonstrates that new firm formation and growth are the central drivers of net
employment growth (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1996; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda,
2013). Greater understanding of the nature of new businesses founded during the pandemic and
the challenges these businesses face in terms of growth is vital for policymakers seeking to
leverage entrepreneurship as a pathway for economic recovery.

   A growing number of sources indicate that the dynamics and growth of entrepreneurship
over the course of 2020 was distinctive relative to prior economic downturns as well as other
top-level economic indicators. The U.S. Census Business Formation Statistics (BFS), the
Current Population Survey (CPS), and the Startup Cartography Project (SCP) all identified a
steep drop in new business formation at the onset of the pandemic (Fairlie, 2020; Buffington, et
al, 2020; Bartik et al, 2020; Haltiwanger, 2021, Fazio, et al, 2020), with declines in new business
registrations occurring much more rapidly and sharply and persisting for longer than those
observed during the 2008 financial crisis or even in the aftermath of 9/11. Surprisingly, data
from the BFS show applications for new IRS employer identification numbers (EIN) beginning

                                                                                                     2
to increase starting in May 2020, pointing toward a rapid rise in new business formation
(Buffington, et al, 2020; Dinlersoz, et al, 2021; Haltiwanger, 2021). As emphasized by
Haltiwanger (2021), the BFS documents a striking increase in both employer-oriented and non-
employer-oriented new EIN filings, with the rate of new filings actually increasing from an
average of 300,000 per month in 2019 to more than 500,000 in July 2020, alone. "The increase
from 2019 to 2020 in total application exceeds 20 percent which is double the rate in any other
year." (Haltiwanger, 2021, p. 17).

   The impact of the decline, recovery and acceleration in entrepreneurship in 2020 depends
critically not only on the aggregate level of new business formation but also on the geography
and nature of this entrepreneurship. For example, if the entrepreneurship increase observed in
the BFS was centered in a small number of existing hubs of entrepreneurship or already
prosperous economic areas, then the potential for this burst of entrepreneurship to attenuate the
disparities that have arisen across geography, socioeconomic status and race during the pandemic
is limited. Conversely, if the surge in startup formation is centered in communities that have
experienced a higher rate of discrimination or a lower level of income, the potential of
entrepreneurship to mitigate the larger economic contraction suffered there may be stronger. A
better understanding of the nature and geography of the distinct pattern of new firm formation in
2020 may surface opportunities for community investment and help to reduce barriers that have
historically contributed to inequality in entrepreneurship across race and socioeconomic status.

   The purpose of this paper is to assess, in a preliminary way, the changing geography and
nature of entrepreneurship in the wake of the pandemic and resulting policy responses. We
focus, first and foremost, on the microgeography of the upswing in startup formation observed in
the BFS and other data sources. We ask how the geography of entrepreneurship is changing
within urban areas and investigate the relationship between entrepreneurship and differences
across locations in terms of race and socioeconomic status. Next, we examine the link between
the patterns observed and the passage and implementation of the two major economic relief
packages in 2020 ­ the $2.3 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES)
Act and the $900 billion Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021 (Supplemental)--on
the geography of entrepreneurship. Together, these analyses provide a novel perspective on how



                                                                                                    3
the economic impact of policy response to COVID-19 shaped the geography of U.S.
entrepreneurship.

   Our approach builds on the methodology and extends the dataset of the Startup Cartography
Project (SCP; Andrews, et al, 2020). Based on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017), the SCP
combines state-level business registration records and a predictive analytics approach to provide
measures of both the quantity and quality (i.e., potential for growth) of entrepreneurship over
time and at an arbitrary level of geographic granularity. Specifically, while Andrews, et al
(2020) report SCP results covering 49 states and Washington D.C. from 1988-2014, and 46
states through 2016, this paper draws on new data of the entire population of new business
registration records in 2019 and 2020 for eight U.S. states comprising nearly 30% of GDP and
population. Relative to the BFS (which relies on administrative data created in the context of
applying for a Federal Tax Identification Number (or EIN)), state-level business registration is
the administrative procedure in which a new organization is formed as a legal entity, providing
protection from liability for the founders as well as the ability to divide equity and develop a
corporate governance structure. Importantly, for each business registrant, we are able to observe
the name of the business, its location, and the business registration type (e.g., partnership, LLC,
or corporation).

   We leverage these data to gain detailed insight into the changing geography and nature of
entrepreneurship over the course of 2020 compared to 2019. First, consistent with the evidence
from the BFS, we observe a dramatic decline in new business registrations between March and
April, 2020, followed by a significant rebound and expansion in new business registrations
compared to 2019. Overall, we find a more than 20% increase in new business registrations in
2020 compared to 2019. This overall increase masks significant heterogeneity across states in
the rate of change of startup formation: while Georgia records a more than 57% increase,
Washington State experiences only a 6% improvement over 2019. Second, improvements in the
rate of entrepreneurship vary considerably across the microgeography of cities. In New York
City, for example, Manhattan experienced a decline in entrepreneurship in 2020 relative to 2019,
while the Bronx and Brooklyn register significant improvement. Third, this changing geography
is associated with significant differences across neighborhoods in terms of race and
socioeconomic status. Most notably, across a wide range of specifications and control structures,

                                                                                                      4
ZIP Codes including a higher proportion of Black residents, and in particular higher median
income Black neighborhoods, are associated with higher growth in startup formation rates.
Finally, while neither the CARES Act nor the Supplemental Act included specific provisions
supporting new business formation, both are associated with an increase in new business
registration with marked differences across geographies. After each, we observe an increase in
the start-up formation rate, particularly in neighborhoods with a high median income and a high
proportion of Black residents.

   This granular assessment of the geography and nature of entrepreneurship provides an
opportunity to gain sharper insight into changing drivers of the choice to establish a new
business, the potential ways that entrepreneurship may serve as a source of dynamism, and the
ways that policy might be targeted to best support the survival and growth of new enterprises for
an inclusive economic recovery. Research has long documented the higher barriers faced by
minority owned firms to securing the financial and human capital needed to survive and grow
(e.g., Chatterji et al, 2011). Targeting support to these communities may be key to leveraging
entrepreneurship as a catalyst for economic recovery.

   II.     Entrepreneurship and the Geographic Demographic Divide

   Entrepreneurship is simultaneously a choice by an individual or founding team to pursue an
economic opportunity and a potential channel for economic development. Because the private
incentives to become an entrepeneur (which depend on the private returns to entrepreneurship
relative to the cost of establishing and growing a business) may be quite different than the social
value of entrepreneurship (through the creation of new products and services, new jobs and other
spillovers), gaps can arise between the privately chosen level of enterpreneurship and the socially
optimal level of entrepeneurship.

   This disjunction is important when considering the role of entrepreneurship in local econmic
development, and in particular how barriers to entrepreneurship shape the resulting geography of
entrepreneurship and the ways policies shape this response. On the one hand, as emphasized by
careful studies of net employment growth across a wide variety of contexts, esssentially all net
employment growth over the past forty years has been the result of the expansion of young firms
as they have grown over time (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1996; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and

                                                                                                      5
Miranda, 2013). Moreover, this growth is highly skewed, with a very small fraction of all new
establishments accounting for the entirety of employment and productivity growth (Decker, et al,
2014). But, almost by definition, the vast majority of the early growth of these young
organizations occurs in the locations where they were initially founded, and thus specifically
enhances opportunities for employment and productivity growth in that location (Feldman, 2001;
Guzman, 2018). Put another way, the value of entrepeneurship in economic development falls
disproportionately on communities and locations where such startup growth occurs (Moretti,
2012; Decker et al, 2016).

    While the growth outcomes of entrepreneurship are of course not random and depend
critically on the underlying entrepreneurial quality of a venture (Schoar, 2010; Hurst and
Pugsley, 2011; Guzman and Stern, 2015; Andrews, et al, 2020), 1 strong entrepreneurial
ecosystems that help firms establish themselves and scale are an important element of realizing
the social value of entrepeneurship. For example, even outside the context of the COVID crisis,
there are signficant differences across regions in the ability of a company of a given quality to
grow. For example, firms in the Bay Area are more than 400% more likely to grow than a
similar firm in an arbitrary location, and otherwise similar quality firms that move from an
arbitrary location to Silicon Valley receive a 4.5X boost to their growth probability from that
move (Guzman, 2018). One important consequence of the interplay between skewed growth
outcomes and regional variation in the strength of entrepreneurial ecosystems is the emergence
of a geographic economic divide: areas with strong entrepreneurial ecosystems are high-income,
host "good jobs", and exhibit other markers of advantaged socioeconomic status (Moretti, 2012).

    The promise of entrepreneurship as an engine of local economic development and social
progress amplifies the impact of barriers to entrepreneurship, particularly for individuals from
historically disadvantaged groups. Relative to the challenges of establishing and growing a
business that a white male entrepreneur with financial and social capital typically faces, there is
evidence that significant additional structural and systemic barriers obstruct both the founding


   1
     Indeed, a primary focus of the SCP is to integrate measures of the quantity of entrepreneurship with a predictive
analytics model that also allows for the estimation of entrepreneurial quality (Andrews, et al, 2020). As emphasized in our
work, the entrepreneurial quality distribution has historically been highly skewed (e.g., firms that register in Delaware and
obtain or apply for a patent within six months of founding are more than 8,000 times more likely to realize a significant
equity growth event than an average firm). However, given the impact of COVID on "Main Street" businesses, focusing not
only on quality but also on the quantity of entrepreneurship is likely to be important in the context of the current crisis.

                                                                                                                           6
and the growing of new businesses by people of color and those from disadvantaged
backgrounds. As summarized with careful detail and in a comprehensive literature review by
Bates (2011), minority-led businesses confront barriers to growth well beyond those faced by
their white counterparts. Most notably, potential Black entrepreneurs face less access to bank
finance (Bostic and Lampani, 1999; Fairlie and Robb, 2007; Bates, 2011, 2018; Fairlie et al,
2020), and so found businesses with less initial capital, with more personal debt, and at a scale
that limits their potential for growth and profitability. Moreover, racial discrimination in other
markets (such as the housing collateral market) can amplify any patterns of discrimination in
entrepreneurial finance (Atkins, 2020). These issues appear especially salient during the early
stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. As documented by Fairlie (2021), in March through May of
2020, individuals of color experienced the largest decreases in relative firm formation.

   While patterns of discrimination against minority entrepreneurs are significant and troubling
in their own right, they have an important impact on the establishment and growth of
entrepreneurship in terms of local economic development. Specifically, since entrepreneurship
is a channel for economic opportunity, discrimination aginst minority entrepreneurs has the
consequence of preventing communities with large minority populations from benefitting from
the potential promise of entrepreneur-led economic development. Put another way, because
discrimination against minority entrepreneurship lowers the returns to minority entrepreneurship,
the impact of that discrimination includes not only the private loss to the entrepreneur but also
the loss of social return to the community in which that entrepreneur lives.

   Yet, in sharp contrast to the long existing inequities in access to startup capital for Black
entrepreneurs, the period of 2020 saw two distinct areas of possible support for minority business
owners. First, 2020 was a period of robust social action to support Black business owners and
their communities. Precipitated by episodes of police brutality, the broad social movement of
Black Lives Matter was an affirmation to the social and economic presence of Black
communities across the United States, and created a social impetus where consumers and
services directly focused --at least performatively--on providing access and support for Black
entrepreneurs. Individuals sought to support Black owned businesses, and banks and other
financial institutions emphasized their commitment to them and their communities. Further, at an
individual level, the social affirmation from this movement could have resulted in increased self-


                                                                                                     7
determination, higher locus of control, and willingness to undertake risk within these
communities. Second, 2020 also included the $2.3 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the $900 billion Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021
(Supplemental). While neither the CARES Act nor the Supplemental Act were specifically
aimed at encouraging new business formation, both provided broad-based economic relief across
demographic and geographic lines that were independent of historical inequities in access to
entrepreneurial capital. All of these mechanisms and potentially others may be working against
the persistent racial inequalities in entrepreneurship, changing the incidence and overall trend of
Black entrepreneurship during the COVID recovery.

   The confluence of the COVID-19 pandemic and social action in 2020 highlights the
importance of understanding not only the overall aggregate impact of COVID on
entrepreneurship, but equally importantly how the pandemic has shifted the geography and
nature of entrepreneurship (particularly with respect to the rebound and overperformance in new
business formation relative to 2019). On the one hand, it is possible that the interplay between
lower economic impact (in terms of job loss) in higher-income and more white communities
actually has exacerbated pre-existing inequality, with the potential that strong entrepreneurial
communities are only getting stronger. On the other hand, it is possible that the combination of
increased awareness and activism to address historical inequities, alongside the economic
dislocations brought about by the pandemic, have provided new opportunities for minority
communities to pursue entrepreneurship. While an early analysis of the impact of the pandemic,
Fairlie (2021), finds that individuals of color experienced the largest decreases in relative firm
formation at the onset of the pandemic, this analysis only covers the first few months of 2020
(and did not separately exame the period associated with the rebound and boom in
entrepreneurhsip across the remainder of that year). Thus, to understand the impact of the
pandemic and broader social movements on new firm formation, we need to consider both the
overall level of entrepreneurship, as well as how, where, and under what conditions
entrepreneurship is changing. It is essential to assess the changing demographic geography of
entrepreneurship both to appreciate how individuals are responding to the pandemic and to
design and target policy for an inclusive economic recovery.




                                                                                                     8
    III.      Data 2

The Startup Cartography Project COVID Update

    This paper extends the SCP dataset, which leverages state-level business registration records
and predictive analytics to develop consistent metrics for the quantity, quality, and quantity-
adjusted quality of entrepreneurship covering 49 states and Washington D.C. from 1988-2014,
and 46 states through 2016, and made available at multiple levels of aggregation (see Andrews,
et al, 2020). One advantage of the use of state-level business registration records is that these
public records are created endogenously when an individual registers a new business as a
corporation, LLC or partnership. While it is possible to found a new business without business
registration (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial, and include
limited liability, various tax benefits, the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, and
credibility with potential customers. All corporations, partnerships, and limited liability
companies must register with a Secretary of State (or Secretary of the Commonwealth) in order
to take advantage of these benefits: the act of registering the firm triggers the legal creation of
the company. As such, these records reflect the population of businesses for which an individual
seeks to establish a formal organization separate from themselves in order to pursue some form
of economic opportunity. Concretely, our analysis draws on the complete population of firms
satisfying one of the following conditions: (a) a for-profit firm in the local jurisdiction or (b) a
for-profit firm whose jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in the local
state. In other words, our analysis excludes non-profit organizations as well as companies whose
primary location is not in the state (e.g., companies that are founded in one state but then register
in a second state as part of an expansion into that state-level market).

    We gather data from eight U.S. states that make these business registration records available
on a timely and cost-effective basis. Our dataset includes all registrations through February 2021
for Georgia, Kentucky, New York, Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, and Washington; and all
registrations through the end of December 2020 for Florida. Each record includes the name of
the company, the date of filing, the legal address for that company, the form of corporate



   2
     Some language in this sections draws on Andrews, et al (2020) (which itself draws on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017).
Please see Andrews, et al (2020) for a complete discussion (and more complete references) concerning the use of state-level
business registration records, and the ability to link these records with other datasets, including firm-level growth outcomes.

                                                                                                                             9
governance, and in some states (or for particiular forms of organization) the names of the
principal owners of the organization. The current analysis specifically leverages three elements
of these data: the date of incorporation, the precise street address (including ZIP Code), and the
form of corporate governance. It is useful to note the distinction between the three forms of
corporate governance. On the one hand, LLC/Partnerships are the most straightforward form of
corporate governance providing limited liability protection (in the case of an LLC) and tax
advantages with a minimal level of ongoing administrative paperwork burden. Corporations on
the other hand impose a more onerous administrative burden (and less tax flexibility). Finally,
Local Delaware Corporations involve significant additional upfront expenses (requiring a
separate registration in Delaware) but enable companies to take advantage of a more consistent
body of corporate law governing Delaware corporations that is often preferred by external
investors such as venture capitalists or investors in public stock offerings.

       We limit our core analysis to business registrations in 2019 and 2020 across these eight
states. The summary statistics are reported in Table 1A. We observe more than 2.8 million
business registrations. 82% of these firms are limited liability companies or partnerships
registered under local jurisdiction (Local LLC or Partnership), 16% of firms are corporations
registered under local jurisdiction (Local Corporations), 1.4% of firms are local corporations
registered under Delaware jurisdiction (Delaware Corporations) and 0.5% LLCs or partnerships
under Delaware corporations (Delaware LLC or Partnership).

ZIP Code (ZCTA) Measures and Summary Statistics

       After examining these data over time in aggregate and at the state level, the core of our
analysis focuses on the changing geography of entrepreneurship in the wake of the COVID
pandemic. To detect the geography of entrepreneurship in a granular fashion that nonetheless
allows us to capture differences across locations in a consistent way, we focus our geographic
analysis at the ZIP Code (ZCTA) level. 3 Specifically, for each of the 6734 ZCTA in our dataset,


   3
     Zip Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTA) are generalized area representations of USPS Zip Code service areas (United States
Census, https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/zctas.html). While standard ZIP Codes
represent geographic areas with well-defined geographical boundaries, ZIP Code boundaries potentially changed over time,
and also there are ZIP Codes for PO Boxes, military, and large customers. To fix ZIP Code boundaries over time, we rely
on the 2015 Zip Code to ZCTA crosswalk by the HRSA UDS mapper (https://www.udsmapper.org), which contains 41251
unique ZIP Codes, the correspondent ZCTAs, the type of ZIP Code, city and State. All but two ZIP Codes in the SCP were
matched using the cross walk (which were then assigned manually).

                                                                                                                     10
 we construct several core measures: # Ventures 2019, # Ventures 2020, and supplementary
 measures that only record the number of new business registrations from May 1 to December 31
 in each year. The purpose of these latter measures is to capture the level of entrepreneurship
 registered within a ZCTA after the first wave of the pandemic and lockdowns. Overall, the
 average level at the ZCTA level for # Ventures 2019 is 107, with an increase to an average of
 145 in 2020. These ZCTA level measures are highly variable (the standard deviation in 2019 is
 196 and 280 in 2020). We then calculate a measure, Startup Growth Ratio, which is simply the
 level of entrepreneurship within a given ZCTA in 2020 compared to the average level of
 entrepreneurship in that region across 2019 and 2020.

                                                  # Ventures 2020
=
StartupGrowthRatio (                                                           - 1) *100          (1)
                                       1
                                         (# Ventures 2019 + # Ventures 2020)
                                       2

 This measure captures the relative increase in the number of new business registrations in a
 given ZCTA. Overall, the average level of Startup Growth Ratio is 12 (with a standard deviation
 of 23) for a measure over the entire year, with an average level of 7 for the measure of increase
 that only accounts for the period between May and December of each year.

    We then include a set of ZCTA characteristics, drawn from the 2017 American Community
 Survey (ACS) Demographic and Housing Estimates (which are themselves projections from the
 2010 Census) to examine the relationship between entrepreneurship and various measures of the
 locational characteristics of these ZCTA. These measures include density (Persons per square
 mile), racial demographics (Population, Proportion of People of Hispanic Origin, Proportion of
 People of Black Origin) and socioeconomic differences (Proportion of People with Bachelor's
 Degree or Higher, Proportion of People with Income Below Poverty Level, Median Income,
 Proportion of Owner Occupied Housing, and Proportion of Population Working Age). Means
 and standard deviations for each of these measures are reported in Table 1B. We observe ample
 variation across ZIP Codes in these measures throughout our eight states. For example, the
 average proportion of non-Hispanic Black in our ZIP Codes is 9.4% (close to the national
 average), but the standard deviation of our measure is 16 percentage points. Similar patterns are
 observable, amongst others, for the proportion of Hispanics, with a mean of 14.5 and a standard




                                                                                                  11
deviation of 20, and of the proportion with bachelor's degree, with a mean of 25 and a standard
deviation of 17.

   IV.     The Dynamics of State-Level Business Registrations: 2020 vs. 2019

Overall Trends

   Our analysis begins in Figure 1A where we simply document the number of new business
registrations in 2019 (dashed line) and 2020 (solid line) on a week-by-week basis. There was a
modest overall downward trend in new business registrations across 2019 (with occasional
spikes for weeks that include holidays such as Thanksgiving). Prior to the pandemic, the week-
by-week match in start-up formation through the first nine weeks of 2019 and 2020 is striking
(ending Friday, March 6, 2020). New business registration then takes a sharp downturn (relative
to 2019) over the course of the next three weeks in 2020, with the new registrations falling to
57% of prior-year levels in the 11th week of 2020 (and ending Friday, March 27, 2020). There is
then a steady rebound in new firm filings through the middle of May, after which point the rate
of new business registrations in 2020 climbs to nearly 50% above that recorded in 2019. In the
week ending July 1, 2020, new business registrations peak across the eight states we observe,
with 37,008 new firms registered, the highest level of business registration recorded in a one-
week span within these states. Figure 1B illustrates the cumulative consequence of these weekly
dynamics, recording the difference between 2020 and 2019 business registrations across the
eight states in our dataset over time. While there is a sizeable decline during the onset of the
pandemic (reaching a net drop of 32,360 new registrations by April 29), the cumulative
difference in new business registrations across the two years turns positive on the week of June
24th, and then continues to climb through the close of 2020. Ultimately, across the 8 states,
2020 records 250,000 more new business registrants than those observed in 2019. This
represents an improvement in 2020 of 21% over the 2019 baseline recorded. The striking
patterns in Figure 1 are very different from the dynamics associated with prior economic and
societal disruptions such as the period surrounding September 11, 2001 or the onset of the Great
Recession in November, 2008 (see Fazio et al, 2020 for these graphs). In response to both of
these prior crises, new business registrations declined by a much smaller magnitude and then
returned to prior levels much more quickly. Moreover, the recovery in the rate of new firm



                                                                                                   12
formation was not followed by any surge beyond prior year registrations, let alone the 21%
increase we observe in the wake of the pandemic. (Fazio et al, 2020).

   We next examine the link between these patterns and the passage and implementation of the
$2.3 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act and the $900 billion
Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021 (Supplemental). As background, the CARES
Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, with $1200 relief checks being issued during the
week of April 15, 2020. The Supplemental Act was signed into law on December 27, 2020, with
smaller relief checks of $600 being issued during the week of December 30, 2020. Throughout
our analysis, we examine patterns of new business formation relative to these key dates.

   In Figure 1C, we include vertical lines that correspond to the date of the passage of the
CARES Act and the date of check issuance, and then plot weekly new business registrations in
the windows around these dates for 2019 and 2020. We see that passage and implementation of
the CARES Act corresponds to the reversal of the downturn that began in the first week of
March 2020. Moreover, the issuance of stimulus checks seems to be associated with a
reinforcement of the rebound and presages a transition a few weeks later towards a sustained
surge in new business registrations beyond 2019 levels. A similar pattern is observable in
relation to the Supplemental Act in Figure 1D, where we see a pronounced increase in new
business registrations corresponding almost exactly with passage of the Supplemental Act and
issuance of the second round of stimulus checks.

   The correlation between the two economic relief packages and the observed trends in new
firm formation relative to 2019 is striking. While the largest economic relief acts in U.S. history,
neither the CARES Act nor the Supplemental Act was specifically aimed at encouraging new
business formation. Instead, the CARES and Supplemental Acts included a wide range of
measures providing immediate relief to individuals and businesses, with targeted efforts towards
buoying existing small businesses through lockdowns and reduced capacity restrictions.
Specifically, the CARES and Supplemental Acts together supported a broad suite of relief
measures, including $460 billion in economic impact payments (stimulus checks) directly to
individual taxpayers, over $600 billion in forgivable small business loans for payroll, rent and
utilities, $500 billion in loans and generous tax credits for corporations, significant extensions of
unemployment benefits, rental assistance and moratoriums on evictions, and $340 billion in

                                                                                                   13
support for state, local and tribal government. Essentially, these packages were meant to extend a
"safety net" under existing businesses and individual employees, with the hope of slowing the
tidal wave of closures and providing income security to individuals in the midst of mass layoffs
and dramatically increased economic uncertainty. The patterns we observe seem to suggest that
the two Acts achieved impact beyond the policy that they were designed to serve.

   The overarching patterns evident across Figure 1C, for example, is consistent with the idea
that this legislation had a ripple effect that worked not only to stabilize existing businesses but
also to spark new business dynamism. Put another way, these broad patterns are in line with a
simple (essentially Keynesian) economic model in which the CARES and Supplemental Acts
both stimulated demand (and so led to more optimistic expectations about the economic future)
and also reduced capital constraints on individuals (particularly those from lower-income
backgrounds, where capital constraints are more likely binding).

   Type of Corporate Form Associated with New Business Registrations.

   We next examine the nature of this robust expansion in entrepreneurship by assessing the
type of corporate form associated with 2020 new business registrations. Similar to Figure 1,
Figure 2 records the week-by-week registrations of new businesses in each state, but divide them
into three categories: LLC/Partnerships, Corporations, and Delaware Corporations. As
discussed earlier, LLC/Partnerships are more likely to be local "Main Street" businesses,
Corporations are more likely to be scalable local enterprises, and Local Delaware Corporations
are the most likely to be associated with founding teams that have the ability to scale beyond the
local market -- potentially through external investment. While Delaware Corporations maintain
a level similar to 2019, both LLC/Partnerships and Corporations experience more dramatic initial
declines followed by a rebound and period of expansion. Notably, new registrations for
Corporations converge back to 2019 levels by early fall 2020. LLC/Partnerships, on the other
hand, experience a more sustained boom over the remaining course of 2020. These "Main
Street" registrations both drive the initial rebound in the spring and account for the bulk of the
year-over-year expansion between 2019 and 2020.




                                                                                                      14
Differences Across States.
   We build on these patterns by exploring differences across states in Figure 3A, examining
cumulative net registrations in each state. Every state registers a decline during the onset of the
pandemic, and every state also experiences a rebound and expansion so that their 2020
cumulative total is well above their 2019 totals. With that said, both the degree of the decline
and the extent of the recovery varies considerably across states. For example, among the eight
states we observe, New York suffers the most dramatic and immediate decline on a percentage
basis, a finding consistent with the early widespread outbreak of COVID in the New York area
in March, 2020. By contrast, both the decline and recovery in Vermont were much more modest
(perhaps reflecting the lower impact of COVID on Vermont). Georgia, on the other hand,
registers only a minor decline and then experiences a very significant and sustained expansion in
new business registrations over the course of 2020: Georgia business registrations increase by
82,627, an improvement of more than 57%. Moreover, as seen in Figures 3B and 3C, while the
magnitude of differences vary, the same overarching trends across time and distinct correlation
between economic relief packages and increases in startup formation are evident across all seven
states for which we have data. The relationship for the CARES Act is particularly notable since
the change in trend after the Act holds across states with different levels of initial drop in
entrepreneurship, different COVID infection rates, and different levels of local restrictions
around this window.

   These state-level findings hold three complementary implications. First, these data, drawn
from state-level business registration records, are consistent with the broad patterns documented
in the BFS, even though the BFS is itself calculated from a separate source of administrative data
(i.e., Federal tax identification number applications rather than business registrations). Second,
the overall similar pattern in the Startup Growth Ratio across these eight states (which
themselves vary considerably in their population, density, political orientation and the like),
suggests that the expansion in entrepreneurship is a fairly broad-based phenomenon that is not
exclusively concentrated in one region or state. The pattern observed thus does not seem to be a
response to a particular state-level program. Moreover, the fact that the rebound and expansion
in the Startup Growth Ratio is led by new businesses organized as partnerships and LLCs (and
not those registering in Delaware) suggests that this broad-based improvement in
entrepreneurship reflects a higher number of new "Main Street" businesses rather than firms with

                                                                                                   15
more national or global ambitions from the outset. Finally, despite similar overarching trends in
the direction of change of the Startup Growth Ratio over the course of 2020, there are noticeable
differences across states, both in terms of the depth of the decline and the extent of the
expansion. Identifying the drivers of this variation is important both to better understand the
factors fueling this upswing in entrepreneurship, and to enable effective targeting on the part of
policymakers and other institutions nurturing the growth of new ventures. Accordingly, we now
turn in a more granular way to the microgeography of the changing dynamics of
entrepreneurship.

The Impact of COVID on the Microgeography of Entrepreneurship

   To explore the impact of COVID on the microgeography of entrepreneurship, we draw on
the ZCTA-level dataset including the rate of new business formation for 6,734 ZIP Codes in
2019 and 2020. Our analysis proceeds in two stages. First, we focus on a purely descriptive but
informative analysis of the changing patterns of entrepreneurship within specific geographic
regions (primarily individual cities). We then turn to a more systematic analysis of the impact of
differences across ZCTAs in terms of race and socioeconomic status.

   We begin with New York City. Figure 4A presents the overall pattern of business
registrations in New York City. As the first large metropolitan area in the United States hit by
the pandemic, New York City's experience may have been exacerbated due to the high level of
negative health outcomes (infection, hospitalization, and mortality), the high level of uncertainty,
and the imposition of strict social and economic lockdowns. Relative to the broad patterns
observed in Figure 1, the reduction in business registration at the onset of the pandemic is
striking: there is a more than 67% decrease between the week of March 2 and the week of April
1, 2020. The recovery in business registrations is also impressive. The rate of business
registrations over July, 2020 in New York City is 45% above the rate recorded in 2019.

   Diving more deeply, we see that this overall pattern across New York City masks a
surprising level of heterogeneity across different areas within it. As indicated in Figures 4B-4F,
the Bronx experienced a persistent increase in new business registrations relative to 2019 for the
remainder of the year. Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island also experienced a sharp decline and
rebound, but did not realize the same level of sustained improvement in entrepreneurship through
the end of the year. In contrast to the outer boroughs, while the initial decline in 2020 new

                                                                                                   16
business registrations in Manhattan relative to 2019 was of a similar magnitude, and that area of
the city then recovered to historical levels, there was no longstanding period during 2020 where
Manhattan outperformed its 2019 record of business registrations.

   These dynamics are captured even more vividly in Figures 5A and 5B, which document the
value of the Startup Growth Ratio for each ZIP Code in New York City (Figure 5A) and the New
York City metropolitan area (Figure 5B). For each ZIP Code-month, the color indicates the
relative value Startup Growth Ratio (the relative change between 2019 and 2020 for that month
and ZIP Code), with darker blues indicating a negative value, neutral colors indicating no
change, and darker oranges indicating more positive increases.

   While January is characterized by areas of improvement and decline (presumably due to
random month-by-month variation), a sharp decline is experienced by nearly every ZIP Code
across New York City during the month of April. A "summer recovery" then emerges in the
Startup Growth Ratio that is concentrated in The Bronx, Harlem, and areas of southern Brooklyn
such as Canarsie and neighborhoods in Eastern New York such as Jamaica. Perhaps not
surprisingly, given the near-total decline in airline travel, the Startup Growth Ratio for the ZIP
Code encompassing JFK Airport remains persistently in a strong negative position throughout
the summer. However, relative to traditional patterns of business dynamism in New York
(where Manhattan historically plays an especially important role), Manhattan lags in
improvement, and Midtown and Lower Manhattan never experience a sustained period in new
business registrations above their 2019 levels. This observed geographic variation is quite
nuanced. For example, where South Harlem (a largely Black community) experiences a
persistent boom after April, the adjacent Upper West Side (which has a much lower proportion
of Black residents) never sees an improvement in new business registration relative to 2019.
These nuanced trends are repeated when we expand our analysis to the entire New York City
metro region. For example, while the entirety of Long Island experiences the sharp decline and
rebound in new firm formation relative to 2019, the expansion appears concentrated more
sharply in the more racially diverse southern suburbs of Long Island such as Brentwood and
Central Islip rather than areas with less diverse populations such as Great Neck.

   We extend this descriptive analysis in Figures 6A-F, where we examine these dynamics in
more condensed form for key cities within our sample, including Atlanta, Houston, and southern

                                                                                                     17
Florida. As indicated in Figures 6A and B, Atlanta experienced only a modest decline in business
registrations in April (and there are indeed a mix of both positive and negative values for Startup
Growth Ratio across ZIP Codes), followed by an almost uniformly positive increase in new
business registrations by July 2020. This increase in the Startup Growth Ratio is much larger in
ZIP Codes south of the center of Atlanta, including neighborhoods such as College Park and East
Point. Overall, by the end of 2020, the Atlanta region records more than a 56% increase in new
business registrations relative to 2019. The pattern in Houston (Figures 6C and D) captures
some similar dynamics, where there is a more modest initial decline (relative to New York) and
then a steady increase in the rate of new firm formation relative to 2019. In Houston, sharper
increases in the Startup Growth Ration are concentrated in the outer rings of the metro area
(potentially suggestive of the de-densification effects of the pandemic). Finally, while Southern
Florida experiences a sharp decline in the Startup Growth Ratio in April (Figure 6F), the strength
of its July increase is centered in the more diverse Miami region as opposed to areas with a more
uniform white population such as Naples, Florida.

The Changing Demographic Geography of Entrepreneurship
   These descriptive patterns (in conjunction with similar exercises for other cities and regions
throughout our sample) surface the significant heterogeneity across regions that together
comprise the overall increase in new business registrations documented across various data
sources. Moreover, this descriptive evidence dispels perhaps the simplest hypothesis that might
follow from the observed surge in U.S entrepreneurship in 2020 relative to 2019 ­ that increases
in Startup Growth Ratio would be associated with traditional hubs of business dynamism in a
region. As well, it highlights important characteristics of neighborhoods exhibiting the greatest
increases in relative entrepreneurship. Many ZIP Codes experiencing the most rapid growth in
entrepreneurship include areas with more diverse populations and a large historical Black or
Hispanic population in particular. Motivated by these observations, we turn to a more systematic
analysis relating the Startup Growth Ratio to zip-code level measures of demographic difference.

   We begin in Table 2 and Figure 7 by examining a set of univariate correlations between a
wide range of demographic characteristics and the Startup Growth Ratio. A number of
observations stand out. First, though there has been an active debate over the degree to which
the COVID pandemic would result in the reallocation of economic activity to less dense areas,


                                                                                                 18
the coefficient on density (Person per square mile) is actually positive though insignificant.
Second, and perhaps most strikingly, there is a quantitatively and statistically large univariate
correlation between the Proportion Non-Hispanic Black in a ZIP Code and the Startup Growth
Ratio. In contrast, the coefficient on Proportion Hispanic Origin is both an order of magnitude
smaller in scale (despite having similar means and standard deviations) and statistically
insignificant. Third, consistent with the potential of liquidity in entrepreneurship (particularly
during an economic crisis), there is a significant and quantitatively large positive coefficient on
Ln(Median Income). Finally, there is a negative correlation on Proportion Bachelor's Degree or
Above.

   There are two potential challenges to the intriguing, yet unstructured, patterns documented in
Table 2 and Figure 7. First, the demographic measures we examine are themselves correlated
with each other. Accounting for the full set of demographic characteristics will provide sharper
insight into the precise factors associated with the overall increase in the Startup Growth Ratio.
Second, both the timing and severity of the pandemic varied considerably across the eight states
within our sample, and these eight states vary considerably in terms of their underlying
demographics. As such, it is important that we control not only for potentially confounding
demographic characteristics but also more general variation across different regions included in
our sample. We address these concerns by implementing a set of regressions that simultaneously
include the full set of demographic measures drawn from the ACS as well as a full set of leading
three-digit or leading four-digit ZCTA fixed effects. In other words, in the four-digit ZCTA
fixed effect specifications, we are only leveraging variation within the nine adjacent ZIP Codes
that share the same first four digits (e.g., 1178 would include ZIP Codes 11780 through 11789,
all of which are in western Suffolk County, New York). Standard errors are clustered at the state
level to account for potential spatial correlation in the error terms.

   The main results are presented in Table 3. The first column reports regression coefficients
for our specification, without including fixed effects. The patterns that we observe throughout
our descriptive analysis are already apparent in this model. The coefficient for Proportion Non-
Hispanic Black is positive and significant with a value of 0.32. Controlling for other
characteristics, ZIP Codes with a ten percentage point higher proportion of non-Hispanic Black
people saw a 3.2% higher increase in entrepreneurship. Similarly, a standard deviation increase


                                                                                                     19
in this variable (15 percentage points) implies an increase of 4.8%, a value that is economically
meaningful. A few other variables are also statistically significant, but with a coefficient that is
an order of magnitude smaller relative to its standard deviation. We proceed to incorporate our
regional controls in columns (2) and (3), by also including the 3-digit and 4-digit ZIP Code fixed
effects, respectively. Our results appear quite consistent, leading to the same conclusions. Using
column (3) as our most stringent specification, the coefficient for Proportion Non-Hispanic
Black is attenuated slightly to 0.23. All other coefficients have smaller magnitudes and are not
statistically significant. These results highlight the importance of the presence of a Black
population in predicting regional entrepreneurship response at a microgeographic level.

   In Column (4), we develop this result further by considering only the recovery phase from
COVID--rather than the whole year--and excluding from our dependent variable the months of
January to April, where most of the (heterogeneous) initial negative impact is concentrated. Our
coefficient for non-Hispanic Black is slightly higher and more precise, with a value of 0.32.
More importantly, we now observe more precision in several other variables that may also be
correlated with COVID response, even if at lower magnitudes. Proportion Hispanic Origin has
a statistically significant magnitude of 0.07, implying an increase of 10 percentage points in this
variable increases post pandemic entrepreneurship by 0.7%. Interestingly, and in contrast to the
common correlations in the literature, the relationship of education (Proportion with Bachelor's
Degree or Above) is negative and significant, as is Proportion of Working Age Population,
though the coefficients for both are relatively small. Understanding the extent to which these
additional variables also predict COVID response, besides the presence of non-Hispanic Black
and income, is one avenue for our future work.

   We then study in columns (5) and (6) the way in which these two variables interact to
consider whether it is Black neighborhoods with the higher or lower income ZIP Codes that
experienced the rise we observe in entrepreneurship. We de-mean our independent variables to
allow the main effect of our regression to be estimated at the mean. The interaction for each is
positive and significant, with coefficients of 0.06 for column (5) and 0.07 for column (6). This
implies that for each one log-point increase in the median income, the relationship between total
entrepreneurship increase and proportion of Black population strengthens by 0.06 points. That is,
it is the Black high income neighborhoods where the response was most substantial.


                                                                                                   20
   Finally, we present in Appendix Table A1 a series of robustness tests for our results. Column
(1) replicates our main specification using the total count of firms in 2020 minus 2019 as the
dependent variable. The coefficient of 2.88 for Proportion of Non-Hispanic Black is significant.
It implies an average increase of 2.88 firms for each percentage point increase in the share of
non-Hispanic Black people in a ZIP Code. Given a mean of this variable of 41, and standard
deviation of 117, this effect is economically meaningful. Columns (2) and (3) are regressions
that put directly the log of firms in 2020 as the dependent variable. Column (2) includes the log
number of 2019 firms as a control, while column (3) is the log difference between 2020 and 2019
as the dependent variable. The impact of Log(Proportion of Non-Hispanic Black) is positive and
significant. The coefficient suggests doubling the proportion of non-Hispanic Black people leads
to a 4.8% increase in the total number of firms in 2020. Column (4) considers only ZIP Codes
that have at least 10 firms in 2019 to avoid small sample issues, and column (5) includes fixed-
effects for CBSA rather than 3-digit ZIP Codes. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively
the same as our main effect in Table 3.

   Together, our results document a series of important relationships in the incidence of new
firm formation during the COVID pandemic. Three key results stand out. First, while the overall
level of new business registrations increases across all eight states, there is significant
heterogeneity across states. Whereas Georgia records a 57% increase in startup formation
relative to 2019, Washington State experiences only a 6% improvement. Second, improvements
in the rate of entrepreneurship vary considerably across the microgeography of cities. In New
York City, while Manhattan experienced a decline in entrepreneurship relative to 2019, the
Bronx and Brooklyn register significant improvement. Finally, this varied geography of the
rebound in new firm formation is associated with significant differences across neighborhoods in
terms of race and socioeconomic status. Most notably, across a wide range of specifications and
control structures, ZIP Codes including a higher proportion of Black residents, higher median
incomes, and higher median income Black neighborhoods are associated with higher growth in
startup formation rates.




                                                                                                   21
   The Relationship between Economic Relief Packages and the Changing Demography of
Entrepreneurship

   We next undertake more detailed regression analysis of the relationship between the CARES
and Supplemental Acts and the dynamics of the geography of entrepreneurship. We begin by
constructing a dataset of new business starts at the ZIP Code (ZCTA) level on a weekly basis for
2019 and 2020 from seven states (Georgia, Kentucky, New York, Tennessee, Texas, Vermont
and Washington). We then regress the number of new business registrations (the "Startup
Formation Rate" or SFR (Andrews, et al, 2020)) on an OLS regression including week fixed
effects, year fixed effects, ZIP Code fixed effects, and Federal holiday fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. We calculate the week-by-week coefficients
corresponding to the weeks just before and after the passage of CARES and Supplemental Acts
(setting the baseline at five weeks prior to the passage of each policy). We complete this
analysis both in levels and in log plus 1 (to gauge relative effects) first for the CARES Act
(Figures 8 and 9), and then for the Supplemental Act (Figures 10 and 11).

   Figures 8A and 9A plot the coefficients of this regression. Consistent with the earlier
aggregate analysis, we observe a meaningful drop in total entrepreneurship during COVID that is
then reversed after the passage of the act, helping to stabilize this segment of the economy. The
level of new business formation falls more than 40% in the four weeks prior to passage of the
CARES Act. The overall rate of new business formation rebounds to nearly 2019 levels within
two weeks of the issuance of relief checks in mid-April.

   We go on to examine the relationship between the CARES Act and the geographic
demography of entrepreneurship. Specifically, in Figures 8B and 9B, we report the week-by-
week coefficients of our model run only on the subsample of ZIP Codes with the highest and
lowest percentage of Black residents (those in the top and bottom 25% of the distribution). We
observe three key interrelated findings. First, the Startup Formation Rate declined more
precipitously prior to the passage of the CARES Act in predominantly Black neighborhoods.
Second, passage of the CARES Act is linked to a reversal and rebound in both Black and non-
Black neighborhoods. Third, and notably, however, in the period subsequent to the issuance of
checks, a rebound and surge in entrepreneurship is seen in Black neighborhoods, but not non-
Black neighborhoods. And, the increase in SFR in Black neighborhoods persists for the

                                                                                                   22
remainder of 2020). Within 12 weeks after the CARES Act, predominantly Black
neighborhoods registered approximately a 30% increase in SFR relative to 2019.

   We then examine variation in the geographic demography of these dynamics in the SFR by
comparing high- and low-income neighborhoods (Figures 8C and 9C). Similar to our earlier
analyses, we separate out the coefficients associated with high-income versus low-income zip
codes on a week-by-week basis relative to passage of the CARES Act. On the one hand, low-
income neighborhoods register very little impact of the pandemic and policy response ­ the rate
of new business formation does not change by more than 5% with the onset of the pandemic, or
with the passage and implementation of the CARES Act. In contrast, the SFR in high-income
zip codes plummeted at the onset of the pandemic (with a decline of more than 50% relative to
2019 in the four weeks prior to the passage of the CARES Act), followed by a rebound and surge
to more than 20% above 2019 levels (which persists for the remainder of 2020).

   Finally, we combine these two findings to examine specifically the dynamics observed in
predominantly Black high-income neighborhoods (Figures 8D and 9D). Specifically, we
construct the week-by-week coefficients for zip codes that are simultaneously in the top 25% in
terms of Black population share and also in the top 25% of median income. The results are
striking: the weeks prior to the CARES Act are associated with a steeper decline in startup
formation and the weeks after the CARES Act are associated with a steeper rebound and
subsequent surge. The decline in startup formation in Black high-median-income neighborhoods
was more than 50% in the weeks prior to the passage of the CARES Act. In these same
neighborhoods, startup formation rates had risen to 50% above 2019 levels by 12 weeks after the
passage of the CARES Act.

   Next, using the same methodology, we implement a simple regression analysis that allows us
to capture the changing level of the SFR in the weeks preceding and subsequent to the
Supplemental Act. Specifically, Figures 10 and 11 examine the relationship between the passage
and implementation of this legislation and the changing geographic demography of
entrepreneurship. Notably, relative to the precipitous decline observed prior to the CARES Act
(the result of the pandemic, lockdowns and social distancing), the trend in the weeks prior to the
Supplemental Act is effectively flat (if anything, there is a very small downward trend).
However, with the passage of the Supplemental Act, we observe an 8% additional improvement

                                                                                                23
in the SFR within two weeks of passage (relative to the first weeks of 2020), and this effect is
again concentrated in neighborhoods with a high fraction of Black residents, high median
incomes, and high-income Black neighborhoods. Overall, this second set of findings suggests
that the particular shifts observed during 2020 may have longer-lasting implications for the
overall geography and geographic demography of entrepreneurship going forward.

   V.      Conclusions

   As a leading economic indicator, new firm formation rates can signal recession, stagnation or
growth. Changes in the rate and geography of startup formation during times of crisis can
surface potential paths to economic recovery and targeted priorities for policy. This paper
leverages our unique dataset of business registration records to further investigate the observed
startup surge over the course of the COVID pandemic and to add a new layer of granularity to
the wave of recent scholarship around this important phenomenon. Building on our prior work,
we provide several new views of startup formation in 2020 that help to decompose observed
trends by both entrepreneurial quantity and quality as well as by geography. Looking at the
startup surge through these lenses yields several interesting observations and surfaces important
insight for both local and federal policy.

   Across all eight states, the road to recovery appears to be through "Main Street." Rebound
and expansion in startup formation is being led by new businesses formed as LLCs and
partnerships ­new businesses that generally rely on debt financing (as opposed to venture
capital) to grow. Federal programs making low-interest loans available for fledgling firms is
likely to be fundamental in converting the entrepreneurial potential of the 2020 increase in new
firm formation into economy-wide growth.

   The microgeography of the 2020 surge in startup formation likewise yields important insights
for policy. Increases in the Startup Growth Ratio are not associated with traditional hubs of
business dynamism in regions across the country, but instead centered in areas with a higher
Black population. In metro regions from New York City to Houston to Atlanta, communities
with a greater percentage of Black residents are experiencing larger relative increases than other
areas in startup formation. Though our analysis is not causal, it is useful to note that the federal
relief payments, and their uniform distribution (independent of eligibility criteria), may have
played a role in enabling new firm formation in Black neighborhoods which might otherwise

                                                                                                    24
have been constrained by discrimination. Moreover, given the unequal historical access to
capital, talent and markets for minority business enterprises (MBE; Bates, 2011), bias in the
allocation of critical entrepreneurial inputs may hinder the United States' ability to fully realize
potential economic gains associated with the 2020 surge in new business formation. Put another
way, the changing geography of entrepreneurship during 2020 highlights the importance of MBE
growth in economic recovery. Indeed, initiatives like BE NYC (Black Entrepreneurs NYC)
launched in 2019 are aimed at increasing Black entrepreneurship by bringing access to capital,
business background, reliable resources, customers, affordable workspaces and networking to
Black-owned businesses. 4 The knowledge, networking and market access that such initiatives
can bring to fledgling firms may complement more blunt federal policies by increasing access to
capital.

      More generally, the 2020 boom in new firm formation is significant in its magnitude,
composition, and varied geography. By adding new lenses to our view of the 2020 surge in
startup formation and examining how those patterns are linked with the federal relief legislation,
our analysis offers insight for federal and state policy. Initiatives aimed at encouraging an
inclusive recovery may benefit from identifying and reducing barriers to new business formation.




  4
      https://www1.nyc.gov/site/sbs/businesses/black-entrepreneurs-nyc.page

                                                                                                   25
References

Andrews, R.J., et al (2020). "The Startup Cartography Project," Working Paper.

Atkins, R. (2020). "Homeownership, Home Equity, and Black-Owned Business Starts." Academy
    of Management Annual Meeting Proceedings.

Bartik, A., et al (2020). "The Impact of COVID-19 on Small Business Outcomes and
    Expectations." Proceedings of the National Academies of Science. 117 (30): 17656-17666.

Bates, T. (2011). "Minority Entrepreneurship," Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship.
    7(3-4).

Bostic, R.W., and K. P. Lampani (1999). "Racial Differences in Patterns of Small Business
    Finance: The Importance of Local Geography," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Buffington, C., et al (2020). "Measuring the Effect of COVID-19 on U.S. Small Businesses: The
    Small Business Pulse Survey," US Census Working Paper CES-20-16.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020).Gross Domestic Product, 2nd Quarter 2020 (Advanced
    Estimate) and Annual Update. Url: https://www.bea.gov/news/2020/gross-domestic-product-
    2nd-quarter-2020-advance-estimate-and-annual-update Accessed on March 7th, 2021.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021). The Employment Situation ­ February 2021. Url:
    https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/empsit.pdf Accessed on March 7th, 2021.

Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., and S. Schuh (1996). Job creation and destruction. MIT Press.

Decker, R., et al (2014). "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic
    Dynamism." Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3): 3-24.

Decker, R., Flaeen, A., and M.D. Tito (2016). "Unraveling the Oil Conundrum: Productivity
    Improvements and Cost Declines in the US Shale Oil Industry" Working Paper.




                                                                                              26
Dinlersoz, E., Dunne, T., Haltiwanger, J., and V. Penciakova (2021). "Business Formation: A
    Tale of Two Recessions." Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 21-01.

Fairlie, R. (2020). "The Impact of COVID19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence from the First
    Three Months after Widespread SocialDistancing Restrictions." Journal of Economics &
    Management Strategy. 29(4): 727-740

Fairlie, R. (2020). "COVID-19, Small Business Owners, and Racial Inequity". NBER Reporter,
    2020(4). URL https://www.nber.org/reporter/2020number4/covid-19-small-business-
    owners-and-racial-inequality Accessed on March 11th, 2021.

Fairlie, R. and A. Robb (2007). "Why are Black-Owned Businesses Less Successful than White-
    Owned Businesses? The Role of Families, Inheritances, and Business Human Capital,"
    Journal of Labor Economics 25(2): 289-323.

Fairlie, R., Robb, A., and D. Robinson (2020). "Black and White: Access to Capital Among
    Minority-Owned Startups" NBER Working Paper.

Fazio, C., Guzman, J., and S. Stern (2020). "New Business Needs a Big Rescue, Too" Forbes.
    URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/columbiabusinessschool/2020/04/24/new-business-needs-
    a-big-rescue-too/ . Accessed on April 30, 2021.

Feldman, M.P. (2001). "The Entrepreneurial Event Revisited: Firm Formation in a Regional
    Context." Industrial and Corporate Change. 10. 861-891.

Gans, J.S., Scott, E., and S. Stern (2021). Entrepreneurship: A Strategic Approach. Manuscript
    draft.

Guzman, J., and S. Stern (2015). "Where is Silicon Valley?" Science 347(6222): 606­9.

Guzman, J., and S. Stern (2017). "Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and
    Performance," in Haltiwanger, J.C., Hurst, E., Miranda, J., and A. Schoar (Eds.), Measuring
    Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges. University of Chicago
    Press.

                                                                                                 27
Guzman, J. (2018). "Go West Young Firm: Agglomeration and Embeddedness in Startup
    Migrations to Silicon Valley." SSRN Working Paper 3175328.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., and J. Miranda (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large
    versus Young." The Review of Economics and Statistics. 95(2):347-361

Haltiwanger, J. (2021). "Entrepreneurship During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Evidence from the
    Business Formation Statistics" Working Paper.

Hurst, E., and B. Pugsley (2011). "What Do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity 43(2): 73-142.

Kinder, M. and M. Ross. 2020. "Reopening America: Low-wage workers have suffered badly
    from COVID-19 so policymakers should focus on equity." The Brookings Institution:
    Metro's COVID-19 Analysis.

Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

New York Department Of Labor. NYS Unemployment Rate Falls to 8.2% in December 2020.
    URL:https://labor.ny.gov/stats/pressreleases/pruistat.shtm#:~:text=In%20December%202020
    %2C%20the%20statewide,from%205.7%25%20to%205.9%25. Accessed on March 7th,
    2021.

Schoar, A. (2010). "The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship," in
    Innovation Policy and the Economy 10: 57-81.

Utah Dept. of Workforce Services (2021). Utah's Employment Summary: December 2020. URL:
    https://jobs.utah.gov/wi/update/press/pdfs/ratedec20.pdf




                                                                                            28
Figure 1A
Figure 1B
                                                            Figure 1C

                                    Count of New Firm Foundings Around CARES Act
               25000
  10000 15000 20000
Number of new firms
               5000




                                         CARES Act Signed        CARES Checks Issued
               0




                                    -5                  0                5                           10                     15

                                                             2020                        2019



                                                            Figure 1D

                                        Count of New Firm Foundings Around
                                    Consolidated Appropiations Act (Second Stimulus)
5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
    Number of new firms




                                                                                     Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                                                     (Signed and checks issued)
               0




                               -6              -4           -2                   0                        2                 4

                                                             2020                        2019
                                                                                                                                                             Figure 2
                                                                                                        Local Delaware Corporations                                                                                                                         Corporations
                                          100                                                                                                                                                                   6000




                                                                                                                                                                      Number of New Firms Registered Per week
Number of New Firms Registered Per week




                                          80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                4000
                                          60


                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000

                                          20


                                                School and Restaurant                                   First                                              Second                                                      School and Restaurant     First                                               Second
                                            0               Closures                                    Stimulus Checks                             Stimulus Check                                                 0               Closures      Stimulus Checks                              Stimulus Check


                                           01jan2020                                            01apr2020                 01jul2020    01oct2020           01jan202                                               01jan2020              01apr2020                 01jul2020      01oct2020          01jan202

                                                                                                           2019 Firms                 2020 Firms                                                                                                   2019 Firms                    2020 Firms




                                                                                                                                                         LLCs and Partnership
                                                                                               40000
                                                     Number of New Firms Registered Per week




                                                                                               30000



                                                                                               20000



                                                                                               10000



                                                                                                    0         School and Restaurant
                                                                                                                          Closures
                                                                                                                                                   First
                                                                                                                                                   Stimulus Checks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Stimulus Check

                                                                                                  01jan2020                           01apr2020                       01jul2020                                                                01oct2020                          01jan202

                                                                                                                                                     2019 Firms                                                                                2020 Firms
                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3A

                                                          Cumulative Difference in Number of Local Registrations. 2019 to 2020
                                                                                          FL                                                                                                         GA                                                                                                                            KY




                                                                                                                                      20000 40000 60000 80000
-20000 0 20000 40000 60000 80000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
   Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019




                                                                                                                                  Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019
                                                                                                                                  0
                    01jan2020                                       01apr2020          01jul2020        01oct2020     01jan2021                       01jan2020                     01apr2020     01jul2020             01oct2020   01jan2021                             01jan2020                          01apr2020       01jul2020         01oct2020    01jan2021


                                                                                          NY                                                                                                         TN                                                                                                                            TX




                                                                                                                                      2000 4000 6000 8000 10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20000 40000 60000
                                15000
   Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019




                                                                                                                                  Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019
          -5000 0 500010000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
     -10000
-15000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -20000
                                                                                                                                   0




                    01jan2020                                       01apr2020          01jul2020        01oct2020     01jan2021                       01jan2020                     01apr2020     01jul2020             01oct2020   01jan2021                             01jan2020                          01apr2020       01jul2020         01oct2020    01jan2021


                                                                                          VT                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                  10000
            200 400 600 800
  Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019




                                                                                                                                    Cumulative Difference 2020 - 2019
                                                                                                                                               0        5000
       0




                                                                                                                                  -5000
-200




                    01jan2020                                       01apr2020          01jul2020        01oct2020     01jan2021                       01jan2020                     01apr2020     01jul2020             01oct2020   01jan2021




                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3B
                                                                                                                      COVID Startup Evolution by State
                                                                                                                               CARES Act
                                                                                               GA                                                                                                   KY                                                                                                                     NY
                                         2000 4000 6000 8000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1000 2000 3000 4000
                                                                                                                                                200 400 600 800
                                        Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                               Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Number of new firms




                                                                    CARES Act Signed       CARES Checks Issued                                                                 CARES Act Signed   CARES Checks Issued                                                                              CARES Act Signed      CARES Checks Issued
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                               -5                  0             5               10        15                                             -5                  0         5                  10        15                                                       -5                  0            5               10          15


                                                                                               TN                                                                                                   TX                                                                                                                     VT
                                                                                                                                                2000 4000 6000 8000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                        200 400 600 800 1000
                                        Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                               Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Number of new firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CARES Act Signed      CARES Checks Issued
                                                                    CARES Act Signed       CARES Checks Issued                                                                 CARES Act Signed   CARES Checks Issued
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                               -5                  0             5               10        15                                             -5                  0         5                  10        15                                                       -5                  0            5               10          15


                                                                                            WA
                                         1000 2000 3000 4000
                                        Number of new firms




                                                                    CARES Act Signed       CARES Checks Issued
                                                  0




                                                               -5                  0             5               10        15




                                                                                                                                                                                    2020                                            2019
                                                                                                                         Figure 3C

                                                    COVID Startup Evolution by State
                                            Consolidated Appropriations Act (second stimulus)
                                            GA                                                                                       KY                                                                               NY
 2000 4000 6000 8000




                                                                                                             1500




                                                                                                                                                                                 1000 2000 3000 4000
Number of new firms




                                                                                         Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                                                                 Number of new firms
                                                                                            500     1000
                                                                                                                                          Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021                                             Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                          (Signed and checks issued)                                                       (Signed and checks issued)
                                                  Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                             -6   -4   -2                         2 issued)
                                                 0(Signed and checks                4                               -6   -4     -2        0               2                 4                          -6   -4   -2        0               2                 4


                                            TN                                                                                       TX                                                                               VT
                    1500




                                                                                                                                                                                  50 100 150 200 250
                                                                                          2000 4000 6000 8000
Number of new firms




                                                                                         Number of new firms




                                                                                                                                                                                 Number of new firms
   500     1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                  Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021                                                    Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021                                             (Signed and checks issued)
              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                  (Signed and checks issued)                                                              (Signed and checks issued)

                             -6   -4   -2        0                2                 4                               -6   -4     -2        0               2                 4                          -6   -4   -2        0               2                 4


                                            WA
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
  Number of new firms




                                                  Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                  (Signed and checks issued)

                             -6   -4   -2        0                2                 4




                                                                                                                         2020                                          2019
Figure 4A
Figure 4B
                                                                                  Figure 4C

                                                      Staten Island Business Registrations by Week. 2019-2020.
                                          150
Number of New Firms Registered Per week




                                          100




                                          50




                                            0 School and Restaurant
                                                          Closures
                                                                       First
                                                                       Stimulus Checks
                                                                                        Restaurants Open for
                                                                                        Outside Seating
                                                                                                                                Second
                                                                                                                         Stimulus Check
                                           01jan2020            01apr2020            01jul2020               01oct2020          01jan2021

                                                                             2019 Firms                    2020 Firms
Figure 4D
Figure 4E
Figure 4F
Figure 5A
Figure 5B
Figure 6A
Figure 6B
Figure 6C
Figure 6D
Figure 6E
Figure 6F
Figure 7
                                                                                                                                         Figure 8


                                                                 COVID 19 Pandemic Onset and the Impact of the CARES Act
                                                                                         A. All ZIP Codes                                                                                                               B. Across ZIP Code Black Population Share




                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                       4




                                                                                                                                                  Number of New Firms per ZIP Code
Number of New Firms per ZIP Code




                                                                           CARES Act Signed
                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CARES Act Signed
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                       -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CARES Checks Issued
                                                                                                      CARES Checks Issued




                                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -8   -7    -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                  7   8   9   10 11 12
                                       -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weeks to CARES Act Signature
                                                  -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                     7   8   9   10 11 12
                                                                                     Weeks to CARES Act Signature                                                                                                       Highest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (top 25%)
                                                                                                All ZIP Codes                                                                                                           Lowest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)


                                                                           C. Across ZIP Code Median Income                                                                                                  D. For High Income and High Black Population ZIP Codes




                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                            10




                                                                                                                                                  Number of New Firms per ZIP Code
Number of New Firms per ZIP Code




                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                            5




                                                                           CARES Act Signed




                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CARES Act Signed

                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                            -5




                                                                                                     CARES Checks Issued
                                                                                                                                                                                         -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CARES Checks Issued
                                            -10




                                                  -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                   7      8   9   10 11 12                                                    -8   -7    -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                  7   8   9   10 11 12
                                                                                     Weeks to CARES Act Signature                                                                                                                       Weeks to CARES Act Signature

                                                                           Highest Median Income ZIP Codes (top 25%)                                                                                                          High Income & High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                                           Lowest Median Income ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)                                                                                                        All ZIP Codes




                                                                                                                                         Figure 9

                                                                 COVID 19 Pandemic Onset and the Impact of the CARES Act
                                                                                 Log Number of Firms
                                                                                         A. All ZIP Codes                                                                                                               B. Across ZIP Code Black Population Share
                                                                                                                                                        Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)
      Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)




                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                       .2




                                                                           CARES Act Signed                                                                                                                                   CARES Act Signed
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                       -.2
                                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CARES Checks Issued
                                                                                                                                                                                         -.5




                                                                                                      CARES Checks Issued

                                                                                                                                                                                                   -8   -7    -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                  7   8   9   10 11 12
                                       -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Weeks to CARES Act Signature
                                                  -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                     7   8   9   10 11 12
                                                                                     Weeks to CARES Act Signature                                                                                                       Highest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (top 25%)
                                                                                                All ZIP Codes                                                                                                           Lowest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)


                                                                           C. Across ZIP Code Median Income                                                                                                  D. For High Income and High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                                                                                                                        Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)
      Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                       .4




                                                                           CARES Act Signed
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CARES Act Signed
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                       -.2
                                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.5




                                                                                                     CARES Checks Issued                                                                                                                                CARES Checks Issued
                                       -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                  -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                   7      8   9   10 11 12                                                    -8   -7    -6   -5    -4   -3   -2   -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                  7   8   9   10 11 12
                                                                                     Weeks to CARES Act Signature                                                                                                                       Weeks to CARES Act Signature

                                                                           Highest Median Income ZIP Codes (top 25%)                                                                                                          High Income & High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                                           Lowest Median Income ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)                                                                                                        All ZIP Codes
                                                                                                                                   Figure 10


                                                           Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021
                                                                         (second stimulus)
                                                                        A. All ZIP Codes                                                                                                              B. Across ZIP Code Black Population Share




                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                       1.5




                                                                                                                                         Number of New Firms per ZIP Code
Number of New Firms per ZIP Code




                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                       -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021




                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Signed and checks issued)

                                                                                        Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021                                                              -5     -4     -3             -2       -1         0                  1            2               3   4
                                       -1




                                                                                        (Signed and checks issued)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Weeks to Stimulus Act
                                                 -5   -4    -3     -2      -1         0           1            2               3     4
                                                                        Weeks to Stimulus Act                                                                                                         Highest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (top 25%)
                                                                                All ZIP Codes                                                                                                         Lowest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)


                                                             C. Across ZIP Code Median Income                                                                                                  D. For High Income and High Black Population ZIP Codes




                                                                                                                                               Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)
                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                       4
Number of New Firms per ZIP Code




                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021



                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Signed and checks issued)


                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                        Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                                                        (Signed and checks issued)
                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                       -2




                                                 -5   -4    -3     -2      -1         0           1            2               3     4                                                    -5     -4     -3             -2       -1         0                  1            2               3   4
                                                                        Weeks to Stimulus Act                                                                                                                                Weeks to Stimulus Act

                                                             Highest Median Income ZIP Codes (top 25%)                                                                                                    High Income & High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                             Lowest Median Income ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)                                                                                                  All ZIP Codes




                                                                                                                                   Figure 11


                                                           Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021
                                                                         (second stimulus)
                                                                                                           Log Number of Firms
                                                                                                                                               Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)




                                                                        A. All ZIP Codes                                                                                                              B. Across ZIP Code Black Population Share
      Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)
                                       .15




                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                       .05




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                       -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Signed and checks issued)
                                                                                        Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                                                        (Signed and checks issued)
                                       -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                          -5     -4     -3             -2       -1         0                  1            2               3   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Weeks to Stimulus Act
                                                 -5   -4    -3     -2      -1         0           1            2               3     4
                                                                        Weeks to Stimulus Act                                                                                                         Highest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (top 25%)
                                                                                All ZIP Codes                                                                                                         Lowest Black Population Share ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)
      Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)




                                                                                                                                               Log(Number of New Firms per ZIP Code +1)




                                                             C. Across ZIP Code Median Income                                                                                                  D. For High Income and High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                       -.1




                                                                                        Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021                                                                                                                    Consolidated Appropiations Act, 2021
                                                                                        (Signed and checks issued)                                                                                                                              (Signed and checks issued)
                                       -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                                 -5   -4    -3     -2      -1         0           1            2               3     4                                                    -5     -4     -3             -2       -1         0                  1            2               3   4
                                                                        Weeks to Stimulus Act                                                                                                                                Weeks to Stimulus Act

                                                             Highest Median Income ZIP Codes (top 25%)                                                                                                    High Income & High Black Population ZIP Codes
                                                             Lowest Median Income ZIP Codes (bottom 25%)                                                                                                  All ZIP Codes
                                                        TABLE 1A

             Variable Definition and Summary Statistics ­ Core Business Registration Data

      Variables                                                             Source              Mean     Std. Dev.
Business Registration
Local corporation                                              Startup Cartography Project        0.16       0.38


Local LLC or partnership                                       Startup Cartography Project        0.82       0.36


Delaware corporation                                           Startup Cartography Project      0.014        0.12


 Delaware LLC and partnerships                                 Startup Cartography Project     0.0005        0.07


                           Total number of states                                                    8
                           Total number of business registrations                            2,824,748
                                                  TABLE 1B
                           Variable Definition and Summary Statistics ­ ZCTA Data

       Variables                                                  Source               Mean     Std. Dev.
Outcome Variables
 Startup Growth Ratio between 2019 and 2020,         Startup Cartography Project      12.111      23.017
full year

  Startup Growth Ratio between 2019 and 2020,        Startup Cartography Project       7.205      21.166
from May to December

Business Registration Measures
 Number of business registrations in 2019            Startup Cartography Project      106.91      196.16


 Number of business registrations in 2020            Startup Cartography Project      145.22      280.92

Demographic Measures
 Persons per square mile                             ACS Demographic and Housing       5.277       2.318
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Proportion Hispanic origin                          ACS Demographic and Housing       14.51       20.36
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Proportion non-Hispanic Black                       ACS Demographic and Housing       9.387       15.71
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Proportion Bachelor's Degree or Above               ACS Demographic and Housing       24.98       16.84
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Proportion Below Poverty Level                      ACS Demographic and Housing       15.71       10.77
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Proportion of owner occupied houses                 ACS Demographic and Housing       70.55       18.21
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)


 Share of Working Age Population                     ACS Demographic and Housing       66.76       7.918
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Ln(Median Income)                                   ACS Demographic and Housing       7.540       1.682
                                                     Estimates (2013-2017)

 Population in 2019                                  ACS Demographic and Housing    13,750.18   17,270.76
                                                     Estimates (2019)

                           Total number of ZCTA                                        7,307
                                                    TABLE 2
                    Local ZIP Code Characteristics and May-Dec Increase in Entrepreneurship

                                                    Coefficients                    R2                  Observations
Persons per square mile                                0.523                       0.003                   6947
                                                      (0.457)

Proportion non-Hispanic Black                        0.326***                      0.058                    6947
                                                     (0.0509)

Proportion Hispanic origin                             0.0224                      0.000                    6947
                                                      (0.0309)

Proportion Bachelor's Degree or Above                 -0.103*                      0.006                    6945
                                                      (0.0376)

Share of Working Age Population                       -0.00849                     0.000                    6947
                                                      (0.0608)

Proportion Owner Occupied Housing                     -0.0911*                     0.006                    6926
                                                      (0.0307)

Ln(Median Income)                                         1.342*                    0.010                   6929
                                                         (0.468)
  OLS univariate regressions. The dependent variable is Startup Growth Ratio from May to December in 2020 compared to 2019 in
  each ZIP Code. Standard errors clustered by state.
  *
    p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
                                                          TABLE 3
                        Local ZIP Code Characteristics and Increase in Entrepreneurship with Controls

                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)                 (6)
                               Startup Growth      Startup Growth      Startup Growth       Startup       Startup Growth      Startup Growth
                              Ratio (Full Year)   Ratio (Full Year)   Ratio (Full Year)   Growth Ratio   Ratio (Full Year)   Ratio (Full Year)
Proportion non-Hispanic           0.317***            0.245***            0.231***         0.334***          0.202***            0.186***
Black
                                  (0.0646)            (0.0377)            (0.0514)          (0.0367)         (0.0392)            (0.0529)

Proportion Hispanic origin        0.00607              0.0434              0.0397          0.0685**           0.0486              0.0446
                                  (0.0198)            (0.0398)            (0.0498)         (0.0268)          (0.0411)            (0.0504)

Ln(Median Income)                   0.967              0.939               1.280             1.232            0.491               0.827
                                   (0.599)            (0.706)             (1.249)           (0.915)          (0.724)             (1.264)

Proportion non-Hispanic                                                                                     0.0603***           0.0672***
Black # Ln(Median Income)
                                                                                                             (0.0113)            (0.0148)

Persons per square mile             -0.295             0.211               0.317             -0.237           0.177               0.289
                                   (0.548)            (0.287)             (0.387)           (0.169)          (0.286)             (0.385)

Proportion Bachelor's            -0.0691**            -0.0595*            -0.0642           -0.0514          -0.0502*            -0.0542
Degree or Above
                                  (0.0239)            (0.0270)            (0.0394)          (0.0282)         (0.0246)            (0.0364)

Proportion Below Poverty           0.0112             0.00522             0.00258           -0.0189          0.00337             0.00173
Level
                                  (0.0497)            (0.0371)            (0.0532)          (0.0306)         (0.0382)            (0.0533)

Proportion Owner Occupied         0.0442*              0.0287              0.0183           0.0205            0.0260              0.0130
Housing
                                  (0.0219)            (0.0167)            (0.0170)          (0.0237)         (0.0160)            (0.0143)

Share of Working Age              0.00499             -0.0346             -0.0178           -0.0909*         -0.0323             -0.0167
Population
                                  (0.0411)            (0.0428)            (0.0389)          (0.0413)         (0.0408)            (0.0372)

Log(Population)                     0.295             0.0788               -0.235            0.467            0.595               0.274
                                   (0.756)            (0.942)             (1.426)           (0.751)          (0.997)             (1.520)

First 3 ZIP Code F.E.                No                 Yes                  No               Yes              Yes                  No

First 4 ZIP Code F.E.                No                  No                 Yes               No                No                 Yes

Constant                                 Yes              No                No                No               No                  No
Observations                            6919             6914              6774              6638             6914                6774
R2                                      0.068           0.124              0.284             0.151            0.128               0.289
      OLS Regression. Standard errors clustered by state.
      *
        p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
                                                                  APPENDIX

                                                        Table A1
                             Local ZIP Code Characteristics and Increase in Entrepreneurship.
                                                  Corporations Only
                                   (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                 (5)
                             Bus. Reg 2020 ­     Log(Bus. Reg. 2020)   Log(Bus. Reg. 2020/    Startup Growth      Startup Growth
                             Bus. Reg. 2019                              Bus Reg 2019)       Ratio (Full Year)   Ratio (Full Year)
                                                                                             Dropping small
                                                                                                ZIP Codes
Proportion non-Hispanic          2.877**                                                         0.324***            0.258***
Black                            (0.880)                                                         (0.0228)            (0.0461)

Log(Proportion of Non-                                0.0484**              0.0336**
Hispanic Black)                                       (0.0144)              (0.0136)

Log(Business Reg. 2019)                               0.611***
                                                      (0.0416)

Proportion Hispanic origin        0.129              -0.000950              -0.000229            0.0876**             0.0182
                                 (0.209)             (0.000959)            (0.000598)            (0.0310)            (0.0302)

Ln(Median Income)                12.45**              0.257***               0.0104              -1.903               0.939
                                 (4.894)              (0.0550)              (0.0185)             (1.718)             (0.736)

Persons per square mile         3.287***               0.0158*               0.00292             0.726*               0.132
                                (0.847)               (0.00752)             (0.00298)            (0.378)             (0.362)

Proportion Bachelor's             0.168              0.00447***            -0.00332***            -0.0472           -0.0678**
Degree or Above                  (0.275)             (0.00105)             (0.000798)            (0.0249)            (0.0269)

Proportion Below Poverty        -0.854**              0.00177*              0.00130             -0.0995***            0.0162
Level                            (0.321)             (0.000853)            (0.000716)            (0.0262)            (0.0421)

Proportion Owner                  0.322              -0.000485              -0.000355             0.0360             0.0483**
Occupied Housing                 (0.174)             (0.000865)            (0.000737)            (0.0254)            (0.0176)

Share of Working Age             -0.178               0.000158              -0.00225*             -0.0634            -0.0144
Population                       (0.243)              (0.00192)             (0.00108)            (0.0478)            (0.0424)

Log(Population)                   5.282                0.138*                0.0291               0.936              -0.0770
                                 (3.134)              (0.0633)              (0.0185)             (2.008)             (0.771)

First 3 ZIP Code F.E.             Yes                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  No

MSA                               No                       No                 No                   No                  Yes
Observations                     6638                     5610               5610                 4485                6915
R2                               0.503                    0.954              0.158                0.311               0.096
    OLS Regression. Standard errors clustered by state.
    *
      p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
