                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AIR POLLUTION AND ADULT COGNITION:
                           EVIDENCE FROM BRAIN TRAINING

                                        Andrea La Nauze
                                       Edson R. Severnini

                                       Working Paper 28785
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28785


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Karen Clay, and seminar/conference participants at the Australian National University,
Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, Lumos Labs, Inc., and the University of
Adelaide for invaluable comments and suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the University of Pittsburgh and the Heinz College at Carnegie Mellon University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrea La Nauze and Edson R. Severnini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Air Pollution and Adult Cognition: Evidence from Brain Training
Andrea La Nauze and Edson R. Severnini
NBER Working Paper No. 28785
May 2021
JEL No. I14,I24,J24,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

We exploit novel data from brain-training games to examine the impacts of air pollution on a
comprehensive set of cognitive skills of adults. We find that exposure to particulate matter
(PM2.5) impairs adult cognitive function, and that these effects are largest for those in prime
working age. These results confirm a hypothesized mechanism for the impacts of air pollution on
productivity. We also find that the cognitive effects are largest for new tasks and for those with
low ability, suggesting that air pollution increases inequality in workforce productivity.


Andrea La Nauze
Level 6, Colin Clark Building
Brisbane, QLD 4072
Australia
a.lanauze@uq.edu.au

Edson R. Severnini
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
ersevernini@gmail.com
                                          I.   Introduction

Besides being harmful to human health,1 exposure to air pollution is detrimental to human
capital formation,2 and labor productivity.3 In principle, these detrimental effects may be
the result of a decline in cognitive skills such as attention, memory, speed of information
processing, and problem solving. To date, however, data availability has been a particular
obstacle to this line of research (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013). As such, prior studies have
focused on secondary measures of cognition using scholastic achievement, or coarse measures
of performance in cognitively-demanding settings. The accumulated evidence therefore arises
either from school-age groups, or from a limited set of specific sites, industries and tasks.
Yet, when impacts are heterogeneous such studies may fail to identify effects relevant to the
broader population (Hsiang, Oliva and Walker, 2019).
       In this study, we overcome these challenges by examining the impacts of air pollution
exposure on direct measures of cognitive performance using Lumosity brain games over the
period 2015-2017. Lumosity is a widely-used, freely available online platform offering games
aiming at improving attention, memory, flexibility, speed of processing, and problem solving.
It takes scientifically-validated tasks and turns them into games that are accessible to any
age or skill level. Through an agreement with Lumos Labs, Inc., we obtained access to
proprietary user-level data for each play across seven games, totaling over 4.6 million user-
play observations. These detailed data allow us to exploit daily variation in fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) within a 3-digit ZIP code area to identify the effects of air pollution on a
comprehensive set of cognitive domains across different age groups and levels of cognitive
   1
     See, for example, Chay and Greenstone (2003); Currie and Neidell (2005); Currie and Walker (2011);
Graff Zivin and Neidell (2013); Currie et al. (2014, 2015); Schlenker and Walker (2016); Deschenes, Green-
stone and Shapiro (2017); Deryugina et al. (2019).
   2
     See, for example, Currie et al. (2009); Sanders (2012); Miller and Vela (2013); Ham, Zweig and Avol
(2014); Stafford (2015); Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth (2016); Bharadwaj et al. (2017); Marcotte (2017); Austin,
Heutel and Kreisman (2019); Chen (2019); Shehab and Pope (2019); Gilraine (2020); Roth (2020); Heissel,
Persico and Simon (Forthcoming); Persico and Venator (Forthcoming).
   3
     See, for example, Graff Zivin and Neidell (2012, 2013); Hanna and Oliva (2015); Chang et al. (2016);
Heyes, Neidell and Saberian (2016); Fu, Viard and Zhang (2017); Meyer and Pagel (2017); Archsmith, Heyes
and Saberian (2018); Chang et al. (2019); He, Liu and Salvo (2019); Adhvaryu, Kala and Anant (2020);
Huang, Xu and Yu (2020).


                                                    1
ability in the U.S. population. Due to data limitations, previous studies have focused on
adverse effects on the young and the elderly, overlooking the working-age population.
      There are two well-known challenges to identifying causal impacts of pollution exposure.
First, ex-post pollution exposure is not random: for example, individuals may sort into
residential areas in part based on environmental quality (e.g., Chay and Greenstone, 2005;
Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008). Our identification relies only on short-term changes in pollution
exposure within an individual's play history. Second, there may be important disconnections
between where individuals live and work and where pollution is measured, leading to serious
measurement error issues (e.g., Moretti and Neidell, 2011). Inspired by Deryugina et al.
(2019), we address this concern by instrumenting for daily PM2.5 concentrations using daily
changes in local wind direction. Our instrument is an indicator variable for whether the
daily local wind direction is at the direction associated with the maximum potential for the
transport of pollutants from other locations. The exclusion restriction is that, after flexibly
controlling for many fixed effects and climatic variables, changes in an area's daily wind
direction have no direct effect on performance in brain games except through their influence
on air pollution.
      Our IV estimates indicate that exposure to PM2.5 at levels above 25µg/m3 reduces stan-
dardized scores in brain games by approximately 0.18 standard deviations. The threshold is
the World Health Organization (WHO) air quality guideline value for 24-hour exposure to
PM2.5, but still 10µg/m3 below the U.S. National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
for PM2.5 over 24 hours. The estimated effect has meaningful implications for the U.S. popu-
lation: it is equivalent to a reduction of 5.8 percentiles in the distribution of scores reweighted
to match the characteristics of the population.4 Across the seven cognitive domains consid-
ered by Lumosity and included in our analysis, the effects on memory are strongest but there
is suggestive evidence that problem solving may also be affected. Furthermore, the results
appear to be substantially larger for individuals in prime working age ­ those under the age
  4
    To construct this distribution, for each game, Lumosity resample from their user base to match age,
gender and education of the US population from the 2010 U.S. Census.


                                                  2
of 50. Taken together, these findings suggest that occupations that require memory and
problem solving may be more affected by PM2.5.
   The results also indicate important heterogeneity by experience and cognitive ability.
The adverse effects of PM2.5 are stronger in the first five times that individuals play the
Lumosity games. On the other hand, there does not appear to be any difference in the
impacts on the performance of more experienced players. The effects also tend to be more
detrimental for individuals in the lower quintiles of the distribution of cognitive ability, as
implied by their initial performances in the games. Overall, these patterns suggest that air
pollution may increase inequality by affecting the acquisition of skills, and by furthering the
divide between low- and high-skilled individuals.
   This study makes two main contributions to the literature. First, it opens up the black
box regarding the effects of air pollution on cognitive function, shedding light on poten-
tial mechanisms behind prior findings on the impacts on scholastic achievement and labor
productivity (e.g., Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth, 2016; Archsmith, Heyes and Saberian, 2018;
Chang et al., 2019; Heissel, Persico and Simon, 2020). It also helps understanding the some-
times mixed results from different industries and occupations (e.g., Chang et al., 2016, 2019;
He, Liu and Salvo, 2019; Huang, Xu and Yu, 2020).5 This is accomplished with a relatively
large sample of individuals across many locations, likely enhancing external validity relative
to most previous settings, which are from a single facility or a handful of them. The closest
paper to ours is Bedi et al. (2021), which also examines the impact of PM2.5 on various
cognitive domains, but their sample consists of 464 students from a university in Brazil who
engaged in 54 lab sessions over a 3-year period.
   The second contribution relates to the potential role of pollution in furthering inequal-
ity in health, education, and labor market outcomes. One dimension of inequality arises
from disproportionate exposure to pollution, as documented by the environmental justice
literature (see reviews by Banzhaf, Ma and Timmins, 2019a,b). Another dimension may be
   5
     The estimated impact on memory may also provide a mechanism behind the causal effect of sustained
exposure to PM2.5 on dementia among the Medicare population (Bishop, Ketcham and Kuminoff, 2018).


                                                  3
disproportionate impacts (Hsiang, Oliva and Walker, 2019). Here we provide evidence that
even under similar levels of pollution, low-skilled and less-experienced individuals might be
more affected by PM2.5. These findings highlight the potential for environmental insults to
exacerbate the gaps observed in health, education, and labor market outcomes.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents background
information on cognitive ability and brain training, and the adverse effects of pollution.
Section III introduces our conceptual framework underlying mechanisms through which pol-
lution may affect cognitive function, including biological channels and behavioral responses.
Section IV describes the data sources and summary statistics, and Section V presents the
empirical strategy, focusing on our instrumental variable approach. Section VI reports and
discusses the main findings, including robustness checks. Lastly, Section VII concludes.


                                     II.   Background


                          A.   Air pollution and cognitive function

There is growing evidence that exposure to air pollution is associated with impaired cognitive
functions at all ages (e.g., Kilian and Kitazawa, 2018; Paul et al., 2019; Schikowski and
Altug, 2020). The adverse effects of particulate matter (PM) on the nervous system may
be a result of a direct route to the brain or stimulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines via
an indirect route. PM has implications for oxidative stress, inflammation, dysfunction of
cellular organelles, as well as the disturbance of protein homeostasis, promoting neuron loss
and exaggerating the burden of central nervous system (Allen et al., 2017; Wang, Xiong and
Tang, 2017). Acute exposure to PM can also alter properties of glutamate receptors that
are critical to neuronal plasticity and memory processes (Davis et al., 2013).
   Older adults living in areas with higher PM2.5 concentrations have been shown to expe-
rience worse cognitive function even after adjustment for community- and individual-level
social and economic characteristics. In a landmark study, Ailshire and Crimmins (2014) an-


                                              4
alyzed data from the 2004 Health and Retirement Study, a large, nationally representative
sample of U.S. adults aged 50 years or older, and found that the association is strongest
for the episodic memory component of cognitive function. PM2.5 has also been associated
with greater declines in immediate recall and new learning in a recent study involving older
females enrolled in both the Women's Health Initiative Study of Cognitive Aging and the
Women's Health Initiative Memory Study of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Younan et al.,
2019). Using quasi-random variation in pollution exposure due to the EPA's 2005 designa-
tion of nonattainment counties for PM2.5, Bishop, Ketcham and Kuminoff (2018) analyzed
fifteen years of Medicare records on 6.9 million U.S. residents over age 65 to estimate the
causal impact of particulate matter on dementia. They found that a 1µg/m3 increase in av-
erage decadal exposure causally increases the probability of receiving a dementia diagnosis
by 1.3 percentage points, or 6.7% of the mean.
   There is also evidence that cognitive function in younger individuals is affected by expo-
sure to particulate matter. Air pollution shocks have been shown to reduce student perfor-
mance from elementary school to college (e.g., Miller and Vela, 2013; Stafford, 2015; Eben-
stein, Lavy and Roth, 2016; Roth, 2020). In the study closest to ours, Bedi et al. (2021)
examined the impact of short-term exposure to fine particulate matter on the cognitive
performance of students from a large university in Brazil. Exploiting plausibly exogenous
variation in indoor pollution across 54 lab sessions over a 3-year period with 464 students,
they found that high levels of PM2.5 reduce performance on a fluid reasoning test, but were
underpowered to detect effects on other cognitive domains such as simple attention, com-
plex attention, arithmetic processing speed, and working memory. Regarding the overall
adult population, Zhang, Chen and Zhang (2018) analyzed data from a nationally repre-
sentative longitudinal survey in China, and found that long-term exposure to air pollution
impedes cognitive performance in verbal and math tests. They also documented that the
effect on verbal tests becomes more pronounced as people age, especially for men and the
less educated.


                                             5
   In summary, while there are strong associations between cognition and exposure to par-
ticular matter across the age distribution, causal evidence is largely limited to performance
of students or long term cognitive decline in the elderly.


                         B.   Brain training and cognitive function

In this study we measure cognitive function in the adult population via performance in
Lumosity games. But does performance in brain training reflect transferable cognitive skills?
Put differently, do changes in game scores, for example due to dedicated training, reflect
changes in cognitive functions such as problem solving? This is a long-standing question in
the behavioral sciences. A recent systematic review of brain-training interventions, or "brain
games," has found extensive evidence that they do improve performance on trained tasks
(Simons et al., 2016). Furthermore, "[i]t is uncontested that training programs can lead to
near transfer, meaning increased performance on untrained tasks involving similar cognitive
functions" (Smid, Karbach and Steinbeis, 2020, p. 531).
   The most extensive review to date of interventions to improve executive functions ­ which
include attention, working memory, cognitive flexibility, and reasoning ­ also highlights the
evidence for improvement by training across the lifespan and transfer of this improvement
to similar tasks (Diamond and Ling, 2020). Taken together, these reviews suggest that
performance scores in brain training do measure a specific cognitive skill. Furthermore, the
reviews note that the length, frequency, spacing and difficulty of the training, combined with
baseline ability of the subjects, all determine its efficacy. These lessons help us informing
our conceptual framework, empirical strategy, and the interpretation of our results.


                              III.   Conceptual Framework

Building on Graff Zivin and Neidell (2013), cognitive function can be expressed as a function
of two components: the level of exposure to air pollution p, and a vector of attributes x that
may influence how exposure affects measures of cognition S :

                                              6
                                          S = f (p, x).                                      (1)

   In our context, p corresponds to ambient concentration of PM2.5 and f (.) translates
p into performance in various cognitive domains. Heterogeneity in environmental impacts
may manifest through differences in levels of exposure p, and/or differences in the vector of
mediating attributes x that may interact with exposure through the cognitive function.
   Building on Hsiang, Oliva and Walker (2019), if a change in exposure is relatively uniform
across individuals ­ perhaps because it is marginal for all i ­ distributional effects may result
from that change if marginal impacts

                                       Si   f (pi , xi )
                                          =                                                  (2)
                                       p       p

differ across individuals. Heterogeneity in marginal impacts on cognition may arise from
nonlinearities in the relationship between exposure and cognitive function, holding other
factors constant, or from heterogeneity in an underlying attribute that controls how exposure
translates into impacts. Designing environmental policy that addresses distributional effects
may require understanding the source of this heterogeneity.
   Heterogeneity in marginal impacts usually generates distributional effects of environmen-
tal change, because some individuals will benefit or be harmed more or less for incremental
changes in environmental conditions. If marginal impacts are positively correlated with cog-
nitive ability, for example, then policies that reduce exposure uniformly across a population
will have regressive benefits since high-ability individuals benefit more from the policy. If
marginal impacts are negatively correlated, such a policy would have progressive benefits.


                                          IV.   Data

Our primary data are anonymized game performance scores from the brain training company
Lumos Labs. This company is the owner of Lumosity, which gives users access to brain


                                                7
training games and analytics on both web based and phone application platforms. Our data
include scores from the seven Lumosity games outlined in Appendix Table A.1. These games
were selected by Lumos because game design and usage were relatively stable over time, and
to ensure that the combination of games spanned the breadth of cognitive domains ­ verbal,
attention, flexibility, memory, math, speed, and problem solving.
       For each game we observe timestamps and scores for all users who signed up for Lumosity
and played between 5 and 50 times on the web based platform during the period 2015-2017.
We also observe each user's location at the 3-digit ZIP code at the time the user signed up
for Lumosity, which is derived by Lumos from a user's IP address.6 In addition, we observe
self reported characteristics of users including age, gender, and education, and additional
data collected by Lumos including an identifier for whether the user is a paid subscriber,
the date the user joined Lumosity, and any dates that the users played games outside our
sample.7
       We use the centroid of each ZIP code to match game data to the U.S. EPA Air Quality
Monitoring System ­ matching to any monitor within 20 miles of the centroid ­ and to
weather observations from the Integrated Surface Database (ISD) from the National Centers
for Environmental Information ­ matching to any station within 30 miles of the centroid.8
Appendix Figure A.2 maps the distribution of the 116,495 users in the estimation sample.
They are scattered around the nation, with heavy concentrations in the West coast, where
Lumos Labs are headquartered (San Francisco, CA).
       To enable comparisons across games, we standardize scores in the following way:

                                         Raw Scoreigt - Raw Scoreg
                                Sigt =                                                                 (3)
                                                     g

where Sigt is the standardized score of user i in game g at time t, Raw Scoreigt is the raw
   6
     For convenience, the 3-digit ZIP code areas in the United States are displayed in Appendix Figure A.1.
   7
     Summary statistics are reported in Appendix Table A.2. Subscription provides users with access to
additional analytics and games.
   8
     The results are qualitatively the same for matching to air quality monitors within 30 miles.



                                                    8
score provided by Lumosity, Raw Scoreg is the mean raw score across all players and plays
in game g , and g is the standard deviation of raw scores in game g .


                                        V.    Empirical Strategy

To estimate the impact of air pollution exposure on cognition, we use the following equation:

                       Sit =  1[P M 2.5zdmy > 25] + Xzdmy  + i + my +                   it ,                  (4)

where S is the standardized score for player i in 3-digit ZIP code z , at time t of day d, month
m, and year y . 1[P M 2.5zdmy > 25] is an indicator variable equal to one if the level of PM2.5
is above 25µg/m3 . This threshold is the World Health Organization (WHO) air quality
guideline value for 24-hour exposure to PM2.5, but still 10µg/m3 below the U.S. National
Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for PM2.5 over 24 hours. The 25µg/m3 cutoff is
above the ninety-ninth percentile of the distribution of particulates in our sample, but far
below the maximum daily concentration in our sample ­ about 270µg/m3 .9 i represents
player fixed effects, my month-by-year fixed effects, and Xzdmy control variables ­ wind
speed, precipitation, and bins of daily maximum temperature.10
       We face two primary empirical challenges in estimating  . First, individuals choose when
to play brain training games and this choice may be directly or indirectly related to pollution
levels. If, for example, pollution does have an effect on cognitive ability, and this effect is
noticeable to participants, they may be more or less likely to decide to play Lumosity games.
This would be problematic if, for example, users who have low cognitive ability are more
affected by pollution and choose not to play on days when they feel its effects. Appendix
Figure A.4, however, shows PM2.5 does not affect the number or composition of players.
       The second empirical challenge in estimating  is measurement error. Measurement
error arises due to the sparsity of the monitoring network, and the fact that actual pollution
   9
    The distribution of daily PM2.5 in our sample is displayed in Appendix Figure A.3.
  10
    In the results section, we explore the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative structure of fixed effects,
alternative thresholds for the indicator variable for exposure to PM2.5, and outliers.


                                                        9
exposure can vary over very short distances based on proximity to large roads or other local
sources of pollution. Measurement error causes attenuation bias leading us to understate
the impact of pollution on cognition.
       We build on the approach of Deryugina et al. (2019) using an instrument based on changes
in wind direction. The idea of the instrument is to isolate variation in non-local pollution
that is transported by wind. This variation in pollution exposure should have a uniform
effect within a locality and be orthogonal to differences in exposure to local sources. The
specification for our first stage is


               1[P M 2.5zdmy > 25] = 1[W indDirzdmy = maxP M 2.5 W indDirz2 m ]

                                      + Xzdmy  + i + my +           idmy .                                  (5)


       The excluded instrument is the variable 1[W indDirzdmy = maxP M 2.5 W indDirz2 m ].
This indicator variable is equal to one if the daily average wind direction in the 3-digit
ZIP code z falls in the 60-degree interval that usually brings the highest levels of PM2.5 to
the more aggregated 2-digit ZIP code region z2 in month m. The wind directions associated
with the maximum pollution levels for each region-month are found in preliminary regression
analysis considering all 60-degree intervals.11


                                              VI.     Results


               A.   Average Impacts of Exposure to PM2.5 on Cognitive Function

Table 1 reports the average impacts of exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) on
cognitive function as measured by standardized scores in Lumosity games. Columns 1 and
2 in Panel A present the OLS estimates using PM2.5 measured in levels or as a dummy for
relatively high concentrations ­ above 25µg/m3 ­ respectively. Columns 3 and 4 display the
  11
    This procedure may avoid weak instrument issues that might emerge when including all interactions be-
tween the 60-degree intervals and the z2 regions in the first stage. Furthermore, unlike an over-identified 2SLS
model, the just-identified 2SLS is approximately median unbiased even with a relatively weak instrument.


                                                      10
corresponding IV estimates. Lastly, columns 5 and 6 present IV estimates for an alternative
outcome variable: the percentile of an individual's score in the overall distribution of scores
adjusted to match the characteristics of the U.S. population. The Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald
F statistics from the first stage in the IV specifications are all above the Staiger and Stock
(1997) rule-of-thumb cutoff of 10, suggesting that the excluded instrument is strong.
       Our preferred estimate in column 4 indicates that exposure to relatively high levels of
PM2.5 reduces standardized scores by about 0.18 of a standard deviation.12 This effect is
relatively large. For comparison, Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth (2016) find that the effect of
PM2.5 on Israeli high-school student scores for the ninety-ninth percentile of exposure in
their sample (about 50 µg/m3 ) implies a decline of roughly 0.13 of a standard deviation
in scores relative to an average day's air quality (about 16µg/m3 ).13 Our estimate is also
equivalent to a reduction of 5.8 percentiles in the distribution of scores adjusted to match
the characteristics of the U.S. population, as reported in column 6.
       Panel B of Table 1 reports a number of robustness and specification checks. Column 1
replaces user fixed effects in our main specification in Equation (4) with user-by-hour fixed
effects, and includes day-of-week fixed effects as well. This alternative specification addresses
concerns associated with selection of users into playing in particular hours or days of the
week. As an example, working-age users may play in the evenings and weekends, and retirees
may play during the day in weekdays. Column 2 adds to our main specification day-of-week
and 2-digit ZIP code-by-month fixed effects, to control more flexibly for spatial and seasonal
variation in game playing. Column 3 adds a lag and a lead of the high PM2.5 indicator to our
main specification, to check for delayed effects of pollution and spurious effects, respectively.
  12
     If we instrumented PM2.5 with interactions of nine 1-digit ZIP code areas and five 60-degree wind
direction bins ­ analogous to Deryugina et al. (2019) ­ the IV estimate -0.119 (S.E. 0.137) would be in the
95% confidence interval of our preferred estimate in column 4.
  13
     Another comparison to put the magnitude of our estimates into perspective: Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth
(2016) find that a test score in an exam on a day with average pollution (about 16µg/m3 ) will be lowered
relative to an exam taken on a day with the minimum pollution level (about 2.4µg/m3 ) by 0.083 standard
deviations. Recall that they use data for every SAT-equivalent test taker in Israel from 2000-2002. Our
estimate in Table 1, Panel B, column 5, shows a reduction of 0.15 of a standard deviation when Lumosity
users nationwide are exposed to levels of PM2.5 above 15µg/m3 relative to exposure below that threshold.



                                                    11
Column 4 constrains the sample to include only observations with PM2.5 below 35µg/m3 ­
the current 24-hour NAAQS for PM2.5 ­ to avoid the potential influence of outliers. This
alternative sample also allows us to test for PM2.5 effects only among levels of exposure below
the current air quality standards. In all these four columns, the causal effect of exposure to
relatively high levels of fine particulate matter is quantitatively similar to our main estimate
in Panel A, column 4.
       The last two columns of Table 1, Panel B, display the estimates associated with alterna-
tive cutoffs for exposure to fine particulates. Column 5 reveals that even exposure to levels
of PM2.5 20µg/m3 below the current 24-hour EPA air quality standards is detrimental to
cognitive function, suggesting that there may be room for adjustments in the standards.
For reference, 15µg/m3 is about the ninety-fifth percentile of the distribution of particulates
in our sample. Perhaps not surprisingly, column 6 shows that exposure to levels of PM2.5
above the current 24-hour standards causes a large decline in cognitive performance.14


            B.   Heterogeneous Impacts of Exposure to PM2.5 on Cognitive Function

PM2.5 Impacts by Age. Figure 1, Panel A, depicts the causal effects by age groups. All
coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between
the indicator of high PM2.5 and the age groups reported in the figure. The pattern that
emerges is that the adverse effects of exposure to PM2.5 are more pronounced at younger
ages ­ below 50. The age distribution in our sample is displayed in Panel B, which shows
little representation of individuals younger than 20, but a large representation of 50- and
60-year-olds. The mean user age in our sample is 48.7. Unlike the bulk of the literature
highlighting detrimental effects of exposure to particle pollution on health outcomes among
children and the elderly, our estimates reveal large impacts on the working-age population.
To give a sense of the magnitude, take the estimated effect for 20-year-olds ­ exposure to
  14
     An alternative way to check for potential nonlinearities in the relationship between PM2.5 and cognition
is to create bins for different ranges of exposure, and jointly estimate the coefficients associated with those
bins. The results of this analysis are presented in Appendix Figure A.5.



                                                      12
levels of PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 causes a reduction in standardized scores by 0.479 of a
standard deviation. This effect is equivalent to the normal decay in cognitive function when
comparing 20-year-olds to 40-year-olds, as depicted by the diamond markers in Panel B.15
       The effects of exposure to air pollution could be larger for younger individuals for a range
of reasons. For example, according to well known theories of intelligence, as people age they
begin to rely more on crystallized intelligence, that part of intelligence that comes from
learned procedures and knowledge.16 If fluid intelligence ­ intelligence that is independent
of learning ­ is more affected by exposure to fine particulates, then we would expect to see
younger and less experienced individuals are more affected.17

PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Domains. Figure 2, Panel A, plots the estimated
effects on seven cognitive domains ­ verbal, attention, flexibility, memory, math, speed,
and problem solving. All coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4)
with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and the cognitive domains reported
in the figure. Among these domains, the effects are strongest for memory, with exposure
to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 estimated to reduce standardized scores by 0.598 of a standard
deviation (95% confidence interval: [-1.147,-0.0489]). There is also suggestive evidence that
problem solving may also be substantially affected by particle pollution. The reduction in this
cognitive domain due to high levels of PM2.5 is estimated to be 0.418 of a standard deviation
(95% CI: [-1.517,0.681]). Although we have a large number of observations associated with
each domain, Lumosity games training memory and math are the least played by the users
in our sample, as reported by Panel B. The game training problem solving, however, is the
most played in our setting.
       To put the estimated impact of PM2.5 on memory into perspective, it is equivalent to the
normal cognitive aging from the 30s to the 50s, as depicted by the diamond markers in Figure
  15
     Salthouse (2009) provides evidence that some aspects of age-related cognitive decline do begin in healthy
educated adults when they are in their 20s and 30s. For a review of the literature on normal cognitive aging,
see Harada, Natelson-Love and Triebel (2013).
  16
     This theory is attributed to Raymond Cattell and Donald Hebb (Brown, 2016).
  17
     This explanation is also consistent with the ability and learning results reported below.


                                                     13
1, Panel B. In the closest study to ours, Bedi et al. (2021) examine the impact of PM2.5 on
five cognitive domains ­ simple attention, complex attention, arithmetic processing speed,
working memory, and fluid reasoning ­ using a sample of 464 students from a university in
Brazil, who engaged in 54 lab sessions over a 3-year period. They find evidence suggesting
that one cognitive domain ­ fluid reasoning ­ may be more affected by high PM2.5 exposure
than other cognitive domains such as attention and memory. Fluid reasoning is the ability to
think flexibly and problem solve. We do find suggestive evidence of adverse effects on problem
solving, but a near zero effect on flexibility. On the other hand, the effect we estimate on
memory is more robust than other cognitive domains. Harada, Natelson-Love and Triebel
(2013) point out that one of the most common cognitive complaints among older adults
is, indeed, change in memory. According to their literature review, "[a]ge-related memory
changes may be related to slowed processing speed, reduced ability to ignore irrelevant
information, and decreased use of strategies to improve learning and memory" (p.740).
       The adverse effect of PM2.5 on memory may have implications for workforce productiv-
ity. The Occupational Information Network (O*NET) database ranks occupations based on
the importance of the use of several cognitive functions.18 The ranking includes over 870
detailed occupations. Among the top twenty in terms of the importance of memory, there
are actors, clergy members, physicians, nurses, inspectors, teachers, managers, engineers,
telecommunicators, and sales representatives. Therefore, it is not surprising that contem-
poraneous exposure to particulate matter has been shown to decrease productivity among
call center workers in China (Chang et al., 2019), but does not affect the manufacturing
output of production workers in the textile industry (He, Liu and Salvo, 2019). Naturally,
our findings open a research avenue on the links between the impact of particle pollution on
cognitive functions and labor productivity.

PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Initial Ability. Figure 3, Panel A, plots the esti-
  18
    See details on the importance of cognition at onetonline.org/find/descriptor/browse/Abilities/1.A.1/
and onetonline.org/find/descriptor/browse/Skills/2.A/.



                                                  14
mated effects of exposure to levels of PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 on cognitive function by quintile
of initial ability. All coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with
interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and quintiles of ability. Because memory
appears to be the cognitive domain most affected by fine particulates, we measure initial
ability by estimating the following equation for first play in the memory game:

                                    Si = W indi + Xi  + i ,                                 (6)

where Si represents standardized score for user i, and W indi the reduced-form equivalent of
particle pollution. Xi includes other meteorological controls and fixed effects for age, 3-digit
ZIP code, and month-year. Our approximate measure of initial ability is the residualized
score   i,   which nets out predictable patterns in the data. This measure has good predictive
power for ability. Indeed, the pattern in Panel B reveals a strong positive association with
educational attainment, which is knowingly correlated with innate ability (see, for example,
discussion in Card, 2001). Panel B also shows that most users in our sample are college
graduates.
   The estimated effects in Figure 3, Panel A, indicate that low-ability individuals are more
affected by exposure to high levels of PM2.5 than high-ability users. The difference between
the point estimates for the second and fourth quintiles of -0.593 of a standard deviation
is nontrivial: it is equivalent to the normal cognitive aging from the 30s to the 50s, as
depicted by the diamond markers in Figure 1, Panel B. We are underpowered to draw strong
conclusions, but the evidence from both panels, taken together, suggests that environmental
insults might exacerbate the inequality in cognitive performance. This corroborates the
pattern found by Ebenstein, Lavy and Roth (2016) for Israeli high-school students. They
rank students based on an ex-ante measure of student quality reflecting performance in the
full-year class and on a previously-taken SAT-equivalent test. When they split the sample
by whether their measure of ability is above or below the median, the estimated detrimental
impacts of exposure to ten additional units of PM2.5 are more than four times larger among


                                                15
those classified as low quality.

PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Learning Stage. Figure 4, Panel A, displays the
estimated effects of exposure to PM2.5 on cognition by practice in the games ­ fewer than
five plays or more than five plays ­ which we are interpreting as different learning stages
or experience. In fact, Panel B depicts a concave relationship between standardized scores
and the number of plays, similar to the well-known experience-earnings profile in the labor
market. The underlying histogram in the panel also reveals that most users play just a few
times over our sample period, similar to the pattern of short job tenure for most workers
in the labor force.19 All coefficients in Panel A are jointly estimated using a version of
Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and the learning-stage
groups reported in the figure using only the sample of users who play a game at least 20
times.
       The pattern emerging from Panel A is that exposure to relatively high levels of PM2.5
appears to affect cognitive performance primarily in the learning stage. Once users acquire
experience, their performance is unaltered by fine particulates. In this case, the difference-
in-differences estimate of about 0.40 of a standard deviation of standardized scores ­ the
difference between fewer and more than five plays for high PM2.5 minus the difference
between fewer and more than five plays for low PM2.5 ­ is marginally significant at conven-
tional levels. That 0.40 difference-in-differences estimate corresponds roughly to the absolute
value of the normal decay in cognitive function when comparing 20-year-olds to 40-year-olds,
as depicted by the diamond markers in Figure 1, Panel B. Given the highly right-skewed
histogram of the number of game plays, as shown in Figure 4, Panel B, there are ample
opportunities for exposure to fine particulates to affect the acquisition of basic skills. If one
were willing to extrapolate these findings to the labor market, they may imply large impacts
on employee turnover, likely due to a failure to learn the basic cognitively-demanding tasks
  19
    According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in January 2020 the median employee tenure was 4.3 years
for men and 3.9 years for women (BLS, 2020).



                                                   16
on the job.


                                    VII.     Concluding Remarks

This study has examined the impacts of exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) on
cognition, leveraging performances in brain games. We have taken advantage of detailed
proprietary user-level data from Lumosity games over the period 2015-2017, covering seven
cognitive domains across all stages of adult life. By instrumenting daily PM2.5 concentrations
                                     ` la Deryugina et al. (2019),20 we were able to identify the
with changes in local wind direction a
local average treatment effects of PM2.5 on cognitive functions, and assess the heterogeneity
of those effects across multiple dimensions.
       We highlight and discuss four main findings. First, the average impact of exposure to
daily PM2.5 is substantial even at levels below the current 24-hour EPA ambient air quality
standards of 35µg/m3 , and even at levels below the WHO air quality guideline value of
25µg/m3 . These results suggest that there may be additional benefits from reducing those
thresholds.21 Second, among the seven cognitive domains we investigated, the effect on
memory is the strongest. This has implications for the types of occupations most likely to
suffer from high exposure to PM2.5, and might reconcile some mixed results in the literature
regarding occupations that were more or less affected by particulate matter.22 The memory
result may also shed light on a mechanism behind the causal impact of sustained exposure
to fine particulates on the probability of receiving a dementia diagnosis among the Medicare
population, as found by Bishop, Ketcham and Kuminoff (2018).
       Third, unlike the bulk of evidence of adverse effects of PM2.5 on health outcomes con-
  20
     As explained earlier, our instrument is an indicator variable for whether the daily local wind direction is
at the direction associated with the maximum potential for the transport of pollutants from other locations
to the area where the Lumosity user is located.
  21
     Despite evidence pointing to gains from lowering those cutoffs, in December 2020 the EPA decided to
retain current standards for PM2.5.
  22
     For instance, exposure to particulate matter has been shown to decrease productivity among call center
workers in China (Chang et al., 2019), but does not seem to affect the manufacturing output of production
workers in the textile industry (He, Liu and Salvo, 2019).



                                                      17
centrated among children and the elderly, our findings indicate that individuals under the
age of 50 ­ the working-age population ­ may be the most affected by contemporaneous ex-
posure to particle pollution. Furthermore, it seems that those learning new tasks may suffer
the most the harmful consequences of PM2.5. Policymakers should consider the impacts of
environmental insults when designing policies to train the youth to enter the labor force,
and retrain displaced older workers to switch careers successfully. Fourth, exposure to high
levels of PM2.5 appears to exacerbate the inequality in cognitive performance. Low-ability
individuals may be the most affected by fine particulates. This is suggestive evidence that
investments in environmental quality are progressive, an important finding in the context of
the recent rise in income inequality in the United States and abroad.




                                            18
                                       References

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala, and Nyshadham Anant. 2020. "Management
  and Shocks to Worker Productivity." Mimeo.
Ailshire, Jennifer A., and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2014. "Fine Particulate Matter Air
  Pollution and Cognitive Function Among Older US Adults." American Journal of Epi-
  demiology, 180(4): 359­366.
Allen, J. L., C. Klocke, K. Morris-Schaffer, K. Conrad, M. Sobolewski, and
  D. A. Cory-Slechta. 2017. "Cognitive Effects of Air Pollution Exposures and Potential
  Mechanistic Underpinnings." Current Environmental Health Reports, 4(2): 180­191.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects
  of Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early
  Training Projects." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481­1495.
Archsmith, James, Anthony Heyes, and Soodeh Saberian. 2018. "Air Quality and
  Error Quantity: Pollution and Performance in a High-Skilled, Quality-Focused Occupa-
  tion." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 5(4): 827­
  863.
Austin, Wes, Gart Heutel, and Daniel Kreisman. 2019. "School Bus Emissions, Stu-
  dent Health and Academic Performance." Economics of Education Review, 70: 109­126.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. "Do People Vote with Their Feet?
  An Empirical Test of Tiebout." American Economic Review, 98(3): 843­863.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins. 2019a. "Environmen-
  tal Justice: Establishing Causal Relationships." Annual Review of Resource Economics,
  11(1): 377­398.
Banzhaf, Spencer, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins. 2019b. "Environmental Jus-
  tice: The Economics of Race, Place, and Pollution." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  33(1): 185­208.
Bedi, Arjun S., Marcos Y. Nakaguma, Brandon J. Restrepo, and Matthias Riege.
  2021. "Particle Pollution and Cognition: Evidence from Sensitive Cognitive Tests in
  Brazil." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 8(3): 443­
  474.
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Matthew Gibson, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Christopher
  Neilson. 2017. "Gray Matters: Fetal Pollution Exposure and Human Capital Formation."
  Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 4(2): 505­542.
Bishop, Kelly C, Jonathan D Ketcham, and Nicolai V Kuminoff. 2018. "Hazed and
  confused: the effect of air pollution on dementia." NBER Working Paper #24970.
BLS, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2020. "Employee
  Tenure in 2020." BLS News Release, Available at bls.gov/news.release/pdf/tenure.pdf,
  accessed on February 19, 2021.
Brown, Richard E. 2016. "Hebb and Cattell: The Genesis of the Theory of Fluid and
  Crystallized Intelligence." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10: 606.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. "Robust Infer-
  ence With Multiway Clustering." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(2): 238­

                                            19
 249.
Card, David. 2001. "Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
 Econometric Problems." Econometrica, 69(5): 1127­1160.
Chang, Tom Y., Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. 2016. "Par-
 ticulate Pollution and the Productivity of Pear Packers." American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 8(3): 141­69.
Chang, Tom Y., Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. 2019. "The
 Effect of Pollution on Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call Center Workers in China."
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1): 151­72.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003. "The Impact of Air Pollution on
 Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
 Recession." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121­1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evi-
 dence from the Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376­424.
Chen, Yulong. 2019. "Early Exposure to Air Pollution and Cognitive Development Later
 in Life: Evidence from China." Mimeo.
Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. "Air Pollution and Infant Health: What
 Can We Learn from California's Recent Experience?" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 120(3): 1003­1030.
Currie, Janet, and W. Reed Walker. 2011. "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health:
 Evidence from E-ZPass." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 65­90.
Currie, Janet, Eric A. Hanushek, Megan E. Kahn, Matthew Neidell, and
 Steven G. Rivkin. 2009. "Does Pollution Increase School Absences?" Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 91(4): 682­94.
Currie, Janet, Joshua Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew Neidell. 2014.
 "What Do We Know About Short- and Long-Term Effects of Early-Life Exposure to
 Pollution?" Annual Review of Resource Economics, 6(1): 217­247.
Currie, Janet, Lucas W. Davis, Michael Greenstone, and W. Reed Walker. 2015.
 "Environmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Open-
 ings and Closings." American Economic Review, 105(2): 678­709.
Davis, David A., Garnik Akopian, John P. Walsh, Constantinos Sioutas, Todd E.
 Morgan, and Caleb E. Finch. 2013. "Urban air pollutants reduce synaptic function of
 CA1 neurons via an NMDA/N pathway in vitro." Journal of Neurochemistry, 127(4): 509­
 519.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Garth Heutel, Nolan H. Miller, David Molitor, and Julian
 Reif. 2019. "The Mortality and Medical Costs of Air Pollution: Evidence from Changes
 in Wind Direction." American Economic Review, 109(12): 4178­4219.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2017. "Defensive
 Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program."
 American Economic Review, 107(10): 2958­89.
Diamond, Adele, and Daphne S. Ling. 2020. "Review of the Evidence on, and Fun-
 damental Questions About, Efforts to Improve Executive Functions, Including Working


                                           20
  Memory." In Cognitive and Working Memory Training: Perspectives From Psychology,
  Neuroscience, and Human Development. , ed. Jared M. Novick, Michael F. Bunting,
  Michael R. Dougherty and Randall W. Engle. Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Victor Lavy, and Sefi Roth. 2016. "The Long-Run Economic
  Consequences of High-Stakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pol-
  lution." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4): 36­65.
Fu, Shihe, V. Brian Viard, and Peng Zhang. 2017. "Air Quality and Manufacturing
  Firm Productivity: Comprehensive Evidence from China." Mimeo.
Gilraine, Michael. 2020. "Air Filters, Pollution, and Student Achievement." Mimeo.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2012. "The Impact of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity." American Economic Review, 102(7): 3652­3673.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2013. "Environment, Health, and Human
  Capital." Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3): 689­730.
Ham, John C., Jacqueline S. Zweig, and Edward Avol. 2014. "Pollution, Test Scores
  and Distribution of Academic Achievement: Evidence from California Schools 2002-2008."
  Mimeo.
Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. 2015. "The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evi-
  dence from a Natural Experiment in Mexico City." Journal of Public Economics, 122: 68­
  79.
Harada, Caroline N., Marissa C. Natelson-Love, and Kristen L. Triebel. 2013.
  "Normal Cognitive Aging." Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 29(4): 737­752.
Heissel, Jennifer A., Claudia L. Persico, and David Simon. Forthcoming. "Does
  Pollution Drive Achievement? The Effect of Traffic Pollution on Academic Performance."
  Journal of Human Resources.
Heissel, Jennifer A., Claudia Persico, and David Simon. 2020. "Does Pollution Drive
  Achievement? The Effect of Traffic Pollution on Academic Performance." Journal of
  Human Resources.
He, Jiaxiu, Haoming Liu, and Alberto Salvo. 2019. "Severe Air Pollution and Labor
  Productivity: Evidence from Industrial Towns in China." American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 11(1): 173­201.
Heyes, Anthony, Matthew Neidell, and Soodeh Saberian. 2016. "The Effect of Air
  Pollution on Investor Behavior: Evidence from the S&P 500." NBER Working Paper
  #22753.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Paulina Oliva, and Reed Walker. 2019. "The Distribution of
  Environmental Damages." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 13(1): 83­103.
Huang, Jiekun, Nianhang Xu, and Honghai Yu. 2020. "Pollution and Performance:
  Do Investors Make Worse Trades on Hazy Days?" Management Science.
Kilian, Jason, and Masashi Kitazawa. 2018. "The emerging risk of exposure to air
  pollution on cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease ­ Evidence from epidemiological
  and animal studies." Biomedical Journal, 41(3): 141­162.
Marcotte, Dave E. 2017. "Something in the air? Air quality and children's educational
  outcomes." Economics of Education Review, 56: 141­151.


                                          21
Meyer, Steffen, and Michaela Pagel. 2017. "Fresh Air Eases Work ­ The Effect of Air
  Quality on Individual Investor Activity." NBER Working Paper #24048.
Miller, Sebastian, and Mauricio Vela. 2013. "The Effects of Air Pollution on Educa-
  tional Outcomes: Evidence from Chile." IDB Working Paper No. IDB-WP-468.
Moretti, Enrico, and Matthew Neidell. 2011. "Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behav-
  ior: Evidence from the Ports of Los Angeles." Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154­75.
Paul, Kimberly C., Mary Haan, Elizabeth Rose Mayeda, and Beate R. Ritz.
  2019. "Ambient Air Pollution, Noise, and Late-Life Cognitive Decline and Dementia Risk."
  Annual Review of Public Health, 40(1): 203­220.
Persico, Claudia L., and Joanna Venator. Forthcoming. "The Effects of Local Industrial
  Pollution on Students and Schools." Journal of Human Resources.
Roth, Sefi J. 2020. "The Effect of Indoor Air Pollution on Cognitive Performance: Evidence
  from the UK." Mimeo.
Salthouse, Timothy A. 2009. "When does age-related cognitive decline begin?" Neurobi-
  ology of Aging, 30(4): 507­514.
Sanders, Nicholas J. 2012. "What Doesn't Kill You Makes You Weaker: Prenatal Pollution
  Exposure and Educational Outcomes." Journal of Human Resources, 47(3): 826­850.
Sanderson, Eleanor, and Frank Windmeijer. 2016. "A Weak Instrument F-test
  in Linear IV Models with Multiple Endogenous Variables." Journal of Econometrics,
  190(2): 212­221.
Schikowski, Tamara, and Hicran Altu         g. 2020. "The role of air pollution in cognitive
  impairment and decline." Neurochemistry International, 136: 104708.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker. 2016. "Airports, Air Pollution, and Con-
  temporaneous Health." Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 768­809.
Shehab, MA, and FD Pope. 2019. "Effects of short-term exposure to particulate matter
  air pollution on cognitive performance." Scientific reports, 9(1): 1­10.
Simons, Daniel J., Walter R. Boot, Neil Charness, Susan E. Gathercole, Christo-
  pher F. Chabris, David Z. Hambrick, and Elizabeth A. L. Stine-Morrow. 2016.
  "Do "Brain-Training" Programs Work?" Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
  17(3): 103­186.
Smid, Claire R., Julia Karbach, and Nikolaus Steinbeis. 2020. "Toward a Science of
  Effective Cognitive Training." Current Directions in Psychological Science, 29(6): 531­537.
Stafford, Tess M. 2015. "Indoor Air Quality and Academic Performance." Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 70: 34­50.
Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental Variables Regression with
  Weak Instruments." Econometrica, 65(3): 557­586.
Wang, Yan, Lilin Xiong, and Meng Tang. 2017. "Toxicity of inhaled particulate mat-
  ter on the central nervous system: neuroinflammation, neuropsychological effects and
  neurodegenerative disease." Journal of Applied Toxicology, 37(6): 644­667.
Younan, Diana, Andrew J. Petkus, Keith F. Widaman, Xinhui Wang, Ramon
  Casanova, Mark A. Espeland, Margaret Gatz, Victor W. Henderson, JoAnn E.
  Manson, Stephen R. Rapp, Bonnie C. Sachs, Marc L. Serre, Sarah A. Gaus-


                                             22
 soin, Ryan Barnard, Santiago Saldana, William Vizuete, Daniel P. Beavers,
 Joel A. Salinas, Helena C. Chui, Susan M. Resnick, Sally A. Shumaker, and
 Jiu-Chiuan Chen. 2019. "Particulate matter and episodic memory decline mediated by
 early neuroanatomic biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease." Brain, 143(1): 289­302.
Zhang, Xin, Xi Chen, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2018. "The impact of exposure to air
 pollution on cognitive performance." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 115(37): 9193­9197.




                                         23
                    Figure 1: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Age
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                              Panel B. Age Distribution




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by age, and descriptive
statistics on the age distribution in our sample. In Panel A, the plotted coefficients are jointly estimated
using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and age groups.
The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence intervals. The estimates are also reported in
Appendix Table A.3. Robustness checks are presented in Appendix Figure A.6. Heterogeneity analysis by
age and gender is presented in Appendix Figure A.7. In Panel B, the bars depict the number of observations
in each age range, and the markers show the change in average standardized scores for an age group relative
to users under 20. Learning curves associated with each age group are presented in Appendix Figure A.8.




                                                    24
                    Figure 2: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Domains
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                              Panel B. Game Distribution




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by cognitive domain, and
descriptive statistics on the distribution of observations across games in our sample. In Panel A, the plotted
coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of
high PM2.5 and cognitive domains. The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence intervals.
The estimates are also reported in Appendix Table A.4. A robustness check is presented in Appendix Figure
A.9. In Panel B, the bars depict the number of observations in each game, and the markers show the change
in the number of times the game is played by an individual relative to the verbal game.




                                                     25
               Figure 3: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Initial Ability
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                        Panel B. Initial Ability and Education




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by initial ability, and descriptive
statistics on ability and educational attainment in our sample. In Panel A, the plotted coefficients are jointly
estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and quintiles
of initial ability. Our measure of ability is based on the first play in the memory game. In practice, it is the
residualized score from Equation (6). The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence intervals.
The estimates are also reported in Appendix Table A.5. Robustness checks are presented in Appendix
Figure A.10, and analysis using education groups as an alternative for quintiles of initial ability is presented
in Appendix Figure A.11. In Panel B, the bars depict the number of observations in each education group,
and the markers show the change in average initial ability for an education group relative to the category
less than college degree.




                                                      26
         Figure 4: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Function by Learning Stage
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                     Panel B. Number of Plays and Learning




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by experience playing Lumosity
games, and descriptive statistics on the distribution of number of game plays and learning in our sample.
In Panel A, the plotted coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions
between the indicator of high PM2.5 and two categories of number of plays ­ fewer or more than five
plays ­ for the sample of users playing at least 20 times. The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95%
confidence intervals. The estimates are also reported in Appendix Table A.6. A robustness check is presented
in Appendix Figure A.12. In Panel B, the bars depict the number of observations for each binned number
of plays, and the markers show the average standardized score for each binned number of plays relative to
the first 5 plays bin.




                                                    27
Table 1: Impacts of Exposure to PM2.5 on Cognition ­ Average Effects and Robustness
  Panel A. Average OLS Estimates (Columns 1-2) and IV Estimates (Columns 3-6)
  Dep. Var.: Std. Score       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)#                 (6)#
                                                         
  Daily PM2.5 (µg/m )3
                         -0.000520               -0.00486                -0.154
                          (0.000178)              (0.00207)             (0.0600)
  1[Daily PM2.5 >25]                        -0.0197                -0.183                      -5.809
                                            (0.00632)              (0.0803)                     (2.316)
  User FE                       Y               Y          Y           Y           Y               Y
  Month by Year FE              Y               Y          Y           Y           Y               Y
  Meteorological controls       Y               Y          Y           Y           Y               Y
  Observations              4,667,636       4,667,636  4,667,636 4,667,636 4,667,636          4,667,636
  First-stage F                                          40.86       33.24       40.86           33.24
  Hausman test (p-value)                                 0.094       0.086       0.049           0.043
  Panel B. IV Estimates for Alternative Specifications, Sample, and Variable Definitions
  Dep. Var.: Std. Score           (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)
                                                                          
  1[Daily PM2.5 >25]           -0.197      -0.176       -0.211     -0.227
                               (0.0943)    (0.0760)     (0.0891)    (0.110)

  1[Daily PM2.5 >25] (t-1 )                               0.0567
                                                          (0.111)
  1[Daily PM2.5 >25] (t+1 )                               0.00680
                                                          (0.103)

  1[Daily PM2.5 >15]                                                               -0.150
                                                                                  (0.0760)
  1[Daily PM2.5 >35]                                                                          -0.654
                                                                                               (0.294)
  User FE                                       Y            Y           Y           Y            Y
  User by Hour-of-day FE            Y
  Game FE                           Y
  Month by Year FE                  Y           Y            Y           Y           Y            Y
  Day-of-week FE                    Y           Y
  Zip2 by Month-of-year FE                      Y
  Meteorological controls           Y           Y            Y           Y           Y            Y
  Sample Restriction                                                     Y           Y
  Observations                  4,382,220   4,667,636    4,635,654   4,659,194   4,659,194    4,667,636
  First-stage F                   36.46       32.63        6.349       36.32       26.42        17.45
 Notes : This table reports the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 on cognitive function, as measured by
 standardized scores in Lumosity games ­ mean zero and standard deviation one. # in the last two
 columns of Panel A indicates that an alternative dependent variable has been used: the percentile of
 a score in the distribution of scores adjusted to match the characteristics of the U.S. population. IV
 estimates arise from instrumenting daily PM2.5 with an indicator variable for whether the daily local
 wind direction is at the direction associated with the maximum potential for the transport of pollutants
 from other locations to a 3-digit ZIP code area where the Lumosity users are located. The first-stage
 F statistic is the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic associated with the excluded instrument in the
 first stage. The null hypothesis for the Hausman test is that the difference between the OLS and
 IV estimates is not systematic. Meteorological controls include wind speed, precipitation and bins of
 daily maximum temperature. "Zip2" at the bottom of Panel B represents a 2-digit ZIP code region,
 an aggregation of 3-digit ZIP code areas, which are the smallest geographical units identified for the
 individuals in our data. The "sample restriction" also at the bottom of Panel B refers to the removal of
 outlier observations for PM2.5 ­ those above 35µg/m3 , the current 24-hour EPA standards for PM2.5.
 Standard errors double-clustered at the user and month-by-year levels are reported in parentheses.
 *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
                                                    28
                         Online Appendix (Not For Publication)




                 "Air Pollution and Adult Cognition:

                      Evidence from Brain Training"



                  Andrea La Nauze and Edson Severnini 




  
   La Nauze: University of Queensland, a.lanauze@uq.edu.au. Severnini: Carnegie Mellon University and
IZA, edsons@andrew.cmu.edu.


                                                 29
                                   Appendix A: Figures and Tables


                 Figure A.1: The 3-Digit ZIP Code Areas in the United States




Notes: This figure displays the 3-digit ZIP code areas in the continental United States. This is the smallest
geographical unit identified in the Lumosity brain training data, which is derived from a user's IP address.
For reference, there are currently 41,692 5-digit ZIP codes in the country, 929 3-digit ZIP code areas, and
99 2-digit ZIP code regions. Source: https://public.tableau.com/views/ZIP3Map/ZIP3NationalMap?.




                                                     30
                            Figure A.2: Distribution of Lumosity Users




Notes: This figure maps the distribution of users of Lumosity brain games in our sample over the period 2015-
2017. Gray indicates no users. Those individuals are scattered around the nation, with heavy concentrations
in the West coast, where Lumos Labs, the owner of Lumosity, are headquartered (San Francisco, CA).




                                                     31
                        Figure A.3: Daily PM2.5 Variation in Our Sample
                                     Panel A. Entire Distribution




                                 Panel B. Variation Above 25µg/m3




Notes: This figure displays the distribution of daily PM2.5 in our sample. The levels of PM2.5 are color-
coded according to the colors used by EPA to provide air quality information to the public via the air quality
index (AQI). Panel A shows the entire distribution. The median daily PM2.5 in our sample 4.48 µg/m3 ,
the mean is 5.61 µg/m3 , and the standard deviation 5.02 µg/m3 . Panel B zooms in over the portion of the
distribution above the threshold used in our main analysis ­ 25µg/m3 . This threshold is the World Health
Organization (WHO) air quality guideline value for 24-hour exposure to PM2.5, but still 10µg/m3 below
the U.S. National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for PM2.5 over 24 hours.

                                                     32
              Figure A.4: PM2.5 Impacts on Number and Composition of Players




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 on the number and composition
of players. The plotted coefficients are estimated in separate regressions of each outcome on an indicator for
P M 2.5 > 25 and the same control variables as in Equation (4) ­ wind speed, precipitation and bins of daily
maximum temperature. Our measure of ability is based on the first play in the memory game. In practice,
it is the residualized score from Equation (6). The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                     33
                Figure A.5: Nonlinear Impacts of PM2.5 on Cognitive Function




Notes: This figure displays the nonlinear impacts of exposure to PM2.5 relative to levels below 5µg/m3 . The
plotted coefficients are separately estimated using a version of Equation (4) with each of the seven 5µg/m3 -
bin indicators for PM2.5. For each estimate the sample is restricted to observations with P M 2.5 < 5µg/m3
and observations with high PM2.5 as defined by the bin indicator. The last bin is for PM2.5 between
35µg/m3 and 40µg/m3 . The colors of the coefficients in this figure are associated with the color code for
the AQI, as explained in A.3). Because the distribution of particulates is highly right-skewed, with the
median slightly below 5µg/m3 (see Figure A.3), in this figure the vertical bars around the coefficients are
90% confidence intervals.




                                                     34
      Figure A.6: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Age ­ Robustness Checks
      Panel A. Controlling for Game FE                   Panel B. Controlling for >5 Plays Dummy




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by age, controlling for addi-
tional variables. Panel A controls for game fixed effects, and Panel B for a dummy indicating that the play
is above the fifth for that user. The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence intervals.




                                                    35
            Figure A.7: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Gender and Age
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                      Panel B. Age Distribution and Male Shares




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by age-gender groups, and
descriptive statistics on the age-gender distribution in our sample. In Panel A, the plotted coefficients are
jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5 and
four age-gender groups ­ combinations of below/above 50 years old with male/female. In Panel B, the bars
depict the number of observations in each age range, and the markers show the change in the share of an
age group that is male relative to male share of 20-25 year olds.




                                                     36
                               Figure A.8: Learning Curves by Age
                             Panel A. Below vs. Above 50 Years Old




                                   Panel B. Detailed Age Groups




Notes: This figure displays the learning curve by age. Each panel plots coefficients of regressions by age
group of standardized scores on dummies for each number of plays. Panel A splits all users into two age
groups ­ below vs. above 50 years old ­ and Panel B provides a more detailed age breakdown.




                                                   37
       Figure A.9: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Domains ­ Robustness Check




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by cognitive domain, controlling
for a dummy indicating that the play is above the fifth for that user. The vertical bars around the coefficients
are 95% confidence intervals.




                                                      38
Figure A.10: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Initial Ability ­ Robustness Checks
      Panel A. Controlling for Game FE                   Panel B. Controlling for >5 Plays Dummy




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by initial ability, controlling
for additional variables. Panel A controls for game fixed effects, and Panel B for a dummy indicating that
the play is above the fifth for that user. Our measure of ability is based on the first play in the memory
game. In practice, it is the residualized score from Equation (6). The vertical bars around the coefficients
are 95% confidence intervals.




                                                    39
               Figure A.11: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Education
          Panel A. Estimated Effects                         Panel B. Education and Initial Ability




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by education, and descriptive
statistics on educational attainment and initial ability in our sample. In Panel A, the plotted coefficients
are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5
and three groups of educational attainment. The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence
intervals. In Panel B, the bars depict the number of observations in each education group, and the markers
show the change in average initial ability for an education group relative to the category less than college
degree. Our measure of ability is based on the first play in the memory game. In practice, it is the residualized
score from Equation (6).




                                                       40
Figure A.12: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Function by Learning Stage ­ Robustness
Checks




Notes: This figure displays the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by experience playing Lumosity
games, controlling for game fixed effects. The vertical bars around the coefficients are 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                   41
                           Table A.1: Lumosity Games
Name                 Domain              Skills                                                             Levels
Word Bubbles Rising Verbal Fluency       vocabulary, reading comprehension                                    Y
Lost in Migration*   Selective Attention selective attention, response inhibition                             N
Brain Shift Task     Flexibility         task switching, classification                                       N
Memory Matrix        Working Memory      spatial recall, visual memory span                                   Y
Chalkboard Challenge Math                quantitative, math, arithmetic reasoning                             N
             #
Speed Match          Speed               information processing                                               N
Pet Detective        Problem Solving     forming possible solutions, choosing the best                        Y
Notes: This table presents the seven Lumosity games used in our analysis. The first column lists the game
names. *Also known as the Flanker Task. # Also known as the N back task. The second column lists the
corresponding cognitive domains. The third column details the skills trained by the games. Lastly, the
fourth column reports whether there are different levels of difficulty within the same game.




                                                 42
                               Table A.2: Summary Statistics
                         Variables                                  (1)
                         Average Age                               48.78
                                                                  (16.39)

                         Proportion Age  50                        0.542
                                                                  (0.498)

                         Proportion of Males                       0.415
                                                                  (0.493)

                         Average Daily PM2.5 (in µg/m3 )           5.850
                                                                  (3.146)

                         Maximum Number of Plays per Game          20.32
                                                                  (13.75)

                         Proportion With Less Than College         0.338
                                                                  (0.473)

                         Proportion With Bachelor Degree           0.353
                                                                  (0.478)

                         Proportion With Post-graduate Degree      0.310
                                                                  (0.462)

                         Proportion of Paid Subscriber             0.367
                                                                  (0.482)
                         Number of Lumosity Users                 113,975
Notes : This table reports summary statistics for our main sample. Standard deviations are reported
in parentheses.




                                                43
                 Table A.3: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Age
                             Dep. Var.: Standardized Score        (1)
                             1[Daily PM2.5 >25] ×

                                1[Age <20]                     -1.604
                                                                (0.386)
                                                                [0.001]
                                                                {7.412}

                                1[Age 20­29]                   -0.479
                                                                (0.142)
                                                                [0.003]
                                                                {9.646}

                                1[Age 30-39]                     -0.235
                                                                (0.179)
                                                                [0.236]
                                                                {7.898}

                                1[Age 40-49]                    -0.414
                                                                 (0.153)
                                                                 [0.012]
                                                                {7.964}

                                1[Age 50-59]                    0.0373
                                                                (0.117)
                                                                [0.501]
                                                                {9.028}

                                1[Age 60-69]                    -0.0968
                                                                (0.122)
                                                                [0.445]
                                                                {9.359}

                                1[Age 70]                        0.146
                                                                (0.198)
                                                                [0.445]
                                                               {10.159}
                             Observations                      4,667,636
Notes : This table reports the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by age. Coefficients are
jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator of high PM2.5
and age groups. The estimating equation includes user fixed effects, month-by-year fixed effects, and
meteorological controls. Standard errors double-clustered at the user and month-by-year levels are
reported in parentheses (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011). *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Sharpened q values accounting for multiple
inference are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Conditional first-stage F statistics for
weak instruments are reported in curly braces (Sanderson and Windmeijer, 2016).




                                                  44
                Table A.4: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Domains
                       Dep. Var.: Standardized Score        (1)         (2)
                       1[Daily PM2.5 >25] ×

                          1[Verbal]                        -0.149
                                                          (0.163)
                                                             [1]
                                                          {8.287}
                          1[Attention]                     0.0738
                                                          (0.137)
                                                             [1]
                                                          {7.762}
                          1[Flexibility]                  -0.0632
                                                          (0.237)
                                                             [1]
                                                         {10.291}
                          1[Memory]                      -0.598
                                                          (0.275)
                                                          [0.304]
                                                         {20.239}
                          1[Math]                          -0.211
                                                          (0.208)
                                                             [1]
                                                         {10.358}
                          1[Speed]                        -0.0859
                                                          (0.206)
                                                             [1]
                                                          {6.499}
                          1[Problem] Solving               -0.418
                                                          (0.551)
                                                             [1]
                                                          {5.420}

                          1[Non-memory domains]                       -0.135
                                                                     (0.0811)
                                                                      [0.077]
                                                                     {42.873}
                          1[Memory domain]                            -0.594
                                                                       (0.276)
                                                                       [0.077]
                                                                     {26.787}
                       Observations                      4,667,636   4,667,636
Notes : This table reports the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by cognitive domain.
Coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the in-
dicator of high PM2.5 and cognitive domains. The estimating equation includes user fixed effects,
month-by-year fixed effects, and meteorological controls. Standard errors double-clustered at the user
and month-by-year levels are reported in parentheses (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011). *** de-
notes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Sharpened q
values accounting for multiple inference are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Conditional
first-stage F statistics for weak instruments are reported in curly braces (Sanderson and Windmeijer,
2016).
                                                  45
           Table A.5: PM2.5 Impacts on Cognitive Function by Initial Ability
                        Dep. Var.: Standardized Score        (1)        (2)
                        1[Daily PM2.5 >25] ×

                           1[Ability Quintile 1]          -0.463
                                                           (0.225)
                                                           [0.124]
                                                          {8.294}

                           1[Ability Quintile 2]          -0.669
                                                           (0.305)
                                                           [0.124]
                                                          {8.336}

                           1[Ability Quintile 3]            -0.181
                                                           (0.386)
                                                           [0.924]
                                                           {6.772}

                           1[Ability Quintile 4]           -0.0760
                                                           (0.302)
                                                           [0.928]
                                                           {9.055}

                           1[Ability Quintile 5]            0.304
                                                           (0.448)
                                                           [0.924]
                                                           {9.220}

                           1[Below Median Ability]                   -0.466
                                                                      (0.189)
                                                                      [0.035]
                                                                     {30.744}

                           1[Above Median Ability]                   0.00959
                                                                      (0.185)
                                                                      [0.921]
                                                                     {35.390}
                        Observations                       352,849    352,849
Notes : This table reports the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by initial ability. Coef-
ficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions between the indicator
of high PM2.5 and quintiles of initial ability. The estimating equation includes user fixed effects,
month-by-year fixed effects, and meteorological controls. Our measure of ability is based on the first
play in the memory game. In practice, it is the residualized score from Equation (6). Standard errors
double-clustered at the user and month-by-year levels are reported in parentheses (Cameron, Gelbach
and Miller, 2011). *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at
the 10% level. Sharpened q values accounting for multiple inference are reported in square brackets
(Anderson, 2008). Conditional first-stage F statistics for weak instruments are reported in curly braces
(Sanderson and Windmeijer, 2016).




                                                   46
     Table A.6: PM2.5 Impacts on Specific Cognitive Function by Learning Stage
                             Dep. Var.: Standardized Score       (1)
                             1[Daily PM2.5 >25] ×

                                1[ Below 5 Plays]             -0.506
                                                               (0.250)
                                                                [0.05]
                                                              {24.614}

                                1[Above 5 Plays]                -0.155
                                                               (0.115)
                                                               [0.077]
                                                              {47.494}

                             1[Below 5 Plays]                      0
                                                                  (.)
                                                                  [.]

                             1[Above 5 Plays]                 0.644
                                                              (0.0150)
                                                               [0.001]
                             Observations                     2,699,936
Notes : This table reports the impacts of exposure to PM2.5 above 25µg/m3 by experience playing
Lumosity games. Coefficients are jointly estimated using a version of Equation (4) with interactions
between the indicator of high PM2.5 and two categories of number of plays ­ fewer or more than
five plays. The coefficient of the indicator for below 5 plays is set to zero because it is the omit-
ted category. The estimating equation includes user fixed effects, month-by-year fixed effects, and
meteorological controls. Standard errors double-clustered at the user and month-by-year levels are
reported in parentheses (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011). *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Sharpened q values accounting for multiple
inference are reported in square brackets (Anderson, 2008). Conditional first-stage F statistics for
weak instruments are reported in curly braces (Sanderson and Windmeijer, 2016).




                                                   47
