                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE LONG-RUN SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF POLLUTION:
        HOW EXPOSURE TO LEAD AFFECTS EVERYONE IN THE CLASSROOM

                                         Ludovica Gazze
                                          Claudia Persico
                                         Sandra Spirovska

                                       Working Paper 28782
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28782


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2021




We are grateful to the North Carolina Division of Public Health and the North Carolina Education
Research Data Center for providing the merged blood lead level data linked to education records data
used in this analysis. The opinions expressed herein do not represent the views of the North Carolina
Departments of Public Instruction or Health. We are thankful to Manuel Bagues, Marco Bertoni, Eric
Chyn, James Fenske, Fanny Landaud, Victor Lavy, Lauren Russell, Viviane Sanfelice, and seminar
and conference participants at UChicago Urban Labs, University of Pennsylvania, York University,
APPAM, Temple University, University of Warwick, Brown University, Arizona State University,
Emory University, OSWEET, WE_ARE, ASSA, AEFP, and MEA for helpful comments and suggestions.
We are also grateful to the Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
the Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago, and American University's School of Public
Affairs and Provost for their initial financial support for data construction. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ludovica Gazze, Claudia Persico, and Sandra Spirovska. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Spillover Effects of Pollution: How Exposure to Lead Affects Everyone in
the Classroom
Ludovica Gazze, Claudia Persico, and Sandra Spirovska
NBER Working Paper No. 28782
May 2021
JEL No. I14,I24,Q52

                                        ABSTRACT

Children exposed to pollutants like lead are more disruptive and have lower achievement.
However, little is known about whether lead-exposed children affect the long-run outcomes of
their peers. We estimate these spillover effects using new data on preschool blood lead levels
(BLLs) matched to education data for all students in North Carolina public schools. We compare
siblings whose school-grade cohorts differ in the proportion of children with elevated BLLs,
holding constant school and peers' demographics. Having more lead-exposed peers is associated
with lower high-school graduation and SAT-taking rates and increased suspensions and absences.
Peer effects are larger for same-gendered students.

Ludovica Gazze                                Sandra Spirovska
Department of Economics                       University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Warwick                         Department of Economics
United Kingdom                                1180 Observatory Drive
Ludovica.Gazze@warwick.ac.uk                  Madison, WI 53706
                                              spirovska@wisc.edu
Claudia Persico
American University
School of Public Affairs
4400 Massachusetts Ave NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
cpersico@american.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28782
I. Introduction
        A growing literature shows that early life exposure to pollution hinders
health and human capital accumulation (Persico, Figlio, and Roth 2020; Alexander
and Currie 2017). For example, lead poisoned children are more likely to be
suspended and commit crimes (Aizer and Currie 2019; Reyes 2015) and have worse
academic achievement (Ferrie, Rolf, and Troesken 2012; Grönqvist, Nilsson, and
Robling 2020; Hollingsworth et al. 2020), consistent with lead's impacts on
children's neurological development. These associations manifest at blood lead
levels (BLLs) as low as 1­2 micrograms per deciliter (µg/dL) of blood (Aizer et al.
2018; Feigenbaum and Mueller 2016). Lead may also affect children's disability
status (Gazze 2016). These negative effects of lead exposure are costly to children,
families, and society in terms of reduced tax revenues and increased expenditure
on special education, crime, and health care (Reyes 2014). Recent estimates suggest
that at least 500,000 young children are still poisoned by lead each year in the US
(Aizer et al. 2018). 1 Low-income children are up to 12 times more likely to have
elevated BLLs (CDC 2005), and Black children are more than twice as likely to be
lead poisoned than their White peers (CDC 2005).
        So far, the literature has focused on estimating the effects of pollution and
lead poisoning on directly exposed children. However, these children interact daily
with peers. Because children exposed to lead are more disruptive, have lower
achievement, and engage in risky behavior, the effects of lead exposure might spill
over to affect everyone in the classroom. While these spillovers may have long term
consequences for students, few papers credibly document the long-run impacts of
childhood peers. In this paper, we document these spillover effects of lead




1
 In this paper, we use the words lead poisoning and lead exposure interchangeably. We follow the
CDC guidelines and define lead poisoning/elevated BLLs as BLLs above 5ug/dL.




                                               2
poisoning on children who are not directly exposed to lead, but are exposed to lead
poisoned school peers.
        In addition to considering the impacts of lead, a growing literature shows
that various types of common pollution exposure (from highways, toxic sites, etc.)
cause worse performance on exams and behavioral issues associated with
suspensions from school (Heissel, Simon, and Persico 2021; Persico and Venator
2021). If one child's exposure to pollution causes negative long run spillover effects
onto his peers, this increases the true costs of pollution and changes our
understanding of how pollution might affect long run human capital attainment.
When considering how common it is for low-income children to be exposed to
pollution sources, the finding that there are spillovers from pollution exposure
means that most children and public schools in the U.S. likely bear some of the cost
of pollution. Our data indicate that in North Carolina public schools between 2000
and 2017, 98.9 percent of middle school students without known lead exposure had
at least one lead poisoned child in their school cohort, 79.9 percent were in a school
cohort with at least 5 percent lead poisoned peers and 52.5 percent were in a school
cohort with at least 10 percent lead poisoned peers. 2 Thus, the spillover effects of
lead exposure are a heretofore unexplored mechanism through which social
context, pollution, and built environment could affect schools and children's
outcomes.
        Rigorously estimating peer effects is challenging because peers influence
each other simultaneously, so it is unclear whether a disruptive child causes their
classmates to misbehave, or whether the classmates cause them to be disruptive
(i.e., the reflection problem). In addition, peer groups are not randomly assigned;


2
  National Childhood Blood Lead Surveillance Data from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention suggest that lead exposure might be even more pervasive in the rest of the US. Indeed,
while the share of children tested for lead poisoning in North Carolina between 2012 and 2017 was
similar to the national average, the percent of NC children with BLLs above 5ug/dL was 0.4-0.7%
compared to 2-3% in the US overall.




                                               3
they are selected based in part on unobserved characteristics (i.e., the selection
problem). We overcome these identification challenges by using a novel data set
and rigorous identification strategy. We use rich education data from public schools
in North Carolina linked to data on children's BLLs measured by age six and
compare siblings whose cohorts happen to randomly differ in the proportion of
children with high preschool BLLs in their grade-cohort in the same school. Our
preferred specification includes family, school, grade, birth month, birth order, and
year fixed effects, and controls for a broad set of time varying child and cohort
demographic characteristics, as well as school quality. Since lead poisoning has
been linked to behavioral incidents, criminality, and lower test scores, we use it as
a proxy for peers with potentially disruptive behavior and lower academic
achievement. This methodology avoids the reflection problem because a child
cannot affect the BLLs of their peers, but lead poisoning might affect children
negatively, which in turn might affect peers. Including family fixed effects
mitigates the selection problem by controlling for unobserved family characteristics
that could be correlated with both peers' quality and a child's outcomes, such as
selection into schools with fewer lead poisoned children. Controlling for peers' race
and socioeconomic status suggests that our estimated effects are due to lead
poisoning and not peer demographics.
       We find that a ten percent increase in the share of peers in a child's cohort
that are exposed to lead is associated with a 0.2 percentage point increase in the
likelihood of suspension from school, a 1.6 percent increase. A ten percent increase
in the share of peers in a cohort exposed to lead is also associated with a 1.7
percentage point decrease in the likelihood that a child graduates high school, a 2
percent decrease in the graduation rate. We also find that having more lead-exposed
children in a child's cohort is associated with a higher likelihood of chronic
absenteeism and dropping out of school, and a decrease in the likelihood of taking
the SAT. Disruptive peers disproportionally affect the outcomes of Black students,




                                         4
suggesting that the spillover effects of pollution could be contributing to persistent
inequality in human capital accumulation. These findings generally hold in samples
limited to locations where we measure lead exposure and sibling matches less
noisily, and where students are less likely to switch schools in response to
disruptive peers. Our results are also largely robust to further testing for school-
switching directly and by including sibling-by-school fixed effects.
       We also find that disruptive peers disproportionally affect same-gendered
and, in the short run, same-race students. Furthermore, we find that students going
to school with a higher share of lead-exposed peers are more likely to be involved
in behavioral incidents with these disruptive students. Finally, exposure to
disruptive peers in middle school, rather than elementary school, appears to drive
long-run outcomes. We interpret our results as suggestive that homophily in
network formation might drive the spillover effects of lead poisoning through peers
influencing each other to engage in similar disruptive behavior.
       This paper makes three main contributions. First, this is the first study to
investigate the spillover effects of lead exposure on peers' academic achievement,
behavior, and long-run outcomes. By exploiting rich individual-level data, we
assess the costs of the spillover effects of lead exposure. Furthermore, our findings
have implications for more than just lead: our estimates imply that the true costs of
pollution are likely higher than the direct costs alone, especially for pollutants that
are known to affect behavior and suspensions from school.
       Second, this is among the first studies to examine the long-run impacts of
disruptive peers, as well as the channels through which these effects manifest.
Current evidence on the long-run effects of peers is mixed. While Carrell, Hoekstra,
and Kuka (2018) show that having peers exposed to domestic violence lowers
wages and educational attainment, Bietenbeck (2020) finds positive long-run
effects from peers who repeat kindergarten. We show that exposure to lead
poisoned peers can have long term consequences, including dropping out of high




                                          5
school, even for those children who were not themselves exposed to lead. We also
find suggestive evidence on the mechanisms ­ that homophily within groups and
exposure to disruptive peers in middle school might drive some of these effects
through the development of noncognitive skills. In particular, our robust results on
suspensions and chronic absenteeism strengthen the suggestive evidence provided
by Carrell, Hoekstra, and Kuka (2018) that noncognitive skills are a mechanism
through which disruptive peers affect long-term outcomes.
       Third, we contribute to a growing literature documenting the importance of
neighborhood effects for health, education, and behavior outcomes. Our findings
on the long-term effects of exposure to lead poisoned children might help explain
why high-poverty and high-pollution neighborhoods have persistent effects
(Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016). Low-income children are more likely to live
near sources of toxic waste (Persico, Figlio, and Roth 2020; Banzhaf, Ma, and
Timmins 2019), and neighborhood characteristics contribute significantly to health
disparities, for example in asthma rates (Alexander and Currie 2017). Our paper
presents another channel through which inequalities in prevalence of pollutants at
the neighborhood level contribute to the persistence of inequality in the US.

II. Background
Lead Exposure
       Ingestion or inhalation of lead causes lead poisoning, which, if severe, can
induce widespread brain damage (Meyer, McGeehin, and Falk 2003). Small
children are especially exposed to lead-contaminated soil and dust from paint due
to normal hand-to-mouth activity. Moreover, lead is most damaging to small
children: they absorb and retain more lead than adults and their neurological
development is particularly susceptible to neurotoxins (Meyer, McGeehin, and Falk
2003). Specifically, lead causes the axons of nerve cells to degenerate and lose their
myelin coats (Meyer, McGreehin and Falk, 2003). Early life exposure to lead has




                                          6
been shown to cause cognitive disabilities, lower test scores, increase suspensions
from school, and even affect crime and wages in adulthood (Persico, Figlio, and
Roth 2020; Gazze 2016; Grönqvist, Nilsson, and Robling 2020). Lead has also been
associated with problems in cognition, executive functioning, abnormal social
behavior (including aggression), and fine motor control (Cecil et al. 2008). Reyes
(2014) estimates that lead poisoning costs $200 billion for a single birth-year
cohort.

Peer Effects in the Classroom
          Peer effects can work through different channels, both positively and
negatively. Children teaching each other is an example of a positive peer effect,
while disruptive behavior can negatively affect the learning of all children in a
classroom (Carrell and Hoekstra 2010; Figlio 2007; Hoxby 2000; Lazear 2001).
Using the random assignment of roommates in college, Sacerdote (2001) finds that
roommates can influence college grade point averages positively or negatively. A
variety of mechanisms link peer composition and academic outcomes, including
differential curricular offerings and instructional practices in classes with higher
average ability (Jackson 2013); social dynamics in a student's reference group
(Hoxby 2000; Brenøe and Zölitz 2020); and low performing students not keeping
up with higher-achieving peers (Imberman, Kugler, and Sacerdote 2012). Peers
might also draw disproportionately on a teacher's time and influence class culture
and standards.
          One strand of the literature examines how low-performing and disruptive
children affect peers. Having more low achieving peers or peers with learning
disabilities is associated with lower achievement (Hoxby 2000; Fletcher 2010).
Moreover, boys with feminine sounding names and children exposed to domestic




                                         7
violence are both more likely to be disruptive and negatively affect peers'
achievement and behavior (Figlio 2007; Carrell and Hoekstra 2010). 3
         Less is known about the long-term impacts of disruptive peers or the
mechanisms through which disruptive peers affect long-run outcomes. Carrell,
Hoekstra, and Kuka (2018) find that having more disruptive peers in elementary
school leads to lower earnings in adulthood and lower college attendance. Bifulco,
Fletcher, and Ross (2011) find that a higher percentage of high school classmates
with college-educated mothers increases school completion and college attendance.
Bobonis and Finan (2009) find that the PROGRESA program in Mexico increased
college attendance of non-eligible peers. Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2013)
find that a higher share of girls in ninth grade reduces educational attainment and
the likelihood of selecting an academic track for college but lowers teen birth rates. 4
By contrast, Anelli and Peri (2019) find that peers' gender in high school does not
affect college major choice, college performance, or income in Italy.
         In this paper, we show that children who were exposed to lead are associated
with both short- and long-run negative outcomes for their peers. We provide fresh
evidence on the spillover effects of lead, the long-run effects of having disruptive
peers, and the mechanisms through which peers affect long-run outcomes.

III. Data Description
Education Data

         We use 1997-2017 population-level data on every child attending public
school in North Carolina, including charter schools, linked to blood lead test
records when available. These unique data include home address identifiers that



3
  There are many excellent papers on short run peer effects. See Epple and Romano (2011) and
Sacerdote (2011) for overviews of the literature on peer effects.
4
  Relatedly, Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert (2020) find that having peers with special needs lowers
performance, the probability of entering post-compulsory education, and income.




                                                8
enable us to match siblings. To our knowledge, this is the first state-level data set
linking individual BLLs to schooling records that allow the matching of siblings
and students to classrooms. The data also include detailed information on students'
race and economic disadvantage status in a given year, annual standardized test
scores administered by the state, suspensions, absences, high school dropout and
completion information, college intentions, as well as teacher characteristics.
        While we use the entire sample to calculate the number of children per
school-grade-year cohort who have elevated BLLs (as well as all of our cohort
controls), for our main analysis we drop children who do not have siblings, as well
as children who live in large buildings since we cannot reliably identify families in
those buildings. In Section V, we show how omitting sibling fixed effects and using
the whole sample affects our estimates and we test for whether error in sibling
matches affects the results. Our main analysis also drops students who themselves
have an elevated BLL and estimates the spillover effects of lead exposure on
children without known lead poisoning. The Data Appendix provides more
information on the linkage performed by the North Carolina Education Research
Data Center (NCERDC) and our sibling identification algorithm.
        For our contemporaneous outcomes, we use the average of standardized
mathematics and reading end-of-grade (EOG) test scores administered in grades 3-
8, indicators for being absent for more than 21 days, 5 and having at least one out-
of-school (OOS) suspension, 6 as well as the number of days the child was
suspended out-of-school each year in grades 6-12. We also construct indicators for
being suspended on the same day and for being involved in a behavioral incident
with a lead-exposed cohort peer. Because EOG exams and exam scales changed



5
  The data break down absences into 0-7, 8-14, 15-21, and more than 21 days. We focus on the last
bin as an indicator of chronic absenteeism.
6
  We focus on OOS suspensions because the reporting requirements for these did not change
during the sample period, while in-school suspension reporting became more stringent over time.




                                               9
multiple times over the sample period, we limit our analysis to exams taken
between 1996-1997 and 2004-2005, which were administered to all children and
had a similar structure. 7
        For our long-term outcomes, we use indicators for high school graduation,
dropping out, 8 community and four-year college intentions in 12th grade, and
whether the student took the SAT in high school. The Data Appendix provides more
details on the construction of our outcome variables.
        We construct various individual, cohort, and time-varying school
covariates. Individual-level covariates include indicators for gender, race, being
economically disadvantaged in a year, having a blood lead level test, birth month,
and birth order. Our cohort level covariates include the share of cohort peers that
are non-white, economically disadvantaged, and tested for lead. The school-year
covariates include the share of teachers with a Master's degree, school size, and the
stability rate which is defined as the percentage of students from the October
membership count who are still present in the second semester (90 days later).


Blood Lead Levels Data

        We obtained individual blood lead test records for children up to age six
from the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services for the years
1992-2016. Test records include the date of blood draw, test result in µg/dL, and
the child's identifier. We define a child as having an elevated BLL (EBLL) if their




7
  During our sample period, the scale for the math EOG exam changed in 2001-2002. The reading
EOG exam scale changed in 2002-2003.
8
  The data include separate variables for dropping out and graduating. Dropping out of school is
distinct from school switching, death, moving, promotion, graduation, and other confounding
factors, and specific reason codes are given for dropping out. If a student is ever observed as
graduating, we count them as graduating and not dropping out.




                                              10
highest BLL is 5 µg/dL, the upper reference interval value per the 2012 guidelines
by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC 2013). 9
        Childhood lead screening is not mandatory in North Carolina. However,
federal guidelines mandate that all children on Medicaid are screened for lead
poisoning at ages one and two. Thus, we expect screening to be higher among low-
income children, who have a higher likelihood of lead exposure. We construct
indicators for children missing blood lead tests and include these children in our
analysis. We compute the share of a child's peers with EBLLs using all children in
the cohort or classroom as the denominator, independently of whether they have a
blood lead test. Figure 1 plots the share of children with blood tests and the share
of children with EBLLs by birth cohort in our sample, showing that as lead
screening increases over time, the incidence of lead poisoning decreases. Despite
this secular trend, Appendix Figure A1 shows that first-born children have only 1.5
percentage points more lead-exposed peers than their younger siblings, suggesting
that our identification strategy is not likely to be driven by differences in outcomes
between older and younger siblings. Given the large literature on birth order
showing that earlier-born siblings typically have better outcomes (see, e.g., Black
et al., 2005; Conley and Glauber, 2006; Price, 2008; and Booth and Kee, 2009), it
is unlikely that birth order effects would be driving our results since this would
require that later-born siblings would have better outcomes than earlier-born
siblings. Moreover, in our regressions on the siblings sample we control for birth
order fixed effects.

Sample Description



9
  This value is the 97.5th percentile of BLLs in U.S. children aged 1­5 years from the combined
2007­2008 and 2009­2010 cycles of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
Starting in 1991 and prior to 2012, CDC defined BLLs 10 µg/dL as the "level of concern" for
children aged 1­5 years. In robustness checks, we define a child as having an elevated BLL if
alternatively the mean of their BLLs is 5 µg/dL or their highest BLL is 10 µg/dL.




                                              11
       Since our blood lead level data begin in 1992 and include children tested up
to age 6, we restrict our sample to children born after 1986. Table 1 presents
summary statistics for the sample of all children attending public schools in North
Carolina (3.3 million children, Column 1) and our analysis sample of siblings (1.3
million children, Column 2). The Data Appendix details our sample selection
criteria. 39.6 percent of children in our analysis sample have a blood lead test, and
10.9 percent have at least one test greater or equal than 5 µg/dL, slightly higher
shares than in the full sample in Column 1. Children in our sibling sample are also
marginally more likely to be economically disadvantaged, less likely to be Black,
attend schools with slightly larger cohorts but have slightly more teachers with a
Master's degree, and have slightly better outcomes. Overall, children with siblings
are fairly similar to the full sample, and our results are very similar when we include
all children in a model using school-grade and grade-year fixed effects, which lends
support to the external validity of our results.
       Children with EBLLs are more likely to be Black, be economically
disadvantaged (ED) as measured by an indicator for having ever received free or
reduced-price lunch, and have teachers without Master's degrees (Columns 4 and
5). The average cohort in our sample includes 225 children. Children who spend at
least one elementary school year in a cohort with above median share of lead-
exposed children (or >10.1 percent of cohort peers) have lower test scores, higher
suspension rates, lower graduation and SAT taking rates, and have a lower
probability of intending to attend a four-year college (Columns 6 and 7). These
children are also more likely to be Black, be economically disadvantaged, have
teachers without Master's degrees, and have a blood lead test themselves. Our
identification strategy controls for family background with family fixed effects,
assuaging concerns of omitted variable bias due to these differences.




                                          12
IV. Identification Strategy
       Rigorously estimating peer effects has proven difficult methodologically
and due to limitations of existing data. First, peers influence each other
simultaneously, so it is unclear whether a disruptive child causes their classmates
to misbehave, or whether the classmates cause them to be disruptive. This is called
the reflection problem (Manski 1993). Second, peer groups are not randomly
assigned; they are selected based in part on unobserved characteristics (Angrist
2014). Children in the same classroom often share similar backgrounds. Moreover,
attentive parents might remove their children from classrooms with more disruptive
peers. Because of this self-selection into groups, it is challenging to determine
whether the outcome is a causal effect of the peers or the reason the individuals
joined the peer group (Carrell and Hoekstra 2010; Hoxby 2000). Third, unobserved
factors might simultaneously cause students and their peers to perform poorly.
       We solve the reflection problem by finding a predetermined proxy for peer
ability: lead exposure. Consistent with the literature on lead exposure and academic
outcomes, being exposed to lead is strongly associated with worse academic
achievement, a higher likelihood of suspension, and a lower probability of
graduating or intending to attend a four-year college in our sample (Figure 2).
       Previous research has proxied for peer ability and behavior using
preexisting measures such as peers' race and gender (Hoxby and Weingarth 2006;
Hoxby 2000), feminine-sounding names of male peers (Figlio 2007), peers'
retention status (Lavy, Paserman, and Schlosser 2012), peers' disability (Fletcher
2010), or peers' exposure to domestic violence (Carrell and Hoekstra 2010). Our
approach is similar in that we use the presence of peers with elevated blood lead
levels to estimate how early health shocks (i.e., lead exposure) spill over within
school contexts to exacerbate inequality through peer effects. This is a valid
approach as a student cannot affect their peers' elevated blood lead levels.




                                         13
          Yet, a child's lead exposure could be correlated with their socioeconomic
status, which in turn has been associated with peers' learning disruptions (Hoxby
and Weingarth 2006; Hoxby 2000). Thus, to causally identify the spillover effect
of a child's lead exposure on their peers we further control for the share of cohort
peers who are non-White or economically disadvantaged. We also control for the
share of the student's peers who have been tested for lead exposure. Because
screening rates are higher among low-socioeconomic status students, additionally
controlling for screening rates mitigates concerns about selection into testing.
Finally, we exclude children with known EBLLs so that we can isolate the spillover
effects of lead poisoning on peers who are not lead poisoned.
          We first examine how lead exposure affects contemporaneous outcomes,
that is test scores, suspensions from school, and absences of peers without known
EBLLs. To start, we compare students who attend the same school but whose grade
cohorts randomly happen to have different proportions of children with EBLLs.
This specification closely follows the one used by Carrell, Hoekstra, and Kuka
(2018) and includes school-by-grade and grade-by-year fixed. The school-by-grade
fixed effects control for unobservable characteristics of students who attend the
same school and grade. Grade-year fixed effects account for common shocks to a
cohort. This estimating equation is as follows:
                   
(1)  = 1                           +  +  +  +  +  + 
                        -1

where  is some outcome for child i who either has not been screened for lead
exposure or has always tested below 5 µg/dL, attending school s, in grade g and in
            
year t.                    is the share of students in a child's school-grade-year
                -1

cohort (or school-classroom-grade-year cohort) with known EBLLs not including
                                                    
the student themselves. The coefficient 1 on                       captures the
                                                       -1

effect of having 100 percent of a child's peers in a given year with known EBLLs.




                                         14
Xit is a vector of child-specific control variables, including gender, race, birth
month fixed effects, economically disadvantaged (ED) status in each year, and an
indicator for whether a child was tested for lead. The vector  controls for
time-varying school-grade characteristics: the percent non-White students by
school-grade-year, the percent economically disadvantaged by school-grade-year,
and the share of students who have been tested for lead exposure by school-grade-
year. We also control for school time-varying characteristics: annual school size,
the share of teachers with Master's degrees and the school-level stability rate. 
is a school-by-grade fixed effect to account for school-by-grade-specific shocks.
 is a grade-by-year fixed effect to account for secular cohort-level trends.  is
an exam type fixed effect that restricts our comparison to children who took the
same exam. We cluster standard errors at the school level to account for arbitrary
correlation in the error terms.
       However, this specification does not account for two potential sources of
bias. First, school composition may change over time, and perhaps in response to
peers' quality. In addition, families select into schools. Thus, in our preferred
specification, we compare siblings whose grade cohorts randomly happen to have
different proportions of children with EBLLs. Including family fixed effects
mitigates the selection problem by controlling for unobserved family characteristics
that could be correlated with both peer quality and child's outcomes, such as
parents' propensity to move their children to schools with fewer lead poisoned
children. Moreover, an advantage of the North Carolina setting is that over most of
our study period there were relatively few options for choosing public schools ­
there was no statewide voucher program (until quite recently) and relatively few
charter schools, which accept students independently of catchment areas (and
whose students we observe). Thus, the only way to attend a different school than
the one assigned by catchment zone in most places was by moving or attending,




                                          15
and fully paying for, private school. Only 5.3 percent of all North Carolina children
attended private school over this time period (NC DPI 2020). Thus, as we will
show, selection into schools was minimal. Including school fixed effects further
controls for students' characteristics that are common to the school's catchment
area. Remaining idiosyncratic variation in the BLLs of siblings' cohorts offers
plausibly exogenous variation to identify the spillover effects of lead and the effects
of peer quality more broadly. 10 Our main estimation equation is thus given by:
                     
(2)  = 1                                  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +
                           -1


which is identical to equation (1) except for the fact that we substitute the school-
by-grade fixed effects  and grade-by-year fixed effects  with family ( ),
grade ( ), school ( ), and year ( ) fixed effects, and include birth order fixed
effects in Xit.
         There are three main threats to the internal validity of our estimates. First,
our estimates would be biased if a child's peers' BLLs were correlated to the child's
own BLLs, or their ability, other than through classroom interactions. To address
this issue, we measure lead exposure prior to school entrance. Moreover, family
fixed effects account for omitted variables such as unobserved lead exposure or
parental characteristics that could confound the effects of peer quality. School fixed
effects help us account for selection into schools. Second, our estimates could be
biased in the presence of common shocks that are systematically correlated with
the proportion of peers with BLLs in a school-grade-year. Time-varying school and
teacher controls help assuage concerns that these channels drive our results. Third,
bias could arise if high-quality students systematically select out of schools when


10
  97.9 percent of sibling groups in our sample present variation in the share of lead-poisoned peers,
suggesting that selection into treatment might not be a concern in our sample (Miller, Shenhav, and
Grosz 2019).




                                                16
there are more students with EBLLs. We test for school switching across siblings
in Section VD, where we also show that our results are largely robust to including
school-by-family fixed effects.
           Finally, it is important that we have enough variation in our regressor of
interest, the share of children with EBLLs in a school-grade-year, after partialling
out our preferred set of controls and fixed effects. Appendix Figure A3 shows the
distribution of the residuals obtained from a regression of the share of a student's
peers with EBLLs at the school-grade-year level on our preferred set of controls
and fixed effects, including family, school, grade, and year fixed effects.

V. Results
A. The Contemporaneous Effects of Peers Exposed to Lead on Child Outcomes

           We begin by showing the effects of peers with elevated BLLs on
contemporaneous standardized test scores, out-of-school suspensions, and
absences. Figure 3 shows that the share of a child's peers with EBLLs is negatively
correlated with the child's test scores, and positively correlated with their likelihood
of receiving a suspension in the raw data. Table 2 confirms these patterns are causal.
Panel A presents the results for the effect of additional cohort peers who are lead
poisoned on a child's outcomes using equation (1), while Panel B uses our preferred
specification in equation (2) with family, school, grade, and year fixed effects. 11
The two panels show a very similar pattern of results: a higher share of peers with
EBLLs is associated with a higher likelihood of, and longer, out-of-school
suspensions, as well as a higher likelihood of absences. Generally, within-siblings
comparisons appear to estimate slightly smaller effects than comparisons within a




11
     The sample size is smaller than in Column 1 of Table 1 due to singletons and missing outcomes.




                                                 17
school-grade, suggesting that family fixed effects better control for endogenous
selection. 12
         In Panel B, we find that a ten percent increase in the proportion of cohort-
level peers with elevated BLLs in a given year leads to a 0.2 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of out-of-school suspension, compared to siblings in the
same school. In other words, attending school with 10 percent more lead poisoned
peers increases the suspension rate by 1.6 percent above the mean of 12.4 percent,
and increases the suspension duration by one hour based on a 8-hour school day.
Moreover, these increased suspensions appear to be driven at least in part by
suspensions on the same day as suspensions for lead poisoned children and
behavioral incidents including lead poisoned children. 13 Finally, we note that the
effect of lead poisoned peers on suspensions is similar to the effect of economically
disadvantaged peers, while the coefficient on non-White peers is negative.
         Increased suspensions for peers of lead poisoned children could be due to
more punitive policies at the cohort-level. For example, teachers might be more
prone to suspending students for minor misbehavior in cohorts with more disruptive
students. To disentangle peers' behavior from school policies, we look at the effects
of lead poisoned peers on absences, which should not be driven by school policies.
We find that a 10 percent increase in the proportion of cohort-level peers with
elevated BLLs increases the likelihood of chronic absenteeism by 0.4 percentage
points, or 10 percent on a base of 4.2 percent, suggesting that our results are driven
by students misbehaving more when they have more lead poisoned peers and not
blanket-style school policies. Finally, some specifications show a decrease in test

12
   Appendix Table A1 estimates the same specification as in Panel A of Table 1 on the sibling
sample to see if results differ when restricting to siblings. We find similar results using the sibling
sample compared with the sample using all children.
13
   Placebo estimates in Appendix Figure A.2 show that we estimate effects of higher shares of
peers with EBLLs on the likelihood of being suspended or involved in an incident with a student
with EBLL that are 154-165% of what the mere size of the proportion of children with EBLLs in a
given cohort implies.




                                                  18
scores among students with more lead poisoned peers, although the point estimate
is positive and not statistically significant at conventional levels in our preferred
specification. This suggests that the effects of having lead poisoned peers on the
long run outcomes described in Section VB may operate through noncognitive
skills and behavior, rather than a learning channel. 14 However, it is difficult to fully
disambiguate between these explanations.
         While we use cohort-level variation in our primary specification to avoid
the issue of selection into classrooms by students, Panel C of Table 2 presents the
estimates of the effect of having more lead poisoned peers in the same classroom
using family, school, grade, and year fixed effects and all controls specified in
equation (2). We define peer exposure at the classroom level by averaging the
number of peers with EBLLs across all classes a child takes in that year. Thus, if
students switch classrooms, they will have more peers overall. 15 We find that
classroom peers have a larger effect on suspensions and absences than cohort peers.
These results could be due to both stronger connections with classroom peers and
selection into classrooms.

B. Long Term Effects of Peers Exposed to Lead

         We next examine whether a child's lead poisoned peers in elementary and
middle school affect that child's long-run outcomes. Table 3 presents estimates of
these long-run effects by estimating the following regressions at the student level:
                     
(3)  = 1                                    +  +  +  +  + 
                            -1




14
   Several recent papers have shown that noncognitive skills are very important to long run outcomes
over and above test scores, such as Chetty et al. (2011) and Jackson (2018).
15
   We only have classroom-level data for a subset of the children in the sample from 2006 to 2017,
whereas the cohort level variation is available from 1997-2017. Since we restrict test scores to 1997-
2005, we cannot estimate the effects of classroom peers on test scores. Children in grades 6 and up
usually switch classrooms, so they are counted as many times as the number of classes they take
with each student.




                                                 19
                   
(4)  = 1                              +  +  +  +  +  +  + 
                         -1


where  and  include all of the individual-level controls from our primary
specification, as well as the average share of non-White peers, the average share of
economically disadvantaged peers, the average share of peers tested for lead, and
the average school size, school stability rate and share of teachers with masters
degrees over elementary and middle school. Equation (3) mirrors equation (1) by
including school-by-grade ( ) and grade-by-year ( ) fixed effects. In equation
(4),  ,  ,  and  are family, school, grade, and year fixed effects as in equation
(2). Grade and year are measured during the child's last observation. The
coefficient 1 captures the effect of having 100 percent of peers with known EBLLs
in elementary and middle school.
       Panels A and B of Table 3 present estimates of 1 from equations (3) and
(4) respectively. We examine the effect of elementary and middle school peers with
EBLLs on graduation and dropout rates, 4- and 2-year college intentions, and SAT
taking. As with short-run outcomes, within-siblings comparisons appear to estimate
slightly smaller effects than comparisons within a school-grade, suggesting that
family fixed effects better control for endogenous selection.
       Our preferred specification in Panel B of Table 3 shows that a child whose
average cohort in elementary and middle school has 10 percent more lead poisoned
peers has a 1.7 percentage point lower likelihood of graduating high school,
representing a 2 percent decrease on the mean graduation rate of 89 percent. We
also find that having 10 percent more lead poisoned peers increases the likelihood
of dropping out by 0.48 percentage points and decreases the likelihood of taking
the SAT while in high school by 2.3 percentage points, or a 4.3 percent decrease on
the mean rate of 53.2 percent. Finally, a higher share of lead poisoned peers
decreases the likelihood that a student intends to attend a four-year college in Panel




                                         20
A, although this result is not statistically significant at conventional levels in our
preferred specification.
        Panel C of Table 3 estimates the long-run effect of lead poisoned peers in
elementary and middle school cohorts separately. We find that long-run outcomes
are largely driven by middle school peers. This result is in line with our findings in
Table 2--that exposure to disruptive peers affects behavior in middle school, which
in turn could set students on a path to lower graduation and college attendance rates.
Peers in middle school also could be especially impactful for long-run outcomes if
middle school is a time when some students are deciding whether to remain in
school. Finally, student learning and behavior in middle school might be especially
important for college readiness (Naven 2019).
       While we find mixed evidence of peer effects on test scores, we estimate
effects on college going that are similar in magnitude to those obtained by Carrell,
Hoekstra, and Kuka (2018). Those authors find that one male peer exposed to
domestic violence increases the number of suspensions by 0.01 (although this result
is not statistically significant) and decreases four-year college going by 1.4
percentage points. Using our cohort results and assuming that there are 25 students
in a class, we calculate that adding an additional lead poisoned peer to each class,
a 0.04% increase in the share of lead poisoned peers, would lead to a 0.08
percentage points increase in the probability of being suspended, a 12-minutes
increase in the suspension duration, a 0.92 percentage point reduction in the
likelihood of taking the SATs, a proxy for college intentions, and a 0.67 percentage
point reduction in graduating high school.

C. Mechanisms and Heterogeneity of Estimated Effects

       We hypothesize that children friends' groups might drive peer effects. As
we lack data on friendship networks, we exploit the fact that children likely sort
into groups with similar characteristics (Jackson 2010). Table 4 presents both the




                                         21
effect of exposure to a higher share of lead poisoned peers and the additional effect
of exposure to a higher share of lead poisoned peers of the same gender (Panel A),
race (Panel B), and same gender and same race (Panel C). We find that same gender
peers with EBLLs have larger effects on both short-run outcomes (suspensions) and
long-run outcomes (high school graduation and SAT taking), while same-race peers
have larger effects on suspensions only. The limited effects of same-race peers on
long-run outcomes suggest the effects of homophily in networks might diminish
over time, potentially due to selection.
       Because exposure to lead poisoned peers could interact with a child's
background to shape their outcomes, we next study heterogeneity in peer effects by
demographic subgroups. For example, students of different socioeconomic status
might have differential access to resources, such as academic help outside of
school, that could ameliorate the effects of peers with EBLLs. Table 5 presents our
preferred estimates by race/ethnicity (White, non-Hispanic in Panel A, Black
students in Panel B, and Hispanic students in Panel C), by economically
disadvantaged status (never economically disadvantaged in Panel D, sometimes
economically disadvantaged in Panel E, and always economically disadvantaged in
Panel F), and by gender (girls in Panel G and boys in panel H).
       We find some evidence of heterogeneous effects of lead poisoned peers on
graduation by race and gender. Black students see the largest decrease in high
school graduation from lead poisoned peers. Boys also seem more affected than
girls by lead poisoned peers, although the difference is not statistically significant.
Black and male students have lower graduation rates to start with, so our results
suggest that these students' learning and behavior might be disproportionally
affected when there are disruptive peers. Panel A of Appendix Table A2 shows that
lead poisoned boys have larger negative effects on their peers than lead poisoned
girls for suspensions from school and SAT taking. Together, these results support




                                           22
the hypothesis that peer effects are mediated by assortative matching of peer
groups, as shown in Table 4.
           We find little systematic evidence of heterogeneity by socioeconomic
status. Students who are economically disadvantaged only in some grades appear
to have larger increases in suspensions and decreases in graduation rates than
students who are either never or always economically disadvantaged, but this
difference is not statistically significant. Appendix Table A3 presents estimates of
the effects of lead poisoned peers for children in schools with different levels of
poverty. We find stronger negative peer effects on suspensions in schools with the
highest share of economically disadvantaged students, but mixed evidence of
heterogeneity in long-run outcomes. This finding suggests that poverty might
exacerbate the effects of having lead poisoned peers.

D. Additional Threats to Internal Validity

           This section discusses and tests for threats to internal validity, including
spurious correlation, selection into lead testing, measurement error, and
endogenous sorting.
           If our results are driven by increases in peers' blood lead levels, we would
expect students exposed to a higher percentage of cohort peers with elevated BLLs
to do worse. Figure 4 plots estimates from equations (2) and (4) using bins for
different percentages of cohort peers with elevated BLLs (0-5%, 5%-10%, 10%-
15%, 15%-20%, 20%-100%). 16 We find a stronger effect of lead poisoned peers on
suspensions and graduation rates as the percentage of peers with elevated BLLs
increases. Moreover, Figure 5 shows that our estimates are unlikely to be due to
random chance. This figure plots the results from estimating 500 placebo
specifications in which we assign a random share of lead poisoned peers to each


16
     We omit the indicator for having 0-5% of cohort peers with elevated BLLs from the regression.




                                                 23
school-grade-year cohort drawn from a distribution with the same mean and
standard deviation as the empirically observed peers' distribution. Our true
estimates for the effects of lead poisoned peers on suspensions and graduation rates
fall well outside the distribution of estimates from the placebo specifications.
           However, we do not observe lead exposure for all children and there may
be selection in who is tested for lead, implying that we measure the share of lead
poisoned children in each cohort with error. Since we compute the share of lead
poisoned peers over all students in a cohort, irrespective of whether they have a
blood lead test, unknown lead poisoned peers would attenuate our results. North
Carolina requires screening for all children living in zip codes where at least one
block group within the zip code has 27 percent or more homes built prior to 1950. 17
Column 1 of Table 6 shows the effects of lead poisoned peers on children in these
high-risk zip codes, where screening rates are 16 percent higher than average. We
find only a slightly larger effect on graduation than in the full sample suggesting
attenuation bias due to measurement error is a minor concern.
           Furthermore, we identify siblings based on home addresses, which could
lead to error, particularly in multi-family homes. Thus, Column 2 of Table 6 shows
results on the sample of Census tracts where the majority of homes are single family
homes. Again, we find only a slightly larger effect on graduation than in the full
sample.
           In addition, if parents of high-achieving students pull their children out of a
cohort with particularly disadvantaged or lead poisoned students, such nonrandom
selection could lead us to misattribute poor peers' performance to the larger
presence of lead poisoned students. Importantly, most of North Carolina did not
offer school choice options for public schools over our sample period: with one
exception, up until the 2014-2015 school year, students could only switch schools


17
     The designation also adjusts for prevalence of elevated BLLs (Hanchette 1999).




                                                 24
if they switched into a charter or magnet school, which we observe in our data. 18
Column 3 of Table 6 shows that our results are larger for children in zip codes with
no charter schools or other school choice options (at the time), which are effectively
no-choice zip codes, suggesting our results in Table 3 are a lower bound on the true
spillovers of lead poisoning.
         Table 7 formally investigates the association between a student's share of
lead poisoned peers and school switching. We find limited evidence of increased
switching to public or charter schools of students with higher shares of lead
poisoned peers or of their siblings, and if anything the coefficients are negative.
Thus, differential sorting does not appear to drive our results. To further test
whether differential school switching biases our results, Column 4 of Table 6
controls for siblings-by-school fixed effects, effectively comparing siblings only in
grades during which they attend the same school. 19 We find spillover effects of lead
poisoned peers that are two-thirds the size of our main result.
         Our estimates could also be biased if the share of peers with EBLLs in a
school-grade-year is systematically correlated with students' or peers'
characteristics other than those included in equation (4). Column 5 of Table 6
controls for the share of a student's peers who live in block groups with above-
median income, share Black and Hispanic residents, share in poverty, and share
with a high school degree. The estimate of the effects of lead poisoned peers is
virtually indistinguishable from our main estimate in Table 3, suggesting that we
are capturing the true effect of lead exposure, and not other correlates. Column 6 of
Table 6 adds fixed effects for the Census block group where students reside when


18
   In the 2014-2015 school year, North Carolina implemented the Opportunity Scholarships
program, a voucher program for low income children. Children whose families make less than 133
percent of the qualifying amount for the federal free or reduced-price lunch program qualify for the
voucher, which can be used for any school. In addition, the Charlotte Mecklenburg Public School
district has had a school choice program from 2002 so we exclude that district.
19
   Bertoni, Brunello, and Cappellari (2020) use this design to study the effects of privileged peers.




                                                25
they first appear in the school data. The results are similar to those in our main
specification despite the sample size being smaller due to missing block group
information,      suggesting       that     neighborhood        characteristics,      including
contemporaneous pollution exposure not captured by BLLs by age 6, do not drive
the results. Column 7 of Table 6 further shows that estimates using more stringent
school-grade fixed effects are similar to our main results that include school and
grade fixed effects.
        Finally, because the incidence of lead poisoning has decreased over time
(Figure 1), our primary estimates might capture similarly occurring trends in
outcomes despite controlling for grade and year fixed effects. To assuage this
concern, in Column 8 of Table 6, we control for school-year fixed effects and find
peer effects that are larger than our main results, suggesting that differential trends
in neighborhood-level removal of lead hazards might lead us to underestimate the
spillover effects of lead poisoning, if anything.
        To address the concern that blood lead levels are measured with some error,
in Panels B and C of Appendix Table A2, we show that our results are largely robust
to using different measures of lead-exposed peers, although when we define EBLLs
as BLLs10 µg/dL we find larger effects on long-run outcomes, suggesting that the
severity of lead poisoning might affect the magnitude of these peer effects. 20 In
Panel D we include all students, even those who are exposed to lead, and control
for one's own lead exposure. The estimates are largely similar to our main results.
        Finally, Appendix Table A4 shows the robustness of our specification to
different sets of controls. Panel A shows that when omitting all controls other than
family, school, grade, and year fixed effects, we would find larger



20
  We estimate a small and insignificant effect of peers with BLLs10 µg/dL on suspensions. One
potential explanation is that interventions targeted at children with BLLs above this intervention
threshold successfully improve these children's short-run outcomes, but do not completely mitigate
damages in the long-run.




                                               26
contemporaneous but smaller long-run peer effects, suggesting that spurious
correlations might arise even with our conservative specification. Reassuringly,
Panel B shows that once we add individual and school-level time-varying controls,
omitting the share of students in a school-grade-year who are non-White and the
share of students who are economically disadvantaged does not affect our estimates
compared to our main results. In other words, peers' characteristics other than lead
poisoning do not appear to explain much of the variation in students' outcomes
after controlling for the set of fixed effects that provides our identification. 21 This
finding suggests that the share of lead poisoned peers does not just capture the effect
of non-White or poor peers. Panel C shows that excluding school fixed effects
yields slightly larger peer effects on suspensions compared to our main results.
These results suggest that our more conservative primary specification controls for
unobserved time invariant school characteristics.

VI. Conclusion
         This is the first study documenting the spillover effects of lead onto school
peers. By comparing siblings who attend the same school, we find that a child's
own lead exposure spills over to affect other children's behavior and long-run
outcomes. A ten percent increase in middle school peers with elevated BLLs in a
given year leads to a 1.6 percent increase above the mean in the likelihood of being
suspended out of school and a ten percent increase in chronic absenteeism. A ten
percent increase in peers with elevated BLLs over a student's elementary and
middle school career causes a 2 percent decrease in the likelihood of graduating
high school, and a 4.3 percent decrease in the likelihood of taking the SAT. These
large effects suggest that the social cost of lead exposure has been underestimated


21
   Related, Appendix Table A5 shows limited evidence that peers' composition at the cohort level
is related to school quality in a way that could confound our estimates. Cohorts with higher share of
students with EBLLs appear to be in school-years with higher stability rate, if anything, and larger
student bodies.




                                                27
so far. Our results suggest that environmental hazards are an important factor
contributing to human capital accumulation even for children who are not
themselves exposed to these hazards. In addition, we show that peers can have long
term consequences on human capital formation and reveal some mechanisms
through which peer effects manifest, namely homophily in network formation and
behavior shaping while in middle school likely through noncognitive skills.
Furthermore, our findings have implications for other types of common pollution
that are known to cause suspensions from school, such as traffic and industrial
pollution (Persico and Venator 2020; Heissel, Persico, and Simon 2020),
suggesting that the true cost of pollution has been underestimated.
         We likely estimate a lower bound of the effect of lead poisoned peers. We
find strong evidence of worse outcomes for children exposed to more lead poisoned
peers despite their siblings are likely exposed to disruptive peers as well and despite
potential spillovers within siblings, too. Moreover, missing BLLs for some lead
poisoned children would attenuate our findings.
         While external validity issues make it difficult to extrapolate how lead
exposure might affect labor market outcomes, we attempt a back of the envelope
calculation for the effect of one lead poisoned peer in a cohort of 220. We find that
being exposed to one additional lead poisoned peer is associated with $71 in lost
earnings per student from lower graduation rates alone. 22 This estimate does not
include the additional costs of behavioral issues, yet, it implies a spillover effect of


22
   Following Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006), we estimate the net present value of graduating
high school to be $93,188. We estimate a schooling-experience-earnings profile non-parametrically
in the 2018 March Current Population Survey data and predict earnings conditional on years of
schooling at each age between 18 and 65, assuming a growth rate of real labor productivity growth
of 1.9 percent and a discount rate of 3.38 (i.e., the 30-year Treasury bond rate). As 1 in 220 students
is a 0.46% increase in the share of peers with elevated BLLs, we multiply that by our estimate of
the effect of 100% of peers with elevated BLLs on graduation (-16.63 percentage points) to obtain
the impact of one child with EBLLs through elementary and middle school on graduation rates: -
0.076 percentage points, or a decrease in the probability of 0.00076. Thus, one child with EBLLs in
a cohort would decrease the net present value of lifetime earnings by 0.00076*$93,188=$71.




                                                 28
a lead poisoned child of $15,549 on their 219 school peers. As half a million young
children appear to still be poisoned by lead each year (Aizer et al. 2018) and lead
poisoned students appear to be quite dispersed across schools, these spillovers total
almost $8 billion per birth-year cohort. Reyes (2014) estimates the direct social cost
of lead poisoning at $200 billion per birth-year cohort. Thus, our, likely lower-
bound, estimates suggest that the social cost of lead has been underestimated by at
least 4 percent by not including these spillover effects. Importantly, our analysis
suggests that most public school children in the United States are likely affected by
the spillover effects of lead.
        Our results imply some important lessons for policy. Remediating lead
hazards is likely to be more cost effective than previously supposed since lead
exposure affects everyone in the classroom. Lead remediation efforts have shown
positive impacts on children's blood lead levels and test scores (Sorensen et al.
2019). In addition, Billings and Schnepel (2018) show that offering early
interventions for lead poisoned children improves their outcomes. Thus, early
interventions might help both lead poisoned children and their peers.
        Finally, school segregation by race and socioeconomic status likely
exacerbates these peer effects, suggesting that additional efforts to desegregate
students might be beneficial. Low-income schools have some of the largest
achievement gaps (e.g., see Reardon 2015). Our results suggest that peer effects
and lead exposure contribute to low performance in high-poverty schools, as well
as to the negative long-run outcomes associated with poverty. Lead exposure and
exposure to lead poisoned peers are both mechanisms through which poverty
produces worse human capital outcomes. Understanding how the organization of
schools mitigates these negative effects is crucial to design policies that curb the
negative consequences of lead poisoning and pollution exposure.




                                         29
References
Aizer, A., & Currie, J. 2019. "Lead and Juvenile Delinquency: New Evidence from
   Linked Birth, School and Juvenile Detention Records." Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 101(4): 575­587.
Aizer, A., Currie, J., Simon, P., & Vivier, P. 2018. "Do Low Levels of Blood Lead
   Reduce Children's Future Test Scores?" American Economic Journal: Applied
   Economics, 10(1): 307­341.
Alexander, D., & Currie, J. 2017. "Is It Who You Are or Where You Live?
   Residential Segregation and Racial Gaps in Childhood Asthma." Journal of
   Health Economics, 55: 186­200.
Anelli, M, & Peri, G. 2019. "The Effects of High School Peers' Gender on College
   Major, College Performance and Income." The Economic Journal, 129(618):
   553­602.
Angrist, J.D. 2014. "The Perils of Peer Effects." Labour Economics, 30: 98­108.
Balestra, S., Eugster, B., & Liebert, H. 2020. "Peers With Special Needs: Effects
   and Policies." Review of Economics and Statistics, 1­42.
Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., & Timmins, C. 2019. "EJ: The Economics of Race, Place, and
   Pollution." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1): 185-208.
Bertoni, M., Brunello, G., & Cappellari, L. 2020. "Who Benefits from Privileged
Peers? Evidence from Siblings in Schools." Journal of Applied Econometrics,
35: 893­ 916.
Bietenbeck, J. 2020. "The Long-Term Impacts of Low-Achieving Childhood Peers:
   Evidence from Project STAR." Journal of the European Economic
   Association, 18(1): 392-426.
Bifulco, R., Fletcher, J.M., & Ross, S.L. 2011. "The Effect of Classmate
   Characteristics on Post-secondary Outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health."
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 25­53.




                                       30
Billings, S.B., & Schnepel, K.T. 2018. "Life after Lead: Effects of Early
   Interventions for Children Exposed to Lead." American Economic Journal:
   Applied Microeconomics, 10(3): 315­344.
Black, S., Devereux, P., & Salvanes, K. 2013. "Under Pressure? The Effect of Peers
   on Outcomes of Young Adults." Journal of Labor Economics, 31(1): 119­153.
Bobonis, G.J., & Finan, F. 2009. "Neighborhood Peer Effect in Secondary School
   Enrollment Decisions." Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 695­716.
Brenøe, A.A., & Zölitz, U. 2020. "Exposure to More Female Peers Widens the
   Gender Gap in STEM Participation." Journal of Labor Economics, 38(4),
   1009­1054.
Carrell, S.E., & Hoekstra, L.H. 2010. "Externalities in the Classroom: How
   Children Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids." American
   Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 211­228.
Carrell, S.E., Hoekstra, L.H., & Kuka, E. 2018. "The Long-Run Effects of
   Disruptive Peers." American Economic Review, 108(11): 3377­3415.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2005. "Preventing Lead
   Poisoning in Young Children."
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013. "Blood Lead Levels in
   Children Aged 1­5 Years -- United States, 1999­2010." Morbidity and
   Mortality Weekly Report.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., & Katz, L.F. 2016. "The Effects of Exposure to Better
   Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
   Experiment." American Economic Review, 106(4): 855­902.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W, & Yagan, D.
   2011. "How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings?
   Evidence from Project Star." The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 126, no. 4:
   1593­1660.




                                       31
Currie, J., Greenstone, M., & Moretti, E. 2011. "Superfund Cleanups and Infant
   Health." American Economic Review, 101(3): 435­441.
Epple, D., & Romano, R. E. 2011. "Peer Effects in Education: A Survey of the
   Theory and Evidence." Handbook of Social Economics, 1B: 1053­1163.
Feigenbaum, J.J., & Muller, C. 2016. "Lead Exposure and Violent Crime in the
   Early Twentieth Century." Explorations in Economic History, 62: 51­86.
Ferrie, J.P., Rolf, K., & Troesken, W. 2012. "Cognitive Disparities, Lead Plumbing,
   and Water Chemistry: Prior Exposure to Water-Borne Lead and Intelligence
   Test Scores among World War Two U.S. Army Enlistees." Economics &
   Human Biology, 10(1): 98­111.
Figlio, D.N. 2007. "Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers."
   Education Finance and Policy, 2(4): 376­394.
Fletcher, J. 2010. "Spillover Effects of Inclusion of Classmates with Emotional
   Problems on Test Scores in Early Elementary School." Journal of Policy
   Analysis and Management, 29(1): 69­83.
Gazze, L. 2016. "Lead Policies, Lead Poisoning, and Government Spending."
   Working Paper.
Grönqvist, H., Nilsson, J.P., & Robling, P. O. 2020. "Understanding How Low
   Levels of Early Lead Exposure Affect Children's Life Trajectories." Journal of
   Political Economy, 128(9): 3376­3343
Hanchette, C.L. 1999. "GIS and decision making for public health agencies:
   childhood lead poisoning and welfare reform." Journal of Public Health
   Management and Practice, 5(4), 41-46.
Heckman, J.J., Lochner, L.J., & Todd, P.E. 2006. "Earnings functions, rates of
   return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond." Handbook of
   the Economics of Education, 1, 307-458.




                                        32
Heissel, J., Persico, C., & Simon, D. 2020. "Does Pollution Drive Achievement?
   The Effect of Traffic Pollution on Academic Performance." Journal of Human
   Resources. In press
Hollingsworth, A., Huang, M., Rudik, I.J., & Sanders, N.J. 2020. "Lead Exposure
   Reduces Academic Performance: Intensity, Duration, and Nutrition Matter."
   Working Paper 28250. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hoxby, C. 2000. "Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
   Variation." Working Paper 7867, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hoxby, C., & Weingarth, G. 2006. "School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer
   Effects." NBER Conference Paper.
Imberman, S., Kugler, A., & Sacerdote, B. 2012. "Evidence on the Structure of
   Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees." American Economic Review, 102(5):
   2048­2082.
Jackson, C.K. 2013. "Can Higher-Achieving Peers Explain the Benefits to
   Attending Selective Schools? Evidence from Trinidad and Tobago." Journal of
   Public Economics, 108: 63­77.
Jackson, C.K. 2018. "What Do Test Scores Miss? The Importance of Teacher
   Effects on Non­Test Score Outcomes." Journal of Political Economy 126, no.
   5: 2072­2107.
Jackson, Matthew O. 2010. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton university
   press.
Lavy, V., Paserman, M.D., & Schlosser, A. 2012. "Inside the Black Box of Ability
   Peer Effects: Evidence from Variation in the Proportion of Low Achievers in
   the Classroom." Economic Journal, 122(559): 208­237.
Lazear, E.P. 2001. "Educational Production." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   116, no. 3: 777­803.
Manski, C.F. 1993. "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
   Problem." The Review of Economic Studies, 60: 531­542.




                                      33
Meyer, P.A., McGeehin, M.A., & Falk, H. 2003. "A Global Approach to Childhood
   Lead Poisoning Prevention." International Journal of Hygiene and
   Environmental Health, 206(4­5): 363­69.
Miller, D.L., Shenhav, N.A., & Grosz, M.Z. 2019. "Selection into identification in
   fixed effects models, with application to Head Start." Working Paper 26174.
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Persico, C., Figlio, D., & Roth, J. 2020. "The Developmental Consequences of
   Superfund Sites." Journal of Labor Economics. 38, no. 4.
Persico, C., & Venator, J. 2020. "The Effects of Local Industrial Pollution on
   Students and Schools." Journal of Human Resources. In press.
Reardon, S.F. 2015. "School Segregation and Racial Academic Achievement
   Gaps." Russel Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 2(5): 34­57.
Reyes, J.W. 2014. "The Social Costs of Lead" in Lead: The Global Poison ­
   Humans, Animals, and the Environment, 1­4.
Reyes, J.W. 2015. "Lead Exposure and Behavior: Effects on Antisocial and Risky
   Behavior among Children and Adolescents." Economic Inquiry, 53(3): 1580­
   1605.
Sacerdote, B. 2001. "Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
   Roommates." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 681­704.
Sacerdote, B. 2011. "Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big
   Are They and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?" Handbook of the
   Economics of Education, 3: 249­277.
Sorensen, L.C., Fox, A.M., Jung, H., & Martin, E.G. 2019. "Lead Exposure and
   Academic Achievement: Evidence from Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention
   Efforts." Journal of Population Economics, 32(1): 179­218.




                                       34
Table 1: Characteristics of children and schools
                                  (1)                      (2)                    (3)                  (4)                    (5)                    (6)                 (7)
                             All children         Children in sibling       Children with        Children with        Children without         Children with        Children with
                           attending public            sample                 BLL test              EBLLs              known EBLLs             above-median        below-median
  Sample:                  school in North                                                                                                    share of EBLL        share of EBLL
                               Carolina                                                                                                       peers in at least      peers in all
                                                                                                                                              one elementary         elementary
                                                                                                                                                   grade               grades
 Average test score              0.001                    0.063                 -0.117               -0.288                 0.128                  -0.094               0.265
 Any out-of-school
                                 0.265                    0.258                  0.305               0.404                  0.238                  0.314                0.202
 suspension
 Ever graduated                  0.837                    0.872                  0.866               0.816                  0.881                  0.848                0.895
 4-year college
                                 0.418                    0.454                  0.398               0.346                  0.471                  0.387                0.516
 intentions
 Has taken the SAT               0.434                    0.466                  0.411               0.366                  0.482                  0.405                0.522
 Cohort size                      220                      225                    199                 203                    229                    193                  261
 Share of teachers
 with an MA                      0.338                    0.356                  0.346               0.335                  0.359                  0.337                0.377
 degree
 Share
 economically                    0.438                    0.441                  0.512               0.521                  0.429                  0.528                0.343
 disadvantaged
 Stability rate                  0.929                    0.957                  0.957               0.953                  0.958                  0.955                0.960
 Share Black                     0.272                    0.249                  0.308               0.432                  0.226                  0.308                0.188
 Share Hispanic                  0.122                    0.124                  0.144               0.107                  0.126                  0.136                0.112
 Share with a BLL
                                 0.338                    0.396                    1                    1                   0.322                  0.534                0.255
 test
 Share with EBLL                 0.071                    0.079                  0.200               0.725                     0                   0.118                0.040
 N Students                   3,334,365                1,326,622               525,535              144,957               1,181,665               670,386              656,236
Notes: The table presents summary statistics for selected variables in our sample. Observations are at the student-year level. Cohort is defined as student-grade-year. Column 1 shows
the means for all children in our original sample. Column 2 shows means for children with siblings, that is our main sample. Column 3 shows means for children that have a blood
lead level test. Column 4 shows means for children with elevated blood lead levels (EBLLs), and Column 5 shows means for children without elevated blood lead levels. Column 6
shows means for children whose share of elementary school peers with elevated BLLs was above the median share at the grade-year level in at least one grade, while Column 7
shows means for children whose share was below the median in all elementary grades. Test scores are standardized at the grade-year level. The stability rate is defined as the
percentage of students from the October membership count who are still present in the second semester (90 days later).
                                                                                         35
Table 2: Contemporaneous Effects of Attending School with an Increased Share of
   Children with Elevated BLLs
                              (1)              (2)            (3)   (4)           (5)                         (6)
 Dependent Variable:        Average          Out of          DaysOSS Same      Incident                   Absent 22
                           Test Score        School        Suspended
                                                                   Day as        with                      or More
                                           Suspension              Lead-        Lead-                       Days
                                             (OSS)                Exposed      Exposed
                                                                   Child        Child
                   Panel A: Cohort Peers with School-Grade and Grade-Year Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with        -0.0354         0.0691***       1.1348***       0.2263***       0.1105***      0.0239**
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL          (0.0351)        (0.0187)        (0.2426)        (0.0143)        (0.0118)       (0.0091)
 Observations               3,303,025       7,924,730       7,924,730      7,196,034       6,542,610       8,135,286
 N Students                  932,753        1,907,865       1,907,865      1,884,925       1,765,517       1,903,431
 Mean of outcome        0.0572       0.1049        0.7744       0.0318       0.0202                         0.0612
              Panel B: Cohort Peers with Family, School, Grade and Year Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with         0.0193         0.0202+         0.6305***       0.1933***       0.1040***      0.0440***
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL          (0.0360)        (0.0117)        (0.1804)        (0.0106)        (0.0082)       (0.0072)
 Share of Non-White         -0.0194         -0.0186+        -0.0071          0.0007         -0.0045         0.0136*
 Children in School-        (0.0212)        (0.0103)        (0.1660)        (0.0101)        (0.0075)       (0.0053)
 Grade-Year
 Share of                    0.0243*        0.0204***       0.3224***       0.0166***        0.0055        0.0077**
 Economically               (0.0121)        (0.0061)        (0.0819)        (0.0050)        (0.0058)       (0.0030)
 Disadvantaged
 Children in School-
 Grade-Year
 Observations               1,414,124       4,290,255       4,290,255      3,921,543       3,673,505       4,397,906
 N Students                  374,137         944,681         944,681        933,835         891,487         939,623
 Mean of outcome              0.1169          0.1238          0.5041         0.0285          0.0187          0.0424
                Panel C: Peers in the Same Classroom with Family and School Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with         --------       0.0568***       0.3820+         0.2250***       0.1489***      0.0947***
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL                          (0.0133)        (0.2146)        (0.0119)        (0.0091)       (0.0095)
 Observations                --------       3,700,650       3,700,650      3,416,626       3,416,626       3,679,226
 N Students                  --------        877,934         877,934        824,400         824,400         884,139
 Mean of outcome             --------        0.0931           0.6325         0.0138          0.0082         0.0507
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with EBLLs on the child's school outcomes. Panels A
and B use the share of peers with maximum BLLs over 5 µg/dL at the school-grade-year level as the main explanatory
variable, while panel C use the share of peers with maximum BLLs over 5 µg/dL at the classroom level. Panel A
includes school-by-grade, grade-by-year and birth month fixed effects. Panels B and C instead include family, school,
grade, and year fixed effects, controlling for birth order. In Column 1, we take the average of math and reading test
scores and additionally control for subject-by-type test fixed effects. In Columns 2-6 we limit the sample to grades 6
and above. All regressions control for individual and cohort controls, which include indicators for gender, race,
economically disadvantaged status, whether the student has a blood lead level test, the share of non-White peers, share
of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who are economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level.
We also control for school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers with an MA degree. Standard errors are
in parentheses and clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.



                                                         36
Table 3: Long-Run Outcomes of Exposure to Peers with Elevated BLLs by Timing of
   Exposure
                               (1)              (2)                 (3)        (4)             (5)
 Dependent Variable:          Ever             Ever            Intention to
                                                                          Intention to    Took SAT
                            graduated       dropped out         Attend a 4- Attend a
                                                               Year College
                                                                          Community
                                                                            College
                             Panel A: Share of All Peers with EBLLs Over Elementary and Middle School
                                          with School-Grade and Grade-Year Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with        -0.1558***     0.1468***       -0.1257***       -0.0098        -0.2778***
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL           (0.0173)      (0.0150)         (0.0362)        (0.0344)        (0.0350)
 Mean of outcome              0.8491          0.0597              0.4406             0.3544              0.4588
 N Students                  831,386         1,157,178           666,821            666,159             657,878
                             Panel B: Share of All Peers with EBLLs Over Elementary and Middle School
                                         with Sibling, School, Grade and Year Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with        -0.1663***      0.0476+          -0.1126         0.0464         -0.2289**
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL           (0.0351)      (0.0245)         (0.0720)        (0.0785)        (0.0740)
 Mean of outcome              0.8904           0.0529             0.5068             0.3288              0.5319
 N Students                  283,032          415,049            205,833            205,761             201,784
                             Panel C: Share of Elementary Versus Middle School Peers with EBLLs with
                                           Sibling, School, Grade and Year Fixed Effects
 Share of peers with         -0.0614*      -0.0025          -0.0100         0.0216          -0.0020
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL           (0.0295)     (0.0216)          (0.0671)       (0.0687)        (0.0669)
 in Elementary
 School
 Share of peers with         -0.1169**         0.0680*           -0.0546            -0.0073             -0.2204*
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL           (0.0415)         (0.0298)           (0.0906)           (0.0990)            (0.0872)
 in Middle School

 Mean of outcome              0.8944           0.0519             0.5108             0.3299              0.5380
 N Students                  248,478          355,238            182,351            182,294             178,875
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's long-run
outcomes. We restrict the sample to the highest grade a student is observed in. Column 1 reports the effects on the
likelihood a student ever graduates from high school, and column 2 shows the effects on the likelihood of ever
dropping out of school. Columns 3 and 4 show the effects on self-reported intention of enrolling in a four-year college
and community college, respectively. Column 5 shows the effects on the likelihood of taking the SAT test by grade
12. Panel A includes school-by-grade and grade-by-year fixed effects. Panels B and C instead include family, school,
grade, and year fixed effects, controlling for birth order and birth month. All regressions include individual controls
for gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the student has a blood lead level test. We also
control for the average share of elementary and middle school peers that are non-White or economically
disadvantaged, average share of children with a lead test, school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers
with an MA degree averaged over elementary and middle school. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at
the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                          37
Table 4: Heterogeneity by Peer Gender and Race
                                                     Short Run Outcomes                   Long Run Outcomes
                                                             (1)                          (2)               (3)
 Dependent Variable:                                    Out of School                    Ever             Took the
                                                         suspension                    graduated           SAT
                                Panel A: By Same-Gender Lead Poisoned Peers
 Share of same-gender peers with BLLs                      0.0771***                    -0.1012+           0.0409
 5 µg/dL                                                   (0.0176)                     (0.0536)          (0.1302)

 Share of peers with BLLs 5 µg/dL                    -0.0199                -0.1155**                     -0.2496*
                                                     (0.0146)               (0.0425)                      (0.0978)
                             Panel B: By Same-Race Lead Poisoned Peers (White)
 Share of same-race peers with BLLs 5                      0.0628***                     0.0300           -0.1657
 µg/dL                                                     (0.0158)                     (0.0580)          (0.1196)


 Share of peers with BLLs 5 µg/dL                          -0.0196                     -0.1867***         -0.1156
                                                           (0.0145)                     (0.0482)          (0.1112)
                        Panel C: By Same Gender-Race Lead Poisoned Peers (White)
 Share of same gender-race peers with                      0.0994***                    -0.0295           -0.0827
 BLLs 5 µg/dL                                              (0.0173)                     (0.0610)          (0.1416)

 Share of peers with BLLs 5 µg/dL                          -0.0123                     -0.1562***         -0.2003*
                                                           (0.0124)                     (0.0373)          (0.0884)

 N Students                                                 944,678                     283,032           201,784
 Mean of outcome                                             0.1037                      0.8904            0.5319
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school
outcomes. Panel A reports the effect of a child's share of same-gendered peers with elevated blood lead levels on the
child's school outcomes, Panel B reports the reports the effect of a child's share of same-race peers with elevated
blood lead levels, and Panel C reports the effect of a child's same-race and same-gender share of peers with elevated
blood lead levels. All regressions include the cohort, school-level and individual controls listed in equation (2), as
well as family, birth month, birth order, school, grade, and year fixed effects. Cohort and school controls are averaged
over elementary and middle school in Columns 2-3. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the school
level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                          38
Table 5: Heterogeneity by Demographic Subgroups
                                  Short Run Outcomes                      Long-run Outcomes
                                             (1)                         (2)                (3)
 Dependent Variable:                  Out of School              Ever Graduated      Took the SAT
                                        suspension
                                Panel A: White, non-Hispanic students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                    0.0095                   -0.1445***           -0.1196
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0110)                    (0.0404)           (0.0873)
                                Panel B: Black non-Hispanic students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                   -0.0045                   -0.3133***          -0.3698*
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0244)                    (0.0772)           (0.1679)
 p-val. =White                              0.60                        0.05               0.19
                                     Panel C: Hispanic students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                   -0.0009                     -0.1362           -0.4186+
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0257)                    (0.1251)           (0.2413)
 p-val. =White                              0.71                        0.95               0.24
                        Panel D: Never Economically Disadvantaged students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                    0.0006                    -0.0911*            -0.0170
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0100)                    (0.0402)           (0.1108)
                      Panel E: Sometimes Economically Disadvantaged students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                    0.0229                    -0.1815**          -0.2745*
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0177)                    (0.0682)           (0.1358)
 p-val. =Never                              0.27                        0.25               0.14
                        Panel F: Always Economically Disadvantaged students
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                    0.0103                      0.0249            -0.1424
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0213)                     (0.1033           (0.2021)
 p-val. =Never                              0.68                        0.30               0.59
                                             Panel G: Girls
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                    0.0180                    -0.1117+           -0.2350+
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0127)                    (0.0606)           (0.1309)
                                             Panel H: Boys
 Share of peers w/ BLLs                   0.0334*                   -0.2469***           -0.2065
 5µg/dL                                  (0.0165)                    (0.0668)           (0.1361)
 p-val. =Girls                              0.46                        0.13               0.88

Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school
outcomes for children with different observable characteristics in each panel. For each outcome, results are from three
regressions, one for each characteristic (race, economic status, gender). All regressions include cohort and individual
controls, as well as family, birth month, birth order, school, grade, and year fixed effects. Individual controls include
indicators for whether the student has a blood lead level test, gender, race, and economically disadvantaged status.
Cohort controls include the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who
are economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level. We also control for school size, the stability rate, and
the percent of teachers with an MA degree. Cohort and school controls are averaged over elementary and middle
school in Columns 2-3. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                          39
Table 6: Results for Alternative Samples and Alternative Specifications

                                                                       Ever Graduated
                                (1)                 (2)                (3)         (4)                (5)                 (6)               (7)           (8)
                             Zip Codes           >50% of           Zip Codes     Adding          Adding Cohort          Adding            Adding        Adding
                                with            Homes in            with No      Sibling-         Block Group        Block Group         School-        School-
                             Universal         Census Tract          School      School          Characteristics     Fixed Effects        Grade        Year Fixed
                             Screening          are Single           Choice       Fixed                                                   Fixed         Effects
                                                  Family            Options      Effects                                                  Effects
 Share of peers with         -0.1854***         -0.1866**          -0.2681***   -0.1035***           -0.1704***        -0.2214***       -0.1462***     -0.2282***
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL            (0.0454)           (0.0721)           (0.0715)     (0.0267)             (0.0345)          (0.0594)         (0.0309)       (0.0449)
 N Students                   146,599             84,729            175,973          228,036          283,032           118,747          282,582        281,851
 Mean of outcome               0.8800             0.8830             0.8934           0.8904           0.8904            0.8904          0.8904          0.8925
 School FEs                       X                  X                 X                                  X                 X
 Sibling FEs                      X                  X                 X                                  X                 X               X               X
 Year FEs                         X                  X                 X                X                 X                 X               X
 Grade FEs                        X                  X                 X                X                 X                 X                               X
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school outcomes. Each column reports results from a
separate regression. Column 1 restricts the sample to students who live in zip codes that are subject to universal lead screening. Column 2 restricts the sample to
Census tracts where more than half of homes are single family homes. Column 3 restricts the sample to zip codes without charter schools or voucher programs.
Columns 4-8 add controls and alternative sets of fixed effects as specified at the top and bottom of each column. Block group characteristics of cohort peers include
share of peers that live in block groups with above median income, above median percent Black and Hispanic population, above median percent of the population
living in poverty, and with above median percent population with a high school degree. All regressions include cohort and individual controls, as well as birth
month and birth order fixed effects. Individual controls include indicators for gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the student has a blood
lead level test. Cohort controls include the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who are economically disadvantaged
at the school-grade-year level. We also control for school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers with an MA degree. Cohort and school controls are
averaged over elementary and middle school. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                                                40
Table 7: The Effects of Peers on Switching Schools

                                            (1)                    (2)                      (3)                     (4)                           (5)
                                      Changed Schools          Changed to a           Child's Sibling          Both Siblings            Consecutive Younger
                                                              Charter School         Changed Schools          Changed Schools          Sibling is in a Different
                                                                                                                                        School for the Same
                                                                                                                                                Grade
 Share of peers with BLLs                   0.0026               -0.0038*                -0.0093                   -0.0095                     -0.0335*
 over 5 µg/dL                              (0.0131)              (0.0015)                (0.0226)                  (0.0137)                    (0.0149)

 Observations                             6,555,045             6,452,608               1,576,604                  840,101                     4,193,920
 N Students                               1,094,875             1,089,551                491,901                   309,887                      587,149
 Mean of outcome                            0.3063                0.0050                  0.3464                    0.1310                       0.1858
Notes: The table reports the association of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels with the child's own likelihood of switching schools (Columns
1 and 2), the child's sibling's likelihood of switching schools conditional on attending the same school (Column 3), both children switching schools conditional on
attending the same school (Column 4), and the likelihood that a consecutive younger sibling attends a different school than the child's school for the same grade
(Column 5). All regressions include cohort and individual controls, as well as family, birth month, birth order, school, grade, and year fixed effects. Individual
controls include indicators for gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the student has a blood lead level test. Cohort controls include the
share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who are economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level. We also
control for school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers with an MA degree. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, **
p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                                                41
Figure 1: Share of Children with Blood Lead Levels at or above 5µg/dL by Birth Cohort
and Share of Children with Blood Lead Tests by Cohort




Notes: The figure plots the share of children in a school-grade-year cohort with at least one blood lead test (blue
dashed line) and with a blood lead level of at least 5µg/dL (red solid line)




                                                          42
Figure 2: The Relationship Between a Child's Own Blood Lead Levels and Test Scores, Out-of-School Suspensions, High
School Graduation, and SAT Taking
                        Panel A: Test scores                  Panel B: Likelihood of Out of School Suspension




                         Panel C: Ever Graduated                                                        Panel D: SAT Taking




    Notes: The figure plots average test scores (Panel A), out-of-school suspension rates (Panel B), graduation rates (Panel C), and SAT taking rates
    (Panel D) by students' blood lead levels and adds the line of best fit.




                                                                         43
Figure 3: The Relationship Between Peers' Blood Lead Levels and Test Scores, Out-of-School Suspensions, High School
Graduation, and SAT Taking


                            Panel A: Test scores                                       Panel B: Likelihood of Out-of-School Suspensions




                         Panel C: Ever Graduated                                                        Panel D: SAT Taking




    Notes: The figure plots average test scores (Panel A), out-of-school suspension rates (Panel B), graduation rates (Panel C), and SAT taking rates
    (Panel D) by vigintile of students' share of peers with blood lead levels at or above 5µg/dL.




                                                                         44
    Figure 4: Binned Effects of Share of Peers with Blood Lead Levels above 5 µg/dL

          Panel A: Likelihood of Out-of-School Suspension                               Panel B: Ever Graduated




Notes: Each figure plots non-parametric estimates of the effect of having different proportions (binned) of peers with BLLs 5+ in a child's cohort on out-of-school
suspension rates (Panel A) and graduation rates (Panel B). The omitted category is an indicator for share of peers with BLLs 5+ that is lower than 0.05. We control
for all fixed effects and controls in our primary specification (which includes family, school, year, and grade fixed effects, and individual and demographic controls
by cohort, averaged over elementary and middle school in Panel B). Vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the
school level.




                                                                                 45
Figure 5: Placebo Estimates




Notes: Distribution of results from 500 placebo tests per outcome. Our main estimates for our preferred specification
are represented with a vertical line on the placebo effect size distribution. The lightly shaded gray region is the
region of the graph where there is 5% in the tail of the distribution. The darker shaded gray region represents 10% in
the tail of the distribution. For each placebo, school-grade cohorts were randomly assigned a percent of peers with
EBLLs from the empirically observed distribution and we estimated our main specification.




                                                         46
APPENDIX A: Additional Tables and Figures

Table A1: Results with School-grade and grade-year fixed effects on sibling sample
                           Short-run Outcomes                               Long-run Outcomes
                                    (1)                             (2)                      (3)
 Dependent               Out of School Suspension             Ever Graduated            Took the SAT
 Variable:
 Share of peers                   0.0584***                     -0.1060***                      -0.2587***
 with BLLs over 5                 (0.0170)                       (0.0203)                        (0.0516)
 µg/dL
 Observations                     4,290,161                      282,782                         201,719
 N Students                        944,679                       282,782                         201,719
 Mean of outcome                    0.0942                        0.8911                          0.5320

Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school
outcomes. The sample is limited to children with siblings who would be included in a regression with sibling fixed
effects. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions include school-by-grade, grade-by-
year, and birth month fixed effects. All regressions include the cohort, school-level and individual controls listed in
equation (1). Cohort and school controls are averaged over elementary and middle school in Columns 2-3. Standard
errors are in parentheses and clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                         47
Table A2: Alternative measures of peers' BLLs and sample including lead poisoned
   students
                     Short Run Outcomes                             Long-run Outcomes
                               (1)                            (2)                         (3)
                        Out of School                 Ever Graduated               Took the SAT
                          Suspension
                   Panel A: Share of Male and Female Peers with Max BLL over 5 µg/dL
 Share of male             0.0565***                      -0.1489**                   -0.2523*
 peers with BLLs            (0.0158)                      (0.0454)                    (0.1021)
 over 5 µg/dL
 Share of female            -0.0255                      -0.1861***                   -0.1942+
 peers with BLLs            (0.0171)                      (0.0467)                    (0.1066)
 over 5 µg/dL
                                     Panel B: Mean BLL is over 5 µg/dL
 Share of peers              0.0177                      -0.2073***                   -0.2320**
 with BLLs over 5           (0.0133)                      (0.0352)                    (0.0740)
 µg/dL
                                     Panel C: Max BLL is over 10 µg/dL
 Share of peers              0.0006                      -0.4047***                   -0.4660**
 with BLLs over 10          (0.0339)                      (0.0849)                    (0.1503)
 µg/dL
 N Students                 944,681                        281,098                     200,186
 Mean of outcome             0.1037                         0.8902                      0.5316
                      Panel D: Including Students with Elevated Blood Lead Levels
 Share of peers              0.0268*                     -0.1764***                  -0.2031***
 with BLLs over 5           (0.0121)                      (0.0327)                    (0.0596)
 µg/dL
 N Students                1,081,179                       361,787                     257,202
 Mean of outcome             0.1125                         0.8768                      0.5031
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school outcomes
using different measures of peer exposure based on blood lead levels. Panel A uses the share of male and share of female
peers with maximum BLL over 5 µg/dL. Panel B uses the share of peers with average BLL above 5 µg/dL. Panel C uses
the share of peers with maximum BLL over 10 µg/dL. Panel D includes children who have maximum BLL over 5 µg/dL.
All regressions include cohort and individual controls, as well as family, birth month, birth order, school, grade, and year
fixed effects. Individual controls include indicators for gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the
student has a blood lead level test. Cohort controls include the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test,
and the share of peers who are economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level, school size, the stability rate,
and the percent of teachers with an MA degree. Cohort and school controls are averaged over elementary and middle school
in Columns 2-3. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                          48
Table A3: Heterogeneity by School-Level Demographics

                      Short Run Outcomes                        Long-run Outcomes
                               (1)                          (2)                        (3)
 Dependent                Out of School               Ever Graduated              Took the SAT
 Variable:                 Suspension
      Panel A: Schools in Lowest Tercile of Share Students who are Economically Disadvantaged
 Share of peers with              0.0249                          -0.1251+                          -0.0926
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL               (0.0238)                         (0.0674)                          (0.1656)

       Panel B: Schools in Middle Tercile of Share Students who are Economically Disadvantaged
 Share of peers with             0.0365+                          -0.1452+                          -0.0626
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL               (0.0201)                         (0.0796)                          (0.1464)

 p-val = First                0.33                          0.85                       0.89
 Tercile
      Panel C: Schools in Highest Tercile of Share Students who are Economically Disadvantaged
 Share of peers with             0.0324+                          -0.1049                           -0.2013
 BLLs over 5 µg/dL               (0.0193)                         (0.0652)                          (0.1346)
 p-val = First                     0.06                             0.83                              0.61
 Tercile
 N Students                      931,381                          222,894                           162,137
 Mean of outcome                  0.1034                           0.8964                            0.5454
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school
outcomes for children in schools with different shares of children who are economically disadvantaged in each panel.
For each outcome, results are from a single regression. All regressions include cohort and individual controls, as well
as family, birth month, birth order, school, grade, and year fixed effects. Individual controls include indicators for
gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the student has a blood lead level test. Cohort controls
include the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who are economically
disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level. We also control for school size, the stability rate, and the percent of
teachers with an MA degree. Cohort and school controls are averaged over elementary and middle school in Columns
2-3. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                         49
Table A4: Results with Fewer Controls

                           Short-run Outcomes                                Long-run Outcomes
                                    (1)                              (2)                      (3)
 Dependent               Out of School Suspension              Ever Graduated            Took the SAT
 Variable:
                                                Panel A: No controls

 Share of peers                    0.0433***                      -0.0170                         -0.0770
 with BLLs over 5                  (0.0102)                       (0.0241)                        (0.0560)
 µg/dL
 Observations                     4,290,255                       283,032                         201,784
 N Students                        944,681                        283,032                         201,784

        Panel B: All Controls Except for Share Non-White and Share Educationally Disadvantaged

 Share of peers                     0.0249*                      -0.1609***                       -0.1718*
 with BLLs over 5                  (0.0115)                       (0.0349)                        (0.0769)
 µg/dL
 Observations                     4,290,255                       248,478                         178,875
 N Students                        944,681                        248,478                         178,875

                                           Panel C: Family Fixed Effects
 Share of peers                    0.0368**                      -0.1578***                       -0.2331**
 with BLLs over 5                  (0.0117)                       (0.0372)                        (0.0739)
 µg/dL
 Observations                     4,290,270                       283,236                         201,814
 N Students                        944,682                        283,236                         201,814
Notes: The table reports the effect of a child's share of peers with elevated blood lead levels on the child's school
outcomes. Each cell reports results from a separate regression. All regressions include sibling, birth month, grade,
year and birth order fixed effects. Panel A shows our results with no control variables except for our fixed effects and
school fixed effects. Panel B includes school fixed effects and controls for gender, race, economically disadvantaged
status, whether the student has a blood lead level test, the share of children with a lead test at the school-grade-year
level, as well as school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers with an MA degree. We omit cohort-level
controls for share of non-White peers and share of peers who are economically disadvantaged. Panel C includes our
fixed effects together with all controls in our main specification but omits school fixed effects. Cohort and school
controls are averaged over elementary and middle school in Columns 2-3. Standard errors are in parentheses and
clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                          50
Table A5: Correlation of Cohort Composition and Measures of School Quality

                                            (1)                       (2)                     (3)                         (4)                      (5)
 Dependent Variable:                Share of teachers            School-year            Missing teachers'          Missing school-             Number of
                                     with Masters or             stability rate           education in            year stability rate      students in school-
                                    higher in school-                                     school-year                                             year
                                           year
 Share of peers with BLLs                -0.0104                    0.0049*                   0.0041                    -0.0003                127.6286***
 over 5 µg/dL                           (0.0077)                   (0.0020)                  (0.0035)                  (0.0003)                 (22.1179)

 Observations                           7,611,499                 7,760,468                 7,760,559                 7,760,559                 7,760,559
 Mean ofoutcome                          0.3657                     0.9575                    0.0191                    0.0000                  782.1071
 N Students                             1,171,476                 1,177,800                 1,177,800                 1,177,800                 1,177,800
Notes: The table reports the correlation of a child's share of peers with EBLLs in a cohort with school-year characteristics. Regressions include family, school,
grade, and year fixed effects, controlling for birth order. All regressions control for individual and cohort controls, which include indicators for gender, race,
economically disadvantaged status, whether the student has a blood lead level test, the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share
of peers who are economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level. We also control for school size, the stability rate, and the percent of teachers with an
MA degree when those are not the dependent variable. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the school level. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, ***
p<0.001.




                                                                                  51
    Figure A1: Share of Lead-Exposed Peers by Birth Order




Notes: This figure plots the average share of cohort peers with blood lead levels at or above 5µg/dL by a student's
birth order. Birth order is set to 0 for only children and children for which we are not able to match siblings.




                                                        52
    Figure A2: Identifying Variation: Residual Variation in Share of Peers with Elevated
    Blood Lead Levels




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of the residuals from a regression of our variable of interest, share of peers
with blood lead levels at or above 5µg/dL on the fixed effects and controls included in our preferred specification. We
include family, birth month, birth order, grade, school, and year fixed effects. Individual controls include indicators
for gender, race, economically disadvantaged status, and whether the student has a blood lead level test. Cohort
controls include the share of non-White peers, share of children with a lead test, and the share of peers who are
economically disadvantaged at the school-grade-year level. We also control for school size, the stability rate, and the
percent of teachers with an MA degree. The black solid line plots the kernel density of these residuals, while the blue
dashed line plots a normal distribution.




                                                          53
Figure A3: Placebo Estimates: Out-of-School Suspensions and Incidents with Students with EBLLs


         Panel A: OSS Same Day as Student with EBLL                               Panel B: Incident with Student with EBLL




Notes: Distribution of results from 500 placebo tests per outcome. Our main estimates for our preferred specification are represented with a vertical line on the
placebo effect size distribution. The lightly shaded gray region is the region of the graph where there is 5% in the tail of the distribution. The darker shaded gray
region represents 10% in the tail of the distribution. For each placebo, we randomly selected a share of student equal to the observed share of students in EBLLs
in that school-grade cohort and construct indicators for their peers being suspended out-of-school on the same day as one of these random students and having an
incident together with one of these random students. We then estimated our main specification with these placebo outcomes




                                                                                 54
