                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


        ARE HIGH-INTEREST LOANS PREDATORY? THEORY AND EVIDENCE
                          FROM PAYDAY LENDING

                                       Hunt Allcott
                                      Joshua J. Kim
                                     Dmitry Taubinsky
                                     Jonathan Zinman

                                     Working Paper 28799
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28799


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021


We thank Xavier Gabaix, David Laibson, Adair Morse, Manisha Padi, Paige Skiba, Jeremy
Tobacman, and seminar participants at Berkeley, the California Department of Financial
Protection and Innovation, the CFPB Research Conference, Cornerstone Research, Harvard,
Harvard Business School, the IPA Financial Inclusion Conference, the London School of
Economics, NBER Public Economics Meeting, Northwestern, Opportunity Insights,
Stanford, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, Stockholm University, the UK
Financial Conduct Authority, University of Copenhagen, and Uppsala for helpful feedback.
We thank the Sloan Foundation for grant funding. We are grateful to Raj Bhargava, Surya
Ierokomos, Eric Koepcke, and Afras Sial for outstanding research assistance, to Melissa
Horste and Innovations for Poverty Action for dedicated project management, and to
employees of the partner payday lender for their collaboration on the project. Our
Memorandum of Understanding with the lender allowed us to publish this research without
prior review by the lender and granted zero editorial control to the lender. The experiment
was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized trials (trial
ID AEARCTR-0003043, available from www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3043) and was
approved by Institutional Review Boards at NYU (protocol number FY2018-1997),
Stanford (#46136), and IPA (#14663). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Hunt Allcott, Joshua J. Kim, Dmitry Taubinsky, and Jonathan Zinman. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are High-Interest Loans Predatory? Theory and Evidence from Payday Lending
Hunt Allcott, Joshua J. Kim, Dmitry Taubinsky, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 28799
May 2021
JEL No. D14,D15,D18,D61,D90,L69

                                           ABSTRACT

It is often argued that people might take on too much high-cost debt because they are present
focused and/or overoptimistic about how soon they will repay. We measure borrowers' present
focus and overoptimism using an experiment with a large payday lender. Although the most
inexperienced quartile of borrowers underestimate their likelihood of future borrowing, the more
experienced three quartiles predict correctly on average. This finding contrasts sharply with priors
we elicited from 103 payday lending and behavioral economics experts, who believed that the
average borrower would be highly overoptimistic about getting out of debt. Borrowers are willing
to pay a significant premium for an experimental incentive to avoid future borrowing, which we
show implies that they perceive themselves to be time inconsistent. We use borrowers' predicted
behavior and valuation of the experimental incentive to estimate a model of present focus and
naivete. We then use the model to study common payday lending regulations. In our model,
banning payday loans reduces welfare relative to existing regulation, while limits on repeat
borrowing might increase welfare by inducing faster repayment that is more consistent with long-
run preferences.

Hunt Allcott                                      Dmitry Taubinsky
Microsoft Research                                University of California, Berkeley
1 Memorial Drive                                  Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02142                               530 Evans Hall #3880
and NBER                                          Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
allcott@post.harvard.edu                          and NBER
                                                  dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu
Joshua J. Kim
Facebook                                          Jonathan Zinman
1 Hacker Way                                      Department of Economics
Menlo Park, CA 94025                              Dartmouth College
josh@joshkim.org                                  314 Rockefeller Hall
                                                  Hanover, NH 03755
                                                  and NBER
                                                  jzinman@dartmouth.edu




An online appendix and replication files is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28799
      "The most hated sort [of wealth-getting], and with the greatest reason, is usury, which
      makes a gain out of money itself, and not from the natural object of it."
      ­Aristotle (Politics)

      "No man of ripe years and of sound mind, acting freely, and with his eyes open, ought
      to be hindered ... in the way of obtaining money, as he thinks fit."
      ­Jeremy Bentham (Defense of Usury, Letter 1, 1787)


1    INTRODUCTION
People have long questioned the ethics and social consequences of high-interest lending. Indeed,
usury laws and other high-interest lending restrictions are among the oldest and most common forms
of consumer protection regulation. However, the extent to which such regulation actually benefits
or harms consumers is still poorly understood, as it depends on the extent to which consumers are
acting in their own best interest. In this paper, we use an experiment to study two key hypothesized
behavioral biases of payday loan borrowers in the United States.
    Critics argue that payday loans are predatory, trapping consumers in cycles of repeated high-
interest borrowing. A typical payday loan incurs $15 interest per $100 borrowed over two weeks,
implying an annual percentage rate (APR) of 391 percent, and more than 80 percent of payday
loans nationwide in 2011-2012 were reborrowed within 30 days (CFPB 2016). As a result of these
concerns, 18 states now effectively ban payday lending (CFA 2019), and in 2017, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) finalized a set of nationwide regulations. The CFPB's then-
director argued that "the CFPB's new rule puts a stop to the payday debt traps that have plagued
communities across the country. Too often, borrowers who need quick cash end up trapped in loans
they can't afford" (CFPB 2017).
    Proponents argue that payday loans serve a critical need: people are willing to pay high interest
rates because they very much need credit. For example, Knight (2017) wrote that the CFPB
regulation "will significantly reduce consumers' access to credit at the exact moments they need it
most." Under new leadership, the CFPB rescinded part of its 2017 regulation on the grounds that
it would reduce credit access.
    At the core of this debate is the question of whether borrowers act in their own best interest.
If borrowers successfully maximize their utility, then restricting choice reduces welfare. However,
if borrowers have self-control problems ("present focus," in the language of Ericson and Laibson
2019), then they may borrow more to finance present consumption than they would like to in the
long run. Furthermore, if borrowers are "naive" about their present focus, overoptimistic about
their future financial situation, or for some other reason do not anticipate their high likelihood of
repeat borrowing, they could underestimate the costs of repaying a loan. In this case, restricting
credit access might make borrowers better off.
    We designed and implemented an experiment with a large payday lender (henceforth, the
"Lender") to answer two key questions. First, do borrowers anticipate the extent of their re-

                                                  1
peat borrowing? Second, do borrowers perceive themselves to be time consistent? Our experiment
provides model-free evidence on these questions and also identifies a structural model of present
focus with partially naive beliefs--one of the first such estimates outside of laboratory experiments.
We then use our structural estimates as inputs to welfare analysis of three common payday lending
regulations--the first such analysis that accounts for key potential behavioral biases motivating
these regulations.
   Our experiment ran from January to March 2019 in 41 of the Lender's storefronts in Indiana,
a state with fairly standard lending regulations. Customers taking out payday loans were asked to
complete a survey on an iPad. The survey first elicited people's predicted probability of getting
another payday loan from any lender over the next eight weeks. We then introduced two different
rewards: "$100 If You Are Debt-Free," a no-borrowing incentive that they would receive in about 12
weeks only if they did not borrow from any payday lender over the next eight weeks, and "Money
for Sure," a certain cash payment that they would receive in about 12 weeks. We measured
participants' valuations of the no-borrowing incentive through an incentive-compatible adaptive
multiple price list (MPL) in which they chose between the incentive and varying amounts of Money
for Sure. We also used a second incentivized MPL between "Money for Sure" and a lottery to
measure risk aversion. The 1,205 borrowers with valid survey responses were randomized to receive
either the no-borrowing incentive, their choice on a randomly selected MPL question, or no reward
(the Control group). We match each participant's survey responses to borrowing data from the
Lender and to the state-wide database of borrowing from all payday lenders.
   We first provide model-free results on the two key questions above. On the first question,
we find that on average, people almost fully anticipate their high likelihood of repeat borrowing.
The average borrower perceives a 70 percent probability of borrowing in the next eight weeks
without the incentive, only slightly lower than the Control group's actual borrowing probability
of 74 percent. Experience matters. People who had taken out three or fewer loans from the
Lender in the six months before the survey--approximately the bottom experience quartile in our
sample--underestimate their future borrowing probability by 20 percentage points. By contrast,
more experienced borrowers predict correctly on average. This contrasts with findings of substantial
average naivete in lab experiments (Augenblick and Rabin 2019) and exercise (e.g., DellaVigna and
Malmendier 2004; Acland and Levy 2015; Carrera et al. 2021). A potential explanation for this
difference is that payday borrowing is a high-stakes decision with clear feedback and repeated
opportunities to learn.
   To answer the second key question, we adapt the Carrera et al. (2021) test for perceived time
inconsistency. The $100 If You Are Debt-Free incentive is equivalent to a $100 certain payment
plus a $100 increase in the price of re-borrowing. Thus, risk-neutral and time-consistent borrowers
would value the incentive at $100 minus the consumer surplus loss from a $100 price increase.
For example, consider risk-neutral and time-consistent people who predict that the incentive would
reduce their borrowing probability from 70 percent to 50 percent. If demand is approximately linear,
the consumer surplus loss from the price increase is the trapezoid under their demand curve as a


                                                  2
$100 price increase reduces demand from 70 to 50 percent: $100 × (70%+50%)/2 = $60. Thus, they
would be indifferent between the incentive and a fixed payment of approximately $100 - $60 = $40.
Since the incentive is risky, risk aversion would reduce that valuation below $40. Time-in consistent
borrowers who believe that their future selves will borrow more than their current preferences
would have higher valuations, because the incentive reduces future borrowing, in line with current
preferences. Thus, if these example borrowers value the incentive at more than $40 and are also
risk averse, we infer that they perceive themselves to be time inconsistent.
   On average, borrowers value the no-borrowing incentive 30 percent more than they would if
they were time consistent and risk neutral. And since their valuations of our survey lottery reveal
that they are in fact risk averse, their valuation of the future borrowing reduction induced by the
incentive is even larger than this 30 percent "premium" suggests. Qualitative data support the
inference that borrowers want to change their behavior: 54 percent of our sample reports that they
"very much" would like to give themselves extra motivation to avoid payday loan debt in the future,
and only 10 percent report "not at all."
   We use these model-free results to help identify a structural model of partially naive present
focus. Specifically, we assume that people have quasi-hyperbolic time preferences (e.g., Laibson,
1997; O'Donoghue and Rabin, 1999), meaning that utility in all future periods is discounted by an
additional   1. We follow O'Donoghue and Rabin (2001) in allowing people to mispredict their
present focus, believing that their future selves will discount later periods by ~. "Sophisticated"
people have  ~ =  , and "naive" or "partially naive" people have    ~> .
   Borrowers' predicted versus actual borrowing probabilities identify sophistication versus naivete.
The small degree of average misprediction in our data translates to an average value of /     ~ that
ranges from 0.95 to 0.98, depending on risk aversion assumptions. The least experienced quartile
of borrowers have /  ~ between 0.79 and 0.89. Borrowers' valuations of the no-borrowing incentive
identify average perceived present focus ~. The large observed premium translates to average ~
between 0.76 and 0.87, implying that borrowers believe they have significant self-control problems.
Combining our estimates of /  ~ and  ~ implies an average  between 0.74 and 0.83.
   At the end of the paper, we discuss potential policy implications of these results. We ground
our discussion in a simple model of borrowing and repayment that builds on Heidhues and Koszegi
(2010). Borrowers first choose a loan amount in period 0. In each subsequent period, borrowers
receive a stochastic repayment cost shock and can choose to repay the loan, reborrow, or default.
Allowing for stochastic cost shocks is crucial, as it implies that behavior, and thus welfare, is
continuous in the level of naivete. Prior work in deterministic models has found that even small
amounts of naivete can cause discontinuously large effects on behavior and thus large welfare losses
(O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999, 2001; Heidhues and Koszegi 2009, 2010). But in our nondeterministic
model, large welfare losses obtain only with large and peristent naivete--and as discussed above,
we do not see any persistent naivete in our data. We further show that losses from naivete can be
bounded using observed behavior, and simple calibrations suggest that these losses are small in our
setting.


                                                 3
        We calibrate the model with our estimates of  and ~ and simulate the welfare effects of common
payday lending regulations. We find that under a standard $500 loan size cap, borrowers with our
estimated  and   ~ enjoy 89 to 96 percent as much surplus as a time-consistent borrower. Because
borrowers are close to fully sophisticated about repayment costs, payday loan bans and tighter loan
size caps reduce welfare in our model. Limits on repeat borrowing increase welfare in some (but not
all) specifications, by inducing faster repayment that is more consistent with long-run preferences.
In our model, these conclusions are robust to various assumptions about learning and heterogeneity
in present focus and naivete. Of course, we do not know if our conclusions would be robust to all
possible alternative models and parameter assumptions, and we highlight six important caveats in
Section 8.4.
        Before we released the paper, we surveyed academics and non-academics who are knowledgeable
about payday lending to elicit their policy views and predictions of our empirical results. We use
the 103 responses as a rough measure of "expert" opinion, with the caveat that other experts not
in our survey might have different views. The average expert did not correctly predict our main
results. For example, the average expert predicted that borrowers would underestimate future
borrowing probability by 30 percentage points, which would imply much more naivete than our
actual estimate of 4 percentage points.
        Section 2 discusses related literature. Sections 3­6 present the background, experimental design,
data, and reduced-form empirical results. Section 7 presents the present focus model and estimation,
Section 8 considers welfare and policy implications, and Section 9 concludes.


2        RELATED LITERATURE
Our work builds on several existing literatures. One literature uses quasi-experimental variation to
evaluate the impacts of payday loan access (Zinman 2010; Melzer 2011, 2018; Morse 2011; Morgan,
Strain, and Seblani 2012; Carrell and Zinman 2014; Bhutta, Skiba, and Tobacman 2015; Bhutta,
Goldin, and Homonoff 2016; Carter and Skimmyhorn 2017; Gathergood, Guttman-Kenney, and
Hunt 2019; Skiba and Tobacman 2019). These papers consider a variety of different outcomes and
find a mix of positive and negative effects. Such impact evaluations cannot be used for welfare
analysis because it is not clear how to trade off effects on different outcomes, how to consider other
unmeasured welfare-relevant outcomes, or how to evaluate regulations such as rollover restrictions
that change the payday loan product instead of eliminating access. This highlights the need for
welfare analyses that include explicit measures of consumer bias. Our paper is the first to do this for
payday lending, thus situating questions about regulation of payday borrowing in the Behavioral
Public Economics literature (see Bernheim and Taubinsky, 2018, for a review).1
        We also build on existing papers studying imperfect information and behavioral biases among
    1
    For other examples of this approach to behavioral policy evaluation, see Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009),
Abaluck and Gruber (2011), Handel (2013), Allcott and Taubinsky (2015), Bronnenberg et al. (2015), Grubb and
Osborne (2015), Handel and Kolstad (2015), Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018), Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky
(2019), Handel, Kolstad, and Spinnewijn (2019), and Rees-Jones and Taubinsky (Forthcoming).



                                                      4
payday loan borrowers. Bertrand and Morse (2011) show that providing information to first-time
borrowers about fees and the likelihood of repeat borrowing reduces borrowing. This result is
consistent with our finding of naivete among inexperienced borrowers, as the information could
induce sophistication and reduce borrowing.2 Mann (2013) asks borrowers how long they think it
will be before they go an entire pay period without borrowing, finding that 60 percent of borrowers
predict correctly within three days. However, Mann (2013) does not present formal statistical tests
of whether borrowers are biased on average, and his sample includes only people who have not
borrowed in the last 30 days, which may limit the generalizability of his results. Leary and Wang
(2016) show that one reason for payday borrowing is a failure to plan for predictable income shocks.
Carter et al. (2019) find that payday borrowers who are quasi-experimentally granted more time
to repay loans do not repay more, and they show that this is consistent with a model of present
focus. Carvalho, Olafsson, and Silverman (2019) show that laboratory measures of decision quality
are negatively correlated with high-interest borrowing in Iceland. Relative to these papers, a key
contribution of our work is a theoretically driven design that allows us to estimate a model of
borrowing behavior, which then allows us to carry out a quantitative behavioral welfare analysis.
       Skiba and Tobacman (2018) use observational data on payday borrowing to estimate a present
focus model. Their identification exploits the timing of default: in their model, naivete is required
to explain long borrowing spells ending in default, as sophisticates would default earlier to avoid
the interest payments. However, recent work by Heidhues and Strack (forthcoming), shows that the
timing of choices cannot be used to identify either  or ~ without additional parametric assumptions,
as every distribution of stopping times can be rationalized by a time-consistent model with a
different distribution of unobserved shocks. For example, with a right-skewed distribution of income
shocks, one might reborrow repeatedly in hopes of repaying upon a high income draw and then
default if that high draw doesn't materialize.
       Finally, we advance the large empirical literature estimating models of limited self control.
Many lab and field experiments attempt to provide evidence for present focus through dynamic
preference reversals, demand for commitment, overoptimism, but without estimating model pa-
rameters.3 Another set of experiments and field studies estimate part of a present focus model,
for example identifying  while assuming that people are fully naive or fully sophisticated.4 There
are only a handful of papers that estimate a full model of partially naive present focus.5 There
also potentially important advantages to our identification strategy, as recent work suggests that
   2
     Burke, Leary, and Wang (2016) show that this information provision had material effects when implemented
throughout Texas.
   3
     See, for example, Read and van Leeuwen (1998), Shapiro (2005), Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006), DellaVigna and
Malmendier (2006), Gine, Karlan, and Zinman (2010), Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2011), Beshears et al. (2015),
Goda et al. (2015),Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2015), Royer, Stehr, and Sydnor (2015), Kuchler and Pagel
(2018), Toussaert (2018), Schilbach (2019), John (forthcoming), and Sadoff, Samek, and Sprenger (forthcoming).
   4
     See, for example, Fang and Silverman (2004), Shui and Ausubel (2005), Paserman (2008), Acland and Levy
(2012), Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a; 2012b), Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015), Laibson et al. (2015),
Augenblick (2018), Martinez, Meier, and Sprenger (2020), Mahajan, Michel, and Tarozzi (2020).
   5
     To our knowledge, these are Allcott, Gentzkow, and Song (2021), Bai et al. (2018), Augenblick and Rabin (2019),
Skiba and Tobacman (2018), Chaloupka, Levy, and White (2019), and Carrera et al. (2021).



                                                         5
reported results on preference reversals, commitment contract take-up, and procrastination are not
necessarily identifying present focus (see Strack and Taubinsky, 2021, Carrera et al., 2021, Heidhues
and Strack, forthcoming, respectively).
        Our strategy for identifying present focus parameters adapts the strategy of Carrera et al. (2021),
who study moderate incentives for exercise assuming quasilinearity in money and separability of
payoffs across periods.6 Our more complex empirical setting requires us to extend the strategy to
allow for income effects and non-separable dynamics.


3        PAYDAY LENDING BACKGROUND
Payday loans are small, high-interest, single-payment consumer loans that typically come due on
the borrower's next pay date. In the Lender's data, typical loan maturities are about 14 days for
people on weekly, biweekly, or semimonthly pay cycles, and about 30 days for people on monthly
pay cycles. In 2016, Americans borrowed $35 billion from storefront and online payday lenders,
paying $6 billion in interest and fees (Wilson and Wolkowitz 2017). In Indiana, the site of our
experiment, lenders disbursed 1.2 million payday loans for a total of $430 million in 2017 (Evans
2019).
        Indiana law caps loan sizes at $605 and caps the marginal interest and fees at 15 percent of
the loan amount for loans up to $250, 13 percent on the incremental amount borrowed from $251-
$400, and 10 percent on the incremental amount borrowed above $400. The Lender and its main
competitors charge those maximum allowed amounts on all loans. The annual percentage rate
(APR) for a 14-day loan with 15 percent interest is 391 percent, meaning that borrowing $100 over
each of the approximately 26 two-week periods in a year would incur $391 in interest. Regulations
vary across states (NCSL 2019), although Indiana's price and loan size caps are close to the norm.
        To take out a payday loan, borrowers must present identification, proof of income (e.g. a
paycheck stub or direct deposit slip), and a post-dated check for the amount of the loan plus
interest. Payday lenders do minimal underwriting, sometimes checking data from a subprime
credit bureau. By law, payday lenders in Indiana must report all loans to a database managed
by a company called Veritec. Lenders must check that database before disbursing loans to ensure
that people do not borrow from more than two lenders at once. We ran our experiment in Indiana
because we received regulatory approval to match consenting survey participants to their borrowing
records from this database.
        When the loan comes due, borrowers can repay (either in person or by allowing the lender
to successfully cash the check) or default. Indiana law does not allow a loan to be "rolled over"
into a new loan without first repaying, but borrowers can immediately get another loan after fully
repaying the principal and interest owed on their previous loan. Per Indiana law, a borrower can
get up to five consecutive loans from a given lender. After that, the borrower cannot take out a
new loan from any lender for seven days. This rollover restriction has limited impact because it
    6
        The strategy also builds on the key insights that motivate the parametric model in Acland and Levy (2012).



                                                           6
lasts less than one pay cycle, so people can get another loan before they get close to running out
of money as their next payday approaches.
       In 2017, 80 percent of the Lender's loans nationwide were followed by another loan within the
next eight weeks. In principle, people can borrow any continuous amount. In practice, most people
make a binary decision to either reborrow the same amount or not get a new loan. Of all consecutive
loans disbursed nationwide by the Lender in 2017, 68 percent of the subsequent loans were for the
exact same amount as the previous loan, while 17 percent were for more and 15 percent were for
less; see Appendix Figure A1. In the 32 percent of cases where the subsequent loan is for a different
amount than the previous loan, the average difference between the loan amounts is only $1. We
will use this fact to simplify our model.7
       If the borrower does not come to the store to repay the loan, the lender attempts to cash the
post-dated check, and is allowed by state law to do so up to three times. For bounced checks, the
borrower's bank will likely charge a fee of about $30, and lenders in Indiana charge an additional
$25 bounced check fee. State law does not permit late fees. If the loan remains unpaid, the Lender's
local staff try to work out a repayment plan with the borrower. If that fails, the Lender occasionally
refers an account to a third-party collection agency. The Lender does not lend to people who have
unpaid balances from past loan cycles.
       Default is relatively rare on a per-loan basis: in 2017, only 3 percent of the Lender's loans ended
in default. However, about 16 percent of sequences of consecutive loans ended in default in that
year.
       Payday lending has the hallmarks of a competitive market. Entry requires only modest physical
capital, technology, and regulatory compliance relative to many other industries. There are about
300 payday lending stores in Indiana, of which the majority are owned by three national chains
(Evans 2019). Despite high interest rates, risk-adjusted profits appear to be low: Ernst & Young
(2009) estimated pre-tax profit margins of less than 9 percent, with the majority of the costs due
to defaulted loans (25 percent of costs) and operating costs (62 percent). Thus, market power is
unlikely to be an economically meaningful distortion in this industry.
       Substitutes for storefront payday loans include online loans, checking account overdrafts, auto
title loans, pawn shops, loans from friends and family, and paying bills late. There is some disagree-
ment across datasets about how much liquidity payday borrowers might have available on credit
cards, which have much lower interest rates (Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman 2009; Bhutta, Skiba,
and Tobacman 2015).
       The Lender and its main competitors transparently disclose the interest and other fees, in both
levels and APRs, both in stores and on their websites. Furthermore, the CFPB's 2017 regulation
would limit the number of times that lenders can attempt to cash borrowers' checks, which generates
the main fees that could be less salient to borrowers. For this reason, we do not study shrouded
fees as a motivation for additional regulation.
   7
     This is notable because depending on the distribution of income shocks, a standard model might predict that
borrowers would gradually pay down the principal instead of repeatedly borrowing the same amount and then repaying
in full.


                                                        7
4        EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We designed the experiment to answer two key questions: whether people anticipate repeat borrow-
ing, and whether people are willing to pay a premium for an incentive to avoid future borrowing.
        The experiment ran at 41 of the Lender's stores in Indiana from January 7th through March
29th, 2019, for two weeks in each store. We piloted and refined the survey in fall 2018, including
follow-up interviews with store staff and with people who had taken the survey to check their
interpretation and understanding of the questions.
        We contracted with EA Consultants, a financial health research company, to place a recruiter
in each center on most days. The recruiter would approach customers either before or after they
took out a loan and ask them to take a survey on an iPad. The iPad survey was self-contained, so
the recruiters were only needed to recruit and answer questions if they arose. Perhaps as a result
of the extensive piloting and refinement, the recruiters reported that they received essentially no
questions about the survey.

Survey details. Appendix I presents the full survey instrument. To be eligible, a person must
have taken out a payday loan from the Lender in Indiana in the past 30 days. After securing
informed consent, the survey asked people's name and date of birth (to match to borrowing records)
and email address (to send gift cards as payment for participation).
        The first substantive question on the survey was to ask people to report the probability that
they would take out another payday loan from any payday lender in the next 8 weeks. The possible
answers were 0%, 10%, 20%, ..., 90%, 100%.8
        The survey then introduced the first reward for completing the survey, "$100 If You Are Debt-
Free." Participants were told that if they were selected for this reward, we would send them a
Visa cash card 12 weeks from now if they did not take out another payday loan from any lender
in the next eight weeks. The survey clarified that "All payday lenders are required to report loans
to a database. We will use that database to check your borrowing from all payday lenders." We
included a comprehension check question to make sure that participants understood the incentive.
We then asked people to report the probability that they would take out another payday loan from
any payday lender in the next eight weeks, if they were offered $100 If You Are Debt Free; we call
this P in this section only.

Rewards and multiple price lists. After the belief elicitations were complete, the survey
introduced the second possible reward: a certain payment that we called "Money for Sure." Just
as with the $100 If You Are Debt Free reward, Money for Sure would be paid within 12 weeks
on a Visa cash card. The survey then walked participants through an adaptive series of questions
to determine their valuations of the no-borrowing incentive. The first question asked whether the
    8
    In a pilot, we found that participants were more likely to answer 0%, 50%, and 100% when they could report
any number from 0­100 in an open-answer box. Because this kind of rounding generates measurement error (see
Appendix B.1), we decided that the equally neutral approach of simply giving people 11 options would elicit beliefs
with greater precision.


                                                        8
person would prefer to receive the no-borrowing incentive or an amount of Money for Sure equal to
the incentive's expected value. We helped people to calculate that expected value and highlighted
the non-financial reasons why they might prefer a certain payment versus a no-borrowing incentive.
The survey read,

      Earlier, you told us that you have a [P ]% chance of getting another payday loan before
      [8 weeks from now] if you are selected for $100 If You Are Debt-Free. In other words,
      you would have a [100 - P ]% chance of being debt-free. So on average, $100 If You Are
      Debt-Free would earn you $[100 - P ].
      Given that, which reward would you prefer?

    · $100 If You Are Debt-Free. This gives you extra motivation to stay debt-free.

    · $[100 - P ] For Sure. This gives you certainty and avoids pressure to stay debt-free.

One possible concern with this language is that by clarifying the reasons why they might prefer the
incentive ("extra motivation") or the Money for Sure ("gives you certainty and avoids pressure"),
we might generate an experimenter demand effect toward one option or the other. Our judgment
was that this concern was outweighed by the experimental value of orienting people to the relevant
considerations, and we intentionally wrote this language in a balanced way that does not favor
either of the two options.9
    The survey then sequentially offered choices with different amounts of Money For Sure in order
to bound the amount at which the borrower was indifferent between the certain payment and $100
If You Are Debt-Free.10
    The third possible reward for completing the survey was called Flip a Coin for $100. Participants
who were selected for this reward would have a 50 percent chance of winning $100 and a 50 percent
chance of winning nothing. This would also be paid within 12 weeks on a Visa cash card. The
survey led participants through an analogous adaptive question procedure, beginning with a tradeoff
between Flip a Coin for $100 and $50 For Sure. People's valuations of Flip a Coin for $100 from
this procedure provide a measure of risk aversion.
   9
     One more subtle potential concern is that the experiment makes commitment opportunities salient to borrowers
who would otherwise be inattentive to their present focus. However, this is desirable for inferring the structural
parameters of a present focus model, as our measurement of the degree of present focus is most accurate when
borrowers are actually aware of it. Note that borrowers' forecasts of their behavior are elicited before they encounter
this frame, and it is their forecasts that identify the degree of sophistication or naivete.
  10
     Because the survey allowed probabilities P to take values 0%, 10%, ..., 90%, 100%, the initial offer of Money For
Sure could take values from $0, $10, ..., $90, $100. If the borrower preferred the no-borrowing incentive over 100 - P
For Sure, the survey would offer another choice with 100 - P + 20. If the borrower preferred 100 - P + 20, the survey
would offer 100 - P + 40. If the borrower preferred 100 - P + 40, the survey would backtrack to 100 - P + 10 to
avoid giving the mistaken impression that this was a bargaining game. Once the borrower preferred x For Sure over
the no-borrowing incentive, the survey would offer x - 10 for Sure. After that question, the borrower's valuation of
incentive would be bounded within a $10 range. The algorithm worked analogously if the borrower initially preferred
100 - P For Sure over the no-borrowing incentive.




                                                          9
Attention check and qualitative questions.                  Immediately after this second MPL, there was
an attention check question in which the text asked people to click the "next" button instead of
answering. The survey ended with three qualitative questions designed to elicit intuitive measures
of desired motivation to avoid future borrowing and of past misprediction of payday borrowing.

Randomization and incentive compatibility.                   The computer used people's responses on the
two adaptive procedures to fill out two multiple price lists (MPLs) with amounts of Money for Sure
ranging from $0 to $160 in increments of $10. Although all participants completed the MPLs, only
two percent of survey respondents (the "MPL group") were ex-post randomly assigned to receive
the choice they made (or would have made) on a randomly selected row from one of the two MPLs.
Because all participants had a chance of having their MPL decisions determine their outcomes, it
was incentive compatible for participants to answer all questions truthfully. We informed people of
this before beginning the questions, saying "Think carefully, because the computer may randomly
select one of the following questions and give you what you chose in that question." People could
click to a separate page for full implementation details.
       We did not incentivize belief elicitations because truthful reporting is not incentive compatible
for individuals who perceive themselves to be time inconsistent. A person who thinks that she
borrows too much should report a borrowing probability that is lower than her actual belief, to
incentivize her future self to borrow less.11
       The randomization assigned participants to $100 If You Are Debt-Free (the "Incentive group"),
no reward (the "Control group"), or the MPL group with 44, 54, and 2 percent probability, re-
spectively. Participants were randomized if they had "valid" survey data under four pre-registered
criteria: (i) if they passed both the no-borrowing incentive comprehension check and the attention
check, (ii) did not make inconsistent choices on either of the two MPLs, and (iii, iv) had certainty
equivalents of less than $160 on each of the two MPLs.

Post-survey.        After the survey was complete, the iPad informed participants of whether they had
been selected for a reward. Each day, we matched surveys to the Lender's records. Participants
whose name and birth date could be matched to a payday loan disbursed by the Lender in the
past 30 days were sent an email thanking them for participating and a reminder of any reward that
they had received. They also received a separate email from our gift card vendor explaining how
to claim their $10 gift card. People who began the survey but failed to complete it received an
email encouraging them to complete their survey from where they had left off. People who took
out payday loans from a store on a day when the survey was available in that store were emailed
a link to take the survey online.
       After four weeks, all participants received a second email, including a reminder of any reward
that they had received. After eight weeks, we received borrowing records from the Veritec statewide
database. By no more than 12 weeks after the survey (in practice, typically at 10 weeks), people
  11
     Although Augenblick and Rabin (2019) show that this distortion is bounded in deterministic, continuous-effort
settings, this does not generalize to our stochastic discrete choice setting.


                                                       10
who had received Money For Sure or had been offered $100 If You Are Debt-Free and had not
borrowed were sent an email from our gift card vendor explaining how to claim their cash cards.


5         DATA
5.1         Survey and borrowing data
13,191 people took out payday loans from one of the Lender's stores on a day when the survey was
available in that store. We have the Lender's records for those 13,191 loans, plus all loans from 2012
through February 2018 for a random sample of the Lender's customers nationwide who took out
payday loans either online or in storefronts. The Lender's data include income, an internal credit
score on a scale from 0­1000, pay cycle length, loan length, and loan amount. For our analyses
using the Lender's nationwide data, we use all loans disbursed in 2017, the most recent complete
year. From the statewide payday lending database managed by Veritec, we also observe whether
each survey participant got another loan from any lender over the next eight weeks after they
took the survey. Payday borrowers typically borrow from only one lender, and reborrowing rates
are almost exactly the same whether calculated with the Lender's data or with the Veritec data.
Appendix Table A1 presents more information on our key variables and their sources. Appendix
Table A2 documents that the Incentive and Control groups are balanced on observables.
         Of the 13,191 people who took out loans on survey days in survey stores, 2,236 consented and
2,122 completed the survey, of whom 1,205 had valid survey data under the four pre-registered
criteria introduced in Section 4. See Appendix Table A3 for details. Unless otherwise noted,
figures and tables in the paper are limited to the 1,205 borrowers with valid data, following our
pre-registered sample inclusion criteria.12 Three percent of surveys were completed by borrowers
who had not responded in the store and were invited by email. Although our valid sample comprises
only a small share of customers who could have taken the survey, Table 1 shows that they are
comparable on our observable characteristics to the 13,191 borrowers on survey days and to the
Lender's borrowers nationwide in 2017. The average loan length in our survey sample is 16 days,
the average loan amount is $373, and borrowers' average annual income is about $34,000.
         To cleanly compare predicted and actual borrowing, our survey participants' borrowing after
the survey must not be affected by unexpected common shocks. For example, if unemployment
suddenly rose in the two months after the survey, this could cause an unpredicted borrowing increase
that our framework would attribute to naivete. Appendix Figure A4 shows that in Indiana over
the study period, per-capita income growth was steady and unemployment varied by only 0.1
percentage points.
         We say that borrowers reborrowed if they were issued another loan from any payday lender at
any point between the day they took the survey and eight weeks after the survey. We say that
borrowers defaulted on a loan if they did not pay off all principal and fees owed. We say that
borrowers repaid if they did not reborrow or default--that is, if they did not owe debt to a payday
    12
         The pre-registration is available at www.socialscienceregistry.org/docs/analysisplan/2037.


                                                             11
lender at any point between the day their current loan (at the time of the survey) came due and
eight weeks after the survey. We define a loan sequence (or borrowing spell ) as a series of loans
with no more than eight weeks between any two loan disbursals.

5.2    Expert survey
Before releasing our paper, we elicited predictions of our results and opinions about payday lending
regulation from a sample of domain experts, following recent work by DellaVigna and Pope (2018)
and others. We surveyed both academic and non-academic experts. For academics, our sample
frame was behavioral and household finance economists we cited in our April 2019 draft, plus
participants before two seminar presentations in April 2019. For non-academic experts, the sample
frame was (i) the chief consumer finance regulator in each of the 50 states plus DC, (ii) the lead
staff person for each Congressperson and Senator on the federal House and Senate financial services
committees, (iii) researchers and regulators working on consumer lending and credit from the CFPB
and the Department of Defense, and (iv) leadership and head payday lending experts at five major
think tanks (the Pew Center, the Center for Financial Services Innovation, the Consumer Federation
of America, the National Consumer Law Foundation, and the Center for Responsible Lending).
    The survey began with a detailed description of our study's context and sample, followed by
two sets of questions. First, we elicited opinions about whether three common types of payday
lending regulation were good or bad for consumers, and the certainty that the expert had in her
answer. Second, we elicited predictions of our empirical results. To elicit expert beliefs about
borrowers' misprediction, we asked if the experts thought that the average payday loan borrower
underestimates, overestimates, or correctly foresees the chance that she will reborrow in the future.
We then told experts that borrowers in our data had about a 70 percent chance of reborrowing
over the next eight weeks, and asked for their estimate of borrowers' average predicted reborrowing
probability.13 To elicit expert beliefs about borrowers' demand for behavior change, we asked
if the experts thought that "the average payday loan borrower would want to give herself extra
motivation to avoid reborrowing." For experts who reported that they had a PhD in economics,
we also elicited their estimate of borrowers' average ~ parameter.
    We had 103 respondents, of whom 68 percent work at a university and have a PhD in economics.
See Appendix Table A4 for descriptive statistics. Appendix J presents the full expert survey
instrument.


6     REDUCED-FORM EMPIRICAL RESULTS
This section presents answers to our two key empirical research questions using only minimal
modeling assumptions.
  13
     We said 70 percent because we did not yet know the sample average reborrowing probability when we fielded the
expert survey.




                                                       12
       Figure 1 illustrates the framework guiding our analysis. The x-axis is the probability of borrow-
ing in the next eight weeks, and the y-axis is the cost of borrowing. There are three demand curves:
actual, predicted, and desired. In a standard model of time-consistent consumers with rational ex-
pectations, these three curves coincide. Actual and predicted demand differ if people mispredict
future borrowing due to naivete about self-control problems, overoptimism about or inattention to
future income or expenditure needs, or any other reason. Predicted and desired demand differ if
people perceive themselves to be time inconsistent.
       The scalars b and w, respectively, denote possible amounts of the no-borrowing incentive and
Money for Sure. We define µ(b) and µ
                                   ~(b) as the actual and predicted probabilities of reborrowing
over the next eight weeks. We define the function w(b) as the valuation of a no-borrowing incentive
of amount b, i.e. the w(b) such that the borrower would be indifferent between a b dollar no-
borrowing incentive and w(b) dollars of Money for Sure.

6.1      Do borrowers anticipate repeat borrowing?
We begin by comparing predicted and actual borrowing for the Control group, i.e. the borrowers
in the standard environment without the experimental no-borrowing incentive. Figure 2 shows
                                             ~(0)  70 percent chance of borrowing without the
that the average borrower predicts she has a µ
incentive, while in reality, µ(0)  74 percent of borrowers in the Control group did borrow.14 This
implies that the average borrower almost fully anticipates repeat borrowing.15
       This slightly underestimated borrowing probability is consistent with responses to an additional
qualitative survey question. When asked how their past expectations of payday loan usage had
lined up with reality, 36, 25, and 39 percent of borrowers reported getting payday loans "more often
than I expected," "less often than I expected," and "about as often as I expected," respectively.
With rational expectations, one would expect equal shares of "more often" and "less often."
       Figure 3 presents misprediction as a function of recent borrowing experience. The four expe-
rience groups are approximately quartiles of the experience distribution in our sample. Borrowers
who had gotten three or fewer loans in the previous six months underestimate future borrowing by
20 percentage points, whereas borrowers with four or more recent loans predict close to correctly
on average.16 This is consistent with borrowers learning from experience.17
  14
      The samples in the left and right spikes of Figure 2 are different in that the left spike includes the full sample while
the right spike includes the (randomly assigned) Control group only. This makes little difference because there is only
minimal sampling error: the Control group's predicted borrowing probability without the no-borrowing incentive is
69 percent.
   15
      Although our pre-registered exclusion restrictions could in principle be correlated with misprediction, we find
that is not the case: Appendix Figure A10 shows that the results are similar when we do not apply the restrictions.
   16
      Over-optimistic beliefs are sometimes attributed to aspirational reporting, where time-inconsistent people misre-
port beliefs in order to encourage future behavior change (Augenblick and Rabin, 2019). The fact that experienced
borrowers are statistically unbiased on average suggests that this and related reporting biases did not affect their
reports, although such factors could in principle affect less experienced borrowers.
   17
      Appendix Figure A11 shows qualitatively similar results after defining experience to be the number of previous
loans in the current borrowing spell. Appendix Figure A12 shows that the decrease in misprediction with experience
is driven mostly by higher predicted borrowing probability, not lower actual borrowing probability. Appendix Figure
A13 shows that misprediction does not differ statistically by internal credit score or income.



                                                             13
       Table 2 presents regressions that quantify and extend this result. The dependent variable in
the first four columns is misprediction, Ri - µ
                                              ~i (0), where Ri is an indicator for whether person i
got another payday loan in the next eight weeks, and the sample includes only the Control group.
Column 1 estimates a linear version of Figure 3. One additional loan in the past six months is
associated with 2.74 percentage points less underestimation of future borrowing probability.
       Because experience is not randomly assigned, we do not know if these results reflect learning from
experience or unobserved factors that are correlated with both past borrowing and misprediction.
Column 2 of Table 2 shows that the misprediction-experience relationship is robust to controlling
for all observables in the Lender's data--annual income, internal credit score, pay cycle length,
loan length, and loan amount--as well as whether the participant took the survey in the store
and the valuation of the $100 coin flip. This is consistent with the relationship being driven by
learning instead of other factors, although there of course may be additional unobservables. Our
present focus model in Sections 7 and 8 predicts that in the absence of learning, sophisticated types
reborrow less, which would imply that the effect of experience on misprediction is even larger than
the correlation between the two variables.
       To what extent is the misprediction-experience relationship driven by recent experience in the
current borrowing spell versus prior experience? Columns 3 and 4 separate the loans in past six
months into loans in current borrowing spell versus loans before the current borrowing spell. Both
types of experience are statistically associated with less misprediction, and the magnitudes are
statistically indistinguishable. Column 4 shows that both associations are robust to the inclusion
of controls.
       Our evidence differs from evidence of substantial and more persistent naivete in other settings.18
One potential explanation is that learning is context-specific, and payday borrowing is a high-stakes
domain with clear feedback and repeated learning opportunities.19
       Appendix B further explores borrowers' beliefs, showing that predicted and actual borrowing
are positively correlated. This relationship is attenuated relative to a 45-degree line because of
survey response noise due to rounding and other cognitive difficulties in articulating probabilities.
However, we show in the appendix that this does not bias our estimate of individuals' average
forecast, because rounding leads to approximately mean-zero measurement error in people's true
subjective beliefs.
       Our expert survey respondents believed that borrowers would be much more naive than they
  18
     A key caveat is that we cannot rule out the possibility that borrowers underestimate the size of their loan
conditional on reborrowing. However, we think it is unlikely that borrowers learn their likelihood of reborrowing but
stay significantly miscalibrated about how much they reborrow, especially because borrowers reborrow exactly the
same amount 68 percent of the time.
  19
     Settings where significant naivete has been documented include real-effort laboratory experiments (Augenblick
and Rabin 2019), which are low-stakes one-shot settings, and gym attendance (DellaVigna and Malmendier 2004;
Acland and Levy 2015; Carrera et al. 2021), which has repeated learning opportunities but relatively low stakes.
Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2015) and Yaouanq and Schwardmann (2019) find that people become more
sophisticated over time in experiments with clear and salient feedback. Theoretical models show that learning is
enhanced by stakes in the presence of partial commitment devices (Ali 2011), or by the possibility of many future
contracting opportunities (Gagnon-Bartsch, Rabin, and Schwartzstein 2019).



                                                         14
actually are. 78 percent of our respondents thought that the average borrower underestimates
reborrowing. Figure 4 presents the distribution of respondents' beliefs about borrowers' average
predicted reborrowing probability. The average respondent thought that the average borrower
would predict only a 40 percent chance (standard error  2.1 percent) of reborrowing over the next
eight weeks, a 30 percentage point misprediction relative to the 70 percent reborrowing probability
we told the experts. This contrasts sharply with the limited misprediction documented in Figure
2.

6.1.1    Misprediction in Incentive condition

A related but different question is whether people correctly predict their borrowing in the Incentive
                                                             ~(100)  50 percent chance of
condition. The average borrower predicts that she has only a µ
borrowing if offered the no-borrowing incentive, while in reality, µ(100)  70 percent of borrowers
in the Incentive group did borrow. Putting this together with the averages in Figure 2, this implies
that the average borrower predicts that the no-borrowing incentive would reduce borrowing by
~(0) - µ
µ      ~(100)  20 percentage points, whereas in reality, the incentive reduced borrowing by only
µ(0) - µ(100)  3.8 percentage points.
     There are several potential explanations. First, even if borrowers correctly predict their status
quo borrowing probability, they might overestimate their demand response if liquidity shocks have
higher variance than they realize. Indeed, because of the lack of price variation in the payday loan
market, borrowers have little opportunity to learn their price elasticity and little incentive to attend
to information that would help them identify this elasticity. Second, because the experimental
incentive is new and unfamiliar, borrowers may have forgotten about it and failed to predict that
they would forget.20 Indeed, although our participants are liquidity constrained and we sent two
reminder emails, our gift card vendor reports that only 44 percent of the $100 gift cards were
claimed, compared with 76 percent of the $10 gift cards given as participation payments the day
after the survey. Third, experimenter demand effects could have caused people to overstate their
beliefs about the effect of the incentive, although this seems least likely.
     Appendix Figure A14 shows that there is no relationship between experience and misprediction
in the Incentive condition, and even experienced borrowers underestimate borrowing in that condi-
tion. This suggests that learning is context-specific. Experience under normal conditions may help
borrowers to predict their behavior in normal conditions, but it does not help them predict their
behavior in unfamiliar conditions.
     Although people substantially overestimate the incentive's effect, they do have some information
about how it would affect them. Figure 5 presents estimates of the average predicted and actual
effects of the incentive separately for people who reported that the incentive would reduce their
borrowing and people who reported that it would not. The low predicted response group correctly
  20
     Our finding is reminiscent of Ericson (2011) in which a large sample of students faces a similarly unfamiliar
choice. In that paper, participants' choices imply that on average they forecasted a 76 percent claim rate of a
monetary reward after a six-month delay, although only 53 percent claimed it in reality.



                                                       15
predicts that the incentive will not affect their borrowing, and the high predicted response group
correctly predicts that the incentive will reduce their borrowing, but the latter group substantially
overestimates the actual effect.
      The bulk of the evidence suggests that misprediction in the Incentive condition is not informative
about misprediction under standard conditions outside the experiment: it appears to be driven by
the unusual nature of the experimental incentive. Thus, we use only the misprediction in the status
quo Control condition to identify naivete. Our estimates in Sections 6.2 and 7 rely only on the
assumption that on average (up to mean-zero noise), people accurately reported their subjective
beliefs about the effect of the incentive on borrowing; the fact that these subjective beliefs turn out
to be mistaken does not bias our estimates.21

6.2      Do borrowers perceive themselves to be time consistent?
6.2.1      Graphical intuition

To identify perceived time inconsistency, we extend Carrera et al. (2021) to our dynamic setting
with income effects. Using people's predictions of their future behavior, we can calculate what
their valuation of the no-borrowing incentive would be if they were time consistent. People who
believe that they are time inconsistent and that their future selves will borrow more than they
presently prefer will place an additional premium on the incentive, because they value the fact that
the incentive will induce their future selves to borrow less.
      More precisely, our strategy exploits the fundamental link between time consistency and the En-
velope Theorem for dynamic optimization. A time-consistent person's expected utility is unaffected
by marginal changes in her future behavior, since her future behavior maximizes her current utility
function (by definition). Thus, a time-consistent borrower's valuation of a marginal no-borrowing
incentive equals the mechanical effect of the incentive on cash-on-hand; the induced marginal be-
havior change has no effect. By contrast, future behavior changes do have first-order effects on
the expected utility of time-in consistent people because they do not share the preferences of their
future selves. Thus, a time-inconsistent borrower's valuation of the no-borrowing incentive will
include the additional behavior change effect.
      For intuition, examine Figure 1 and temporarily assume that borrowers are risk neutral. A
no-borrowing incentive of size b is equivalent to giving people b while also increasing the price of
borrowing by b. Thus, a time-consistent borrower values the incentive at b minus the consumer
surplus loss from increasing the price of borrowing by b. On the figure, this consumer surplus loss is
area ABCD. Thus, borrowers who perceive themselves to be time consistent will value the incentive
at b - ABCD dollars.
    We let w (b) := b - ABCD denote the valuation that borrowers would have if they were risk-
neutral and perceived themselves to be time consistent. We can write this as
 21
      We explore sensitivity to this assumption in Appendix E.6.




                                                         16
                                                          µ
                                                          ~(0) + µ
                                                                 ~(b)
                                         w (b) := b - b               ,                                      (1)
                                                               2
where µ
      ~(0) and µ
               ~(b) are the perceived borrowing probabilities without and with the incentive.
    Borrowers who perceive themselves to be time-inconsistent predict that they will have differ-
ent preferences in the future than they do when they take the survey. The figure captures this
by distinguishing between predicted and desired demand. As drawn, desired demand is shifted
inward, meaning that borrowers want their future selves to borrow less. The perceived utility gain
from a marginal behavior change is the vertical distance between predicted and desired demand,
which integrates to the trapezoid ABEF over the behavior change induced by the the no-borrowing
incentive. Thus, borrowers who perceive themselves to be time inconsistent will value the incentive
at b - ABCD + ABEF > w (b). In theory, borrowers could perceive that their future selves will
borrow too little, giving valuations less than w (b).
    So far, this assumes that borrowers are risk-neutral. Since the no-borrowing incentive is risky,
risk aversion would lower valuations of the incentive. Thus, we have a one-sided test of time
inconsistency: valuations above w (b) are consistent with perceived overborrowing, while valuations
below that bound could be consistent with perceived underborrowing and/or risk aversion. In
Section 7, we impose additional structure to tighten the bound and allow two-sided tests.
    In Appendix D, we formalize this graphical intuition and the implications of risk aversion using
the general Envelope Theorem results developed by Milgrom and Segal (2002) for arbitrary choice
sets. As we show in that appendix, w (b) constitutes an upper bound on a risk-averse person's
valuation of the incentive under relatively weak assumptions and across a broad class of dynamic
stochastic models of individual behavior.
    This approach is related to but different from the approach of testing for time-inconsistency
by eliciting demand for "dominated" commitment contracts that time-consistent people should not
want, such as a commitment to pay $100 if one fails to quit smoking or go to the gym.22 Such tests
can deliver false negatives because uncertainty and demand for flexibility reduce demand for such
contracts (Heidhues and Koszegi 2009; Laibson 2015; Carrera et al. 2021), and they can deliver false
positives because of noise in takeup decisions (Carrera et al. 2021). Building on Carrera et al. (2021),
our approach avoids these drawbacks by analyzing the average valuation of a commitment device
instead of the share of consumers who choose it at a given price and accounting for uncertainty by
eliciting and modeling predicted behavior µ
                                          ~.

6.2.2    Empirical results

Figure 6 presents the key moments that identify time inconsistency. The first spike shows that the
average borrower in our sample values the $100 no-borrowing incentive at $52. The second spike
is the valuation for risk-neutral and time-consistent borrowers from Equation (13): w (100) =
  22
     This literature includes Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006), Beshears et al. (2015), Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson
(2011), Gine, Karlan, and Zinman (2010), John (forthcoming), Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2015), Royer, Stehr,
and Sydnor (2015), and Schilbach (2019).


                                                       17
                70%-50%
 1 - 70% +         2       × $100  $40 on average. In other words, if borrowers were risk-neutral
and believed that they were time consistent, their average valuation of the no-borrowing incentive
would be $40. If borrowers are risk-averse, their average valuation of the incentive would be less
than $40. Since the $52 average valuation exceeds $40, we infer that the average borrower is either
risk seeking or perceives herself to be time inconsistent. We refer to the difference between these
first two spikes, i.e. w(100) - w (100), as the "behavior change premium." This is $12 on average,
or 30 percent more than w (100).
       The third spike on Figure 6 shows that the average borrower is willing to pay $42 for the $100
coin flip. This implies material risk aversion. Thus, the $12 behavior change premium could be a
loose lower bound on borrowers' actual valuation of the behavior change induced by the incentive.23
       This perceived time inconsistency is consistent with qualitative survey responses. Panel (a)
of Figure 7 shows that 54 percent of people report that they would "very much" like to give
themselves extra motivation to avoid future payday loan debt, 36 percent report "somewhat," and
only 10 percent "not at all." Panel (b) shows that although most people want motivation to avoid
payday loan debt, people are more likely to think that restrictions on repeat borrowing would
be bad for them. This is consistent with uncertainty about liquidity shocks creating a need for
flexibility. Responses to these two questions are correlated: people who want more motivation are
more likely to think that borrowing restrictions would be good for them.
       Figure 8 shows that the behavior change premium is correlated with other survey responses
in expected ways.24 People who report that they want more motivation to avoid payday loan
debt, that a rollover restriction would be good for them, or that the incentive will reduce their
probability of borrowing have higher behavior change premia.25 These results build confidence in
the conclusion that borrowers perceive themselves to be time inconsistent.
       In Section 6.1, we saw that misprediction decreases with experience. If this reflects borrowers
learning that they are time inconsistent, one might expect that the behavior change premium would
be higher for experienced consumers. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 show that this is indeed the case:
one additional loan of experience in the past six months is associated with a $1.09 higher behavior
change premium, and adding controls has little effect on this relationship. In all regressions with the
behavior change premium, we also control for predicted demand response. Consistent with Figure
8, borrowers who predict that the no-borrowing incentive will reduce their chance of borrowing
have $12­$13 higher behavior change premia.
       Interestingly, columns 7 and 8 show that the number of loans before the current spell is more
strongly associated with the behavior change premium than loans in the current spell. This con-
  23
     Appendix Figures A2 and A3 present the distributions of valuations of the no-borrowing incentive and coin flip.
  24
     The behavior change premium does not differ statistically by internal credit score or income; see Appendix Figure
A15.
  25
     When eliciting valuations of the no-borrowing incentive, we explained that it "gives you extra motivation to
stay debt-free," which is similar to the language in the qualitative question about "giving yourself extra motivation
to avoid payday loan debt." However, it is unlikely that the correlation in responses to these two questions is just
a mechanical result of framing, because the behavior change premium is also correlated with borrowers thinking
that the rollover restriction would be good for them, and with borrowers predicting a larger reduction in borrowing
probability.


                                                         18
trasts with their statistically equal relationship with misprediction in columns 3 and 4. Through the
lens of the present focus model, a literal interpretation of these results is that time inconsistency,
but not misprediction, has a larger effect on starting borrowing spells than on extending them.


7     STRUCTURAL ESTIMATES OF PRESENT FOCUS AND NAIVETE
7.1    Setup
The previous section showed that misperceived borrowing and perceived time inconsistency can be
identified in our data with minimal assumptions. In this section, we use similar identification ap-
proaches and additional assumptions to estimate a structural model of borrowers' time preferences
and beliefs.
                                                                                                          T       -t u ,
    We assume that borrowers have quasi-hyperbolic preferences given by Ut = ut +                          =t+1       
where ut is the period t utility flow. Following O'Donoghue and Rabin (2001), we allow people to
mispredict their preferences: in all periods t <  , they predict that their period  self will have
short-run discount factor ~. We discuss other misprediction models in Appendix E.5.
    Our model builds on Heidhues and Koszegi (2010). Figure 9 illustrates. We focus on three
periods of a potentially longer or infinite-horizon model. In period 0, the borrower gets a loan of
amount l and then takes our survey. The next eight weeks after the survey are period 1. At the
beginning of period 1, the borrower receives a smoothly distributed transitory repayment cost shock
. This shock captures expenses (such as car repairs) and income shocks (such as being scheduled
for fewer hours at work) that are unpredictable as of period 0. In period 1, the borrower chooses
to either repay or reborrow. If she repays, she pays the principal and fee l + p(l) in period 1 and
receives no-borrowing incentive b in period 2. If she reborrows, she pays only the fee p(l) in period
1, owes l + p(l) in period 2, and does not receive the no-borrowing incentive.
    The cost of repaying amount x in period 1 is a smooth function k (x, ) that is convex in x and
strictly increasing in . The x in k (x, ) equals p(l) if the borrower reborrows in period 1 and equals
l + p(l) if the borrower repays.
                                                         ~ (x); specifically, this is the reduction in
    The cost of starting period 2 with debt x is denoted C
period 2 continuation value (as perceived before period 2) from starting period 2 with debt x instead
of being debt-free.26 The x in C~ (x) equals l + p(l) if the borrower reborrows in period 1 and equals
-b if the borrower repays and is owed an incentive payment. The assumption of a well-behaved
         ~ is far from innocuous when 
function C                            ~ < 1, because C
                                                     ~ is the solution to a non-cooperative game
played between the different selves after period 2 (Harris and Laibson 2001; Laibson et al. 2015).
In Appendix F.1, we show existence, uniqueness, and smoothness of C  ~ in the fully dynamic model
presented in Section 8.
  26
     Formally, if V ~2 (x) is the perceived period 2 continuation value function as a function of period t debt x, C
                                                                                                                   ~ (x) =
~         ~
V2 (0) - V2 (x). We say "perceived" continuation value function because people mispredict their behavior (and thus
their utility) if ~ =  . For simplicity, the exposition in this section assumes that the borrower has the same expectation
of C~ in both periods 0 and 1. However, the proofs of this section's results in Appendix E allow for certain types of
correlated shocks that reveal additional information about C      ~ in period 1.



                                                           19
    These three periods could correspond to any three periods in an infinite-horizon model, such as
the one we present in Section 8. We do not need to observe or explicitly model decisions in period
                                                              ~.
2 or later, as the period 2 continuation value is captured in C
    Three assumptions of this framework should be made explicit. First, people cannot get a loan
of any amount other than l in period 1. This is realistic because as discussed in Section 3, most
people either repay or reborrow the same amount as their previous loan.27 Second, borrowers
cannot default in period 1. This is a reasonable approximation because the probability of default
on any one loan is only 3 percent. The microfounded model in Appendix F.1 allows people to
                                                                                             ~ . Third,
default in period 2 or later, so the possibility of default can influence period 2 debt cost C
borrowers have only one borrowing decision in period 1, even though that period is eight weeks
long.

7.2     Graphical illustration with risk neutrality
In this sub-section, we return to Figure 1 to illustrate the identification. For this graphical illus-
tration only, we assume that borrowers are risk-neutral, or more precisely that period 2 debt cost
C~ is linear. We can now discuss the three demand functions on the figure in the context of the
                                                                                          ~ by 
model. The period 1 self determines actual demand; that self discounts period 2 debt cost C
relative to period 1 utility. The period 0 self predicts that the period 1 self will instead discount C~
by  ~ , so the ratio of predicted to actual marginal utility (i.e. the ratio of the heights of predicted
vs. actual demand curves) is /  ~. The period 0 self would prefer that the period 1 self discount C  ~
by only  instead of the predicted ~ relative to period 1 utility, so the ratio of desired to predicted
marginal utility is ~.


7.2.1    Identifying sophistication versus naivete

In Section 6.1, we compared predicted and actual demand to identify misprediction in probability
units. We now identify the relationship between  and     ~ by transforming misprediction into
marginal utility units using the perceived demand slope.
   Define b such that µ
                      ~(b ) = µ(0). In words, b is the no-borrowing incentive at which predicted
demand with the incentive would equal actual demand without the incentive. Define (     ~ b) :=
~(0) - µ
µ      ~(b) as the predicted effect of the incentive on borrowing. Under a linear approximation,
                                     - ~                                                             ~
the perceived demand slope is         b ,                                         ~(0) + b -b = µ(0), and
                                            the definition of b can be written as µ
thus

                                                    b
                                             b =       (µ(0) - µ
                                                               ~(0)) .                                            (2)
                                                   - ~
  27
     In a more general model where borrowers could choose some other loan amount l , the average differences between
actual, predicted, and desired demand depend (to a first-order approximation) on the average of l + p. In the Lender's
data, conditional on reborrowing a different amount, the average amount reborrowed is only $1 different than the
average previous loan amount. Thus, it is a close approximation to assume that when people re-borrow, they always
reborrow exactly l + p.



                                                         20
This shows how b transforms misprediction µ(0) - µ
                                                 ~(0) into dollar units using the perceived demand
         b
slope   - ~.
   In Figure 1, b is the vertical distance between points H and G, the predicted and actual demand
curves at probability µ(0). b > 0 implies that people overestimate future borrowing, while b < 0
implies that people underestimate borrowing. From Section 6.1, we know that b < 0 on average
in the data.
   We can also write b as a function of  and ~. For b to equate actual demand at zero incen-
tive with predicted demand at incentive b , it must equate the actual reborrowing cost from the
perspective of the period 1 self with the period 0 self's prediction of that reborrowing cost with
incentive b :

                      ~ (l + p) - C
                      C           ~ (0)               =           ~ C
                                                                                ~ (-b )
                                                                    ~ (l + p) - C                       .   (3)
                   period 1 self's reborrowing cost       predicted reborrowing cost with incentive b

                                            ~ (x) gives an intuitive formula for sophistication--the
   Re-arranging and exploiting linearity in C
ratio of actual to perceived present focus:

                                                      l + p + b
                                                    =           .                                           (4)
                                                  ~
                                                         l+p
Both the left-hand side and right-hand side of this equation are the ratio of the height of H to the
height of G in Figure 1, i.e. the ratio of predicted to actual marginal utility at probability µ(0).
If people correctly predict borrowing on average, b = 0 and /    ~ = 1. We infer lower /    ~ (more
naivete) when b is more negative (people more heavily underestimate future borrowing).

7.2.2     Identifying perceived present focus

In Section 6.2, we identified perceived time inconsistency by testing whether people value the no-
borrowing incentive more than they would if they perceived themselves to be time consistent. We
now identify the perceived present focus parameter ~ by putting more structure on that intuition.
   As discussed in Section 6.2, risk-neutral people who perceive they are time consistent value the
no-borrowing incentive at w (b) := b - ABCD = b - b µ   ~(0)+~
                                                            2
                                                              µ(b)
                                                                   . The size of the behavior change
                                        ~
premium trapezoid ABEF depends on  . For an incentive of amount b, the difference between the
desired and predicted demand curves is (l + p + b) - ~(l + p + b) = (1 - ~)(l + p + b). Thus, the lengths
of AF and BE are (1 -   ~)(l + p + b) and (1 - ~)(l + p), respectively. The width of the trapezoid is
the predicted change in borrowing probability induced by the incentive, ~ := µ
                                                                             ~(0) - µ
                                                                                    ~(b). Thus,
                             ~    ~           b
the area of the trapezoid is  1 -  l + p + 2 . The valuation of the incentive is thus




                                                             21
                                                    µ
                                                    ~(0) + µ
                                                           ~(b)              ~                       b            ~
  w(b) = b - ABCD + ABEF =                   b-b                         + 1-              l+p+                             .   (5)
                                                         2                                           2
                                                                                                             predicted
                                          valuation if time consistent         perceived internality      behavior change

                                                                                      internality reduction benefit


We infer a lower ~ (more perceived present focus) when w is more positive (people are willing to pay
more for the incentive to avoid future borrowing), adjusting for the valuation that a time-consistent
person would have.

7.3     Formal model with risk aversion
We now formalize the model further and relax the risk neutrality assumption. Readers with less
interest in these details can skip to the results in Section 7.4.
    While the graphical exposition above assumed linear C     ~ , our formal results and parameter es-
                                                               ~ (0)
timates use a quadratic approximation to C    ~ (x). Let  := C        be the coefficient of absolute risk
                                                                ~             C (0)
aversion at x = 0, and define  := (l + p). Under this quadratic approximation,  approximates the
percent difference in marginal utilities when people reborrow versus repay:   C~ (l + p)/C
                                                                                         ~ (0) - 1.


7.3.1    Identifying sophistication versus naivete
                                                                                                 ~,
To identify sophistication while allowing for risk aversion under the quadratic approximation to C
we re-write Equation (3) as a function of  and .

                                                       ~
Proposition 1. Assume that terms of order (l + p + b)3 C                            ~ b2 are negligible. Then
                                                                                and µ

                                                               ~ l + p + b                   
                          (l + p) 1 +                    =                          1+       - b           ,                    (6)
                                             2                                             2  2
                     period 1 self 's reborrowing cost       predicted reborrowing cost with incentive b


where b =   100
            - ~   (µ(0) - µ
                          ~(0)).

7.3.2    Identifying perceived present focus

From the perspective of the period 0 self, the change in expected utility from a marginal change in
b (at w = 0) is
                                                                                                               
              dV           ~                ~ (l + p) - C
                                                        ~ (-b)                                    ~ (-b) .
                 = 2 
                                                                                                        
              db     - 1 -                  C                              ~ (b)
                                                                           µ          + (1 - µ
                                                                                             ~(b))C                             (7)
                                                                         behavior          mechanical effect
                                       perceived internality

The two terms in Equation (7) generalize the graphical argument for the linear case. The first
term, the product of the perceived internality and the predicted behavior change, corresponds to
the behavior change premium trapezoid ABEF. The second term, the mechanical effect, corresponds

                                                                22
to the valuation of a marginal incentive db for people who perceive themeselves to be time consistent.
Mathematically, these follow from the Envelope Theorem arguments from Section 6.2.
                                                  dV
   Similar logic can be used to derive            dw .   To compute the non-marginal effects of w and b, we
integrate over the marginal conditions and set them equal, giving an expression for the w at which
a person is indifferent between w Money for Sure and the $100 no-borrowing incentive. To obtain
simple approximations to these integrals in terms of observables, we continue to assume that µ~ is
                                                        ~
locally linear and to take a quadratic approximation to C . This yields the following result.

                                                   ~ /C
Proposition 2. Assume that terms of order (l + p)3 C  ~ are negligible and that µ
                                                                                ~ is locally linear
and separable in w and b. If a borrower is indifferent between w Money for Sure and a no-borrowing
incentive b, then

                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                ~
                                                                                                       
              w                            w                     ~                           w   ~
                                                                                                       
           1-     w· 1+ µ        ~(0) +                - 1- 1+                  (l + p)                    (8)
              2                             b 2                             2                 b        
                                                                                                       
                                                               perceived internality    behavior change
                                                                                                       
                   utility from w if time consistent
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                   ~
                                                                                                      
           b                                         ~                          100           ~
                                                                                                      
  =     1-      b· 1-µ    ~(0) +           + 1- 1+                    l+p+                             .
           2                       2                            2                 2                   
              
                                                                                      behavior  change
                                                        perceived internality
                                                                                                      
                    utility from b if time consistent


   The left-hand side is the expected utility of w dollars of Money for Sure, and the right-hand
side is the expected utility of a no-borrowing incentive of b dollars.

7.3.3    Identifying curvature

Our formulas can accommodate any curvature parameter . One approach is to use borrowers'
certainty equivalents of the Flip a Coin for $100 lottery: lower certainty equivalents imply more
curvature. In Appendix E.3, we show that this implies a sample average   0.0064.
   The benefit of this approach is that  is elicited from our population of payday borrowers.
Curvature estimates from other populations may not be relevant: the fact that payday borrowers
carry very costly debt suggests that their marginal utility may be sensitive to small gains and losses.
However, our estimated   0.0064 may be too large: under a quadratic approximation,   0.0064
implies that an extra $100 of debt increases utility from the marginal dollar by 64 percent, and
thus borrowers who have $400 more debt (approximately the average loan size) in period 2 have
256 percent higher marginal utility. One potential reason why   0.0064 may be an upper bound
is that since the $100 lottery is smaller than most loans, certainty equivalents may be affected
by small-stakes risk aversion that is behaviorally distinct from utility function curvature (Rabin
2000). For comparison, our lottery  estimate is 3 to 30 times larger than other estimates using
higher-stakes field decisions such as insurance choice and labor supply in less liquidity-constrained


                                                           23
populations.28 In our empirical estimation, we therefore consider multiple curvature values between
our estimated   0.0064 and  = 0.

7.4      Parameter estimates
Propositions 1 and 2 provide equations that include only  , ~, curvature parameters  and , and
observable data: loan sizes and fees, perceived and actual reborrowing probabilities, and valuations
of the no-borrowing incentive. Appendix E.4 shows how these propositions can be re-arranged
to provide estimating equations for sophistication /~ and perceived present focus ~. We then
multiply the two to derive actual present focus:            /~ ×~ =  . With heterogeneity, our esti-
mates are sample averages under certain orthogonality conditions. We estimate standard errors by
bootstrapping.
       Appendix E.5 considers other misprediction models, such as overoptimism about future repay-
ment cost shocks. In a model where borrowers instead mistakenly perceive that future repayment
costs will be share  as large as they actually are, /~ can be re-interpreted as . If there are
additional sources of misprediction besides naivete about present focus, /~ is a lower bound on
true sophistication, and  is thus a lower bound on true present focus.
   Table 3 presents our parameter estimates. The first five rows present estimates using the full
                                                                                ~ . The estimates of
sample at different values of , the curvature parameter for period 2 debt costs C
/ ~, ~, and  are monotonic in  over this range, so the estimates for   0.0064 and  = 0 provide
bounds. Our point estimates of borrowers' average /~ range from 0.95 to 0.98, reflecting the fact
that the sample slightly underestimates borrowing on average. For each , /     ~ is statistically
distinguishable from one with slightly more than 95 percent confidence. Our point estimates of
borrowers' average  ~ range from 0.76 to 0.87, and the upper end of the confidence intervals never
exceeds 0.90. Assuming less risk aversion increases ~ because it increases the modeled valuation
that a time-consistent borrower would have for the (risky) incentive, thereby reducing the premium
attributed to perceived internality reduction. The point estimates of  range from 0.74 to 0.83.
       The next two rows present estimates for the subsample of borrowers who had gotten three or
fewer loans from the Lender in the six months before taking the survey, for the bounding high and
low values of . The two rows after that present estimates for the complementary subsample with
four or more loans of recent experience. Consistent with Figure 3, more experienced borrowers are
fully sophisticated, with estimated / ~  1.00, while less experienced borrowers have / ~ between
0.79 and 0.89. The point estimates for   ~ differ modestly. Under the plausible assumption that
     ~ for all borrowers, this implies that experienced borrowers are all sophisticated, although
there is more scope for significant heterogeneity among the inexperienced borrowers.
  28
    Using insurance decisions, Cohen and Einav (2007) estimate   (0.00087, 0.0019), Handel (2013) estimates
  (0.00019, 0.000325), and Sydnor (2010) estimates   0.002. Chetty (2006) estimates a constant relative risk
aversion coefficient of 0.7 from labor supply elasticities, which translates to   0.0007 if payday borrowers have
$1000 monthly "uncommitted" (in the sense of Chetty and Szeidl, 2007) consumption. Using relatively small-stakes
gambles, van Gaudecker, van Soest, and Wengstrom (2011) estimate   0.03, and Holt and Laury (2002) estimate
  0.2.



                                                       24
    The estimates of  are statistically different for the two groups, especially at the extreme
assumption of  = 0. There are two possible explanations. First, it could be that the groups'
actual  parameters are the same, and the reduced misprediction in the experienced group is from
learning about the utility cost of repayment, not learning about present focus. Second, the two
groups might actually have different levels of present focus. Such differences could be driven by
experiential learning in the sense of Laibson's (2018) "model-free equilibrium": borrowers with
particularly low  learn that borrowing is delivering low payoffs, and they thus avoid borrowing.
In this model, borrowers do not necessarily learn an exact model of their preferences, and their
perceived ~ does not necessarily change--the low- types simply select out of borrowing.
    As discussed in Appendix E.4, we estimate sample average parameters under certain orthogo-
nality assumptions. The final rows of Table 3 present estimates where we separately estimate the
parameters by above- versus below-median experience (our most important moderator) and take
the subsample size-weighted average of the two estimates within each bootstrap replication. The
resulting parameter estimates are almost identical to the primary estimates in the earlier rows.
Thus, accounting for heterogeneity along this key dimension does not affect our estimates of the
sample average.
    The respondents to our expert survey believed that borrowers would have less demand for
behavior change than they actually did. Only 56 percent believed that the average borrower
would want motivation to avoid future borrowing. By contrast, Figure 7 documented that 90
percent of borrowers reported qualitatively that they wanted extra motivation to avoid payday loan
debt. Quantitatively, Figure 10 shows that most respondents to our expert survey overestimated
borrowers' average ~. The average respondent predicted ~  0.86 (standard error = 0.03), which
is larger than the point estimates in Table 3 except at  = 0, the unrealistic risk-neutral case.


8    WELFARE AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
In this section, we discuss the implications of our empirical results for consumer welfare and payday
lending regulation. We consider three common regulations: a payday lending ban (in practice,
effectuated by a low interest rate cap that causes all lenders to exit), a rollover restriction (in
practice, effectuated by a required "cooling off period" that disallows additional borrowing for 30
days after three consecutive loans, as in the 2017 CFPB rule), and a loan size cap. We think of
this section as only a first step, recognizing that other researchers could bring different lenses to
the data.
    Even this first step is potentially valuable, because there is substantial disagreement and un-
certainty among experts about the welfare effects of regulation. Figure 11 shows that the experts
we surveyed were divided about whether payday loan bans, cooling off periods, and loan size caps
would benefit consumers. We also initiated a similar question about payday loan bans for the
IGM Economic Experts Panel, a survey used to gauge opinion among leading economists. Of the
IGM experts, 33 percent agreed that a payday loan ban would make consumers better off, while 25


                                                 25
percent disagreed, and 37 percent were uncertain.29
      Sub-sections 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4 provide a graphical overview, theoretical results, numerical
calibrations, and a discussion of caveats, respectively.

8.1      Graphical overview
We extend the model of present focus and naivete from Section 7, slightly modifying the notation
and re-numbering the periods. In period t = 0, borrowers choose a loan amount l. In subsequent
periods t  1, borrowers choose whether to reborrow, repay, or default. The three periods from
the estimation strategy in Section 7 could be any three periods in this section. We define u(l) as
the utility benefit of borrowing amount l for a given borrower. C (l) and C~ (l) are now defined as
the actual and perceived expected costs of repaying (or defaulting on) a loan of size l starting in
period 1, discounted to period 1 using the period 0 self's discount function. These expected costs
are conditional on the period 0 information set about possible future liquidity and income shocks
and the borrower's future behavior. Of course, u(l), C (l), and the resulting choices and welfare will
vary across borrowers.
      We use the "long-run criterion," taking exponentially discounted utility to be normatively
relevant. For our primary analyses, we follow Heidhues and Koszegi (2010) in assuming that
the loan affects utility only after period t = 0, as might be the case for a car repair that the
borrower can afford only by taking out a loan. In this case, borrowers choose l in t = 0 to maximize
 u(l) - C  ~ (l) , and the welfare criterion is  [u(l) - C (l)].
      Figure 12 illustrates the loan size choice and resulting borrower welfare. Optimizing borrowers
choose l to equate marginal benefit u (l) and actual marginal repayment cost C (l), giving loan size
l . The resulting welfare gain is the triangle G.
      The two types of behavioral bias we have measured--time inconsistency and misprediction--
both reduce welfare. Present focus tempts people to delay repayment more than the period 0 self
would like. This increases repayment costs C (l) and reduces the resulting welfare gains G. If
borrowers are sophisticated about present focus, they still correctly perceive repayment costs, so
~ (l) = C (l). Thus, any loans that they take out must increase welfare, even if present focus
C
reduces the possible gains.
      If borrowers are naive about present focus or are otherwise overoptimistic about their likelihood
of repayment, they will underestimate repayment costs. Overoptimistic borrowers would choose l
to equate u (l) and perceived marginal repayment cost C~ (l), giving loan size l that exceeds the
optimum l . The resulting welfare loss from overborrowing is the triangle L.
    In alternative analyses, we instead assume that the benefits of the loan accrue fully in t = 0.
In this case, borrowers maximize u(l) -  C  ~ (l), and the long-run welfare criterion is u(l) - C (l).
This tempts people to overborrow relative to their long-run preferences, because they downweight
repayment costs relative to utility benefits by an additional  . On the figure, this could be captured
 29
      See here for the IGM survey results.




                                                    26
                                                             ~ (l) = C (l) as the repayment costs
by thinking of C (l) as welfare-relevant repayment costs and C
as perceived by the period 0 decision-maker.
       Of course, other behavioral biases could affect borrowing. For example, borrowing benefits u(l)
from payday loans might be misperceived if people are not fully aware of alternative forms of credit.
In principle, shrouded fees could cause additional misperception of repayment costs C (l), although
we argued in Section 3 that this is unlikely in the American payday lending market.
       In any case, a payday loan ban increases consumer welfare if the welfare losses from overbor-
rowing exceed the potential welfare gains from optimal borrowing, i.e. if L > G on average across
borrowers. The next two sub-sections provide theoretical and quantitative results exploring whether
                                                 ~ (l) and C (l) to differ substantially, borrowers
this might be the case. A key result is that for C
must be persistently naive. If borrowers are initially sophisticated or become sophisticated through
experience, as suggested by our data, then C   ~ (l) is probably close to C (l), L is probably small
relative to G, and a ban probably reduces consumer welfare in our model.

8.2      Theoretical results
8.2.1      Formal setup

In each period t  1, borrowers receive a transitory shock t and correlated shock t and then
have three options. First, they can repay l + p(l). In this case, the game ends. Second, they can
pay the fee p(l) and reborrow the principal l. In this case, the game continues. Third, they can
default, incurring immediate cost . In this case, the game ends. We assume an infinite horizon,
which allows us to consider stationary equilibria. For our theoretical results in this sub-section, we
assume that the long-run discount factor is  = 1, which is a close approximation given that pay
cycles are two weeks to one month long.
   The utility cost of repaying amount x in period t is now denoted k (x, t , t ). The perceived
and actual repayment cost functions C~ (l) and C (l) are determined by borrower behavior in a
perception-perfect equilibrium (O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999, 2001). Theorem 1 in Appendix F.1
shows that under certain regularity conditions, there exists a unique stationary equilibrium with
smooth C~ (l) and C (l).30
   To model learning, we assume that borrowers have perceived present focus   ~0   before period
t and ~1  [, ~0 ] thereafter. For concreteness, we set t = 1 in the theory (but not the simulations);
using a larger t would not affect our qualitative theoretical conclusions.

8.2.2      Theoretical results on how present focus and naivete affect repayment costs
           and welfare

The effect of  and ~ on repayment costs depends on the amount of volatility in repayment cost
shocks {,  }. Proposition 5 in Appendix F.3 shows that with high enough volatility, present focus
  30
    We are able to establish these results even though the Bellman operator on the continuation value functions is
not a contraction. With infinite horizon, there may also be non-stationary equilibria in environments with minimal
variation in  and  . We use stationarity as an equilibrium refinement.


                                                       27
and naivete have zero effect on repayment costs: regardless of  and   ~, borrowers repay in "good"
                                                                                      ~ = C , and
states and reborrow in "bad" states. In Figure 12, this corresponds to the case where C
G > L = 0.
    On the other hand, Proposition 6 in Appendix F.3 shows that in the limit case of vanishing
volatility in  and  , persistently naive (~1 >  ) borrowers perpetually reborrow because they
are over-optimistic about repaying in the next period, which entices them to reborrow in the
current period. This generates infinite repayment costs. In Figure 12, this corresponds to the case
where l > l = 0 and L = . However, this limit case corresponds to stark and counterfactual
predictions. The main one is that with even small amounts of persistent naivete, borrowers would
reborrow in perpetuity. However, this does not happen in the data.31
    In fact, we can use observed reborrowing rates to provide upper bounds on the effects of  and
~ on repayment costs. The result below extends results such as those of O'Donoghue and Rabin

(1999, 2001) to consider a setting with some uncertainty about the future costs of an action, thus
providing a characterization of the welfare costs of present focus for a more realistic setting between
the two extremes summarized above. To simplify exposition, we state the result below for the case
where the probability of reborrowing does not vary with  , but we offer generalizations in the proof
in Appendix F.6.

Proposition 3. Suppose that the unconditional distribution of  is time invariant. Let µ be the
empirically observed reborrowing rate. Relative to the repayment costs C T C (l) of time-consistent
borrowers, the repayment costs C S (l) of borrowers with present focus  and ~1 =  are bounded by
                                       


                                        S              C T C (l)  C T C (l)
                                       C  (l)                               .                                      (9)
                                                    1 - (1 -  )µ     
                               P N (l) of partially naive borrowers with present focus  and long-run
If µ < 1, the repayment costs C, ~1
                                 
        ~
beliefs 1 >  are bounded by

                                                       C T C (l) - µCS (l)
                                                                     ~
                                         PN                             1
                                        C, ~1 (l)
                                           
                                                                             .                                    (10)
                                                               1-µ

    The first expression shows that for sophisticates, present focus cannot increase repayment costs
by more than proportion 1/ . The second expression shows that for persistently naive types,
naivete can generate large repayment costs only in the limit of perpetual reborrowing (µ  1).
    Proposition 3 has implications well beyond our setting, as it illustrates that theoretical results
where minor naivete can have discontinuously large welfare costs (O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999,
2001; Heidhues and Koszegi 2009, 2010) hinge on the assumption of a deterministic environment.
Indeed, proposition 4 in Appendix F.2 shows that in our model, behavior is continuous in all
parameters in the presence of uncertainty. The proofs in Appendix F show that these results are
  31
     Another counterfactual prediction is that because borrowers predict that their future selves will be approximately
indifferent between reborrowing and repaying, they will believe that even small temporary incentives to repay next
period will ensure repayment that period. However, our belief elicitations reject this.



                                                          28
similar if borrowers mispredict future borrowing because they mispredict future repayment costs
k (x, ,  ) rather than their level of present focus.
                                                                                        ~ , the
       We can plug our parameter estimates from Section 7.4 into Proposition 3 to bound C/C
proportion by which borrowers underestimate repayment costs. When the weak inequalities in
                                                      ~ =   CT C                            S
Proposition 3 hold with equality, perceived costs are C   1-(1-~ )µ , actual costs are C = C =
                                                                                      0
  CT C                         ~                  1-(1- )µ
1-(1- )µ ,    and the ratio is C/C =                   ~0 )µ .
                                                If the reborrowing probability is µ = 0.75 and if
                                                  1-(1-
~0 = 0.78 and  = 0.70, as estimated in the sixth row of Table 3, then C
                                                                      ~  1.20C T C , C  1.29C T C ,
     ~
and C/C    0.93. That is, present focus increases repayment costs by 29 percent, and temporary
naivete leads borrowers to underestimate these costs by 7 percent in period t = 0. This suggests that
even sizeable initial underestimation of future borrowing is not enough to generate a "debt trap" if
borrowers learn over a borrowing spell. Alternatively, with persistent partial naivete matching the
sample average estimates of ~ and  , we have C/C
                                              ~      0.94, so borrowers underestimate repayment
costs by six percent.32
            ~ /C = 0.9, which is conservative relative to the data-driven benchmarks in the previous
    Even if C
paragraph, it is unlikely that L > G in Figure 12 for many borrowers. In general, when demand
for a product is only slightly distorted relative to the social optimum, the only way the product
can reduce welfare is if consumers don't perceive much surplus from the product. In the context of
Figure 12, when C~ /C = 0.9, the only way to make L larger than G for a given loan size l is to
make both u and C  ~ very flat, so that G becomes very short and L becomes very wide. However,
                                                                             ~ can be. First,
Appendix F.7 details two additional arguments that discipline how flat u and C
if consumers don't perceive much surplus from payday loans, demand would drop substantially if
                                                                              ~ and C
lenders charged even modestly higher fees. For example, assuming linear u and C     ~ /C = 0.9,
                     ~ (0)  1.25: the marginal benefit of the first dollar borrowed must not exceed
L > G requires u (0)/C
the perceived marginal cost of the first dollar borrowed by more than 25 percent. But empirical
estimates such as Fekrazad (2020) suggest that demand is not so elastic. Second, an estimate of
                               ~ can be. For example, even assuming that C
curvature disciplines how flat C                                         ~ /C~ is more than ten
times smaller than our lottery-based survey estimate of , we still have G > L for most loans in
our data.

8.3       Numerical simulations
8.3.1       Summary of setup

We now calibrate a parametric version of our borrowing and repayment model in order to evaluate
payday lending regulations. We provide a brief summary here; Appendix G provides complete
details.
  32                                                                                       ~ = CS            C T C (l)
       When the weak inequalities in Proposition 3 hold with equality, perceived costs are C    ~1 =
                                                                                                           1-(1-   ~1 )µ ,   actual
                           C T C (l)-µC S
                                        ~ (l)
               PN
costs are C = C, ~1 =
                                        1                          ~
                                                , and the ratio is C/C =       1-µ                             ~1 = 0.76 and
                                 1-µ                                       1-µ+(~1 - )µ .   If µ = 0.75 and if 
                                                                    ~
 = 0.74, as estimated in the top row of Table 3 for  = 0.0064, then C/C  0.94.




                                                                 29
   We assume a 15 percent borrowing fee, so p(l)/l = 0.15. We set  = 0.998, as this implies
a five percent annual discount rate if a period is a two-week pay cycle. We assume that the
utility benefit is u(l,  ) =  1 - e-0 l , where 0 is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion and
 is a liquidity shock capturing variation in income or spending needs. The repayment cost is
k (x, t , t ) = (t + t ) (e1 x - 1), and the default cost is  = 0 e1 (l+p) - 1 .
   The welfare gains from borrowing are increasing in the slopes of u and C , or equivalently
the curvature of u and C . We thus choose their curvature to be conservatively lower than the
  0.0064 estimated from valuations of the $100 coin flip. We choose (,  ~) = (0.74, 0.77) from
                                                                                       ~ (l) with
the row in Table 3 with  = 0.002, and we set 1 = 0.002, which correspondingly delivers C
  0.002. We consider two cases for the curvature of u(l): higher demand elasticity (0 = 0.002)
and lower demand elasticity (0 = 0.0002).
   We calibrate the distributions of  ,  , and  to match the mean and variance of loan sizes and
the probabilities of reborrowing and defaulting in the Lender's 2017 data. We assume a $500 loan
size cap at baseline, and we use data only from states with loan size caps between $450 and $550.
   We consider a number of different alternatives to the baseline parametric assumptions made for
the body of the paper, all of which are detailed in Appendix G.

8.3.2   Results

Table 4 presents simulated borrower behavior under the baseline policy, a $500 loan size cap. Panels
(a) and (b) present results for the higher and lower demand elasticity cases, respectively. Each row
presents behavior under different assumptions for  ,  ~, and whether the utility benefits of the loan
u(l) accrue in t = 0 or t = 1. Since the simulation parameters other than  and ~ were calibrated
                        ^  ^
                           ~ and then held constant across rows, the loan size and reborrowing
using our estimated ,
probabilities in row 2 approximately match the empirical moments from Table A6, and they vary
across the other rows.
   In both panels, present focus parameters affect borrower behavior. Comparing rows 1 and 2
shows that borrowers with our primary estimates of  and    ~ reborrow more and pay more back
to the lender than they would if they were time consistent. Comparing rows 2 and 3 shows that
people take out larger loans under the alternative assumption that the benefits of the loan accrue
fully in t = 0. Comparing row 5 to row 2 or row 6 shows that naivete increases reborrowing and
amount repaid.
    Row 7 considers borrowers who are partially naive in t  3 but become sophisticated beginning
in t = 4, matching our empirical evidence. We estimate that /        ~  0.84 at  = 0.002 for
borrowers with 0­3 loans in the past six months. For this row, we maintain  = 0.74 and set
~0 = /(/
           ~)  0.88. This has little effect relative to row 2.
   Because misperceptions increase both the height and the width of the overborrowing loss triangle
L on Figure 12, the losses from overborrowing are proportional to the square of misperceptions.
Thus, Jensen's Inequality implies that assuming homogeneous  and     ~ causes us to understate
welfare losses from overborrowing relative to a heterogeneous case with the same population average


                                                 30
parameters. To address this, rows 4 and 8 consider extreme parameterizations of heterogeneity,
where half the population is time consistent and the other half has  and ~ such that the population
averages correspond to the assumptions in rows 2 and 7, respectively. Row 8 also imposes the
alternative assumption that the benefits of the loan accrue fully in t = 0, making this row a
"worst-case scenario" for borrower welfare, and thus a "best-case scenario" for regulation.
   In rows 9 and 10, we set  and    ~ to match expert forecasts. We use the    ~ = 0.86 forecasted
by the average expert, and we calculate /    ~ by inserting experts' average forecast of borrower
misprediction into Equation (42) using  = 0.002. Multiplying these gives  = 0.63. These
assumptions generate much more reborrowing and much higher fees paid than the time-consistent
case or our primary estimates.
   Table 5 presents our model's welfare estimates under alternative payday lending regulations,
using the same assumptions in each row as in Table 4. Panels (a) and (b) again present results for
the higher and lower demand elasticity cases, respectively. In each cell of both panels, we present
welfare as a percent of the welfare that time-consistent borrowers derive from the availability of
payday loans with a $500 loan size cap. Thus, we report 100% in column 1 ($500 cap) of row
1 (time-consistent borrowers). Cells with positive values below 100% imply that borrowers still
derive positive surplus from payday loans, but not as much as time-consistent consumers under a
$500 cap. Negative numbers would imply that borrowers are harmed by access to payday loans.
   In each panel, column 1 presents welfare effects under the baseline policy, a $500 loan size
cap. Column 2 considers a $400 loan size cap. On top of the baseline $500 cap, column 3 adds a
rollover restriction, which we model as a requirement that the loan be repaid no later than t = 3.
Modeling a payday loan ban requires some assumption about what alternative products borrowers
can substitute to. Column 4 considers the effects of a payday loan ban under the assumption that
borrowers can only substitute to higher-cost loans with a $500 loan size cap and a 25 percent fee
instead of 15 percent. Alternatively, a ban on all short-term high-cost borrowing would eliminate the
surplus reported in column 1; this reduces welfare as long as the surplus in column 1 is positive. Of
course, time-consistent borrowers are harmed by any regulation imposed in columns 2­4, although
the rollover restriction does not affect them much because they repay quickly.
   Comparing the different rows in column 1 of each panel, we can see the effects of different
parameter assumptions on welfare under status quo regulation. Row 2 shows that the welfare losses
from our estimated levels of present focus are only 4.1 percent with less elastic demand (Panel (a))
and 11.2 percent with more elastic demand (Panel (b)). In both panels, welfare is higher in row 2
than most subsequent rows, with heterogeneity, temporary naivete, and immediate utility benefits
of the loan each eroding welfare somewhat relative to baseline. The larger welfare losses from
present focus in Panel (b) are consistent with the discussion in Section 8.2 and Appendix F.7 about
how more elastic demand decreases the gains from borrowing relative to the costs of overborrowing.
   In the column 1 baseline, the welfare losses relative to the time-consistent case are less than 30
percent in each of the first eight rows, and the net benefits are always positive. This implies that
a ban on all high-cost borrowing reduces welfare in our model.


                                                 31
       Welfare is lower when using experts' forecasts of  and ~ rows 9 and 10. However, Table 4 shows
that these scenarios generate counterfactually high reborrowing probabilities. When we instead re-
calibrate the distributions of  and  to match the empirical reborrowing rate at experts'  and   ~,
borrower welfare is much higher; see Tables A16­A19 in Appendix H.33
       We can see the effects of different regulations by comparing the different columns in each
row. Given that welfare is typically close to the time-consistent benchmark in column 1, it is not
surprising that a tighter loan size cap (column 2) and a payday loan ban resulting in a higher 25
percent fee (column 4) both reduce welfare. However, adding a rollover restriction (column 3) at
least slightly increases borrower welfare in all rows with time-inconsistent borrowers, as the rollover
restriction induces faster repayment in line with long-run preferences.

Comparison to current regulation.                Subject to the important caveats we discuss below, some
current payday lending regulation reduces welfare in our model. Payday loan bans and tighter loan
size caps both reduce welfare in our model. By contrast, 18 states have banned payday lending,
and some states have particularly stringent loan size caps, such as the $300 limit in California.
       In our model, the only additional regulation that appears to benefit borrowers is a rollover
restriction. This encourages faster repayment, consistent with our survey participants' qualitative
and quantitative desires to motivate themselves to avoid reborrowing. By contrast, effective rollover
restrictions are de facto much less common than bans and loan size caps because most de jure
restrictions lack sufficiently long "cooling off periods" to prohibit new loans within the same pay
cycle. However, the 2017 CFPB rule includes a rollover restriction combined with a mandatory
30-day cooling off period after the third consecutive loan.

8.4      Caveats
We view this analysis as only an illustrative first step toward understanding the welfare effects of
payday lending regulation. There are some important caveats.
       First, our parameter estimates are local to the 1,205 people in our experiment, although our
sample does not differ substantially on observables from the Lender's borrowers nationwide.
       Second, our parameter estimates may also be sensitive to experimental design decisions, as
discussed in Section 4.
       Third, our welfare analyses take the long-run preferences of present-focused borrowers as being
normatively relevant; this "long-run criterion" is common but somewhat controversial (Bernheim
and Rangel 2009; Bernheim 2016; Bernheim and Taubinsky 2018). Using a different welfare criterion
would likely strengthen our model's prediction that most regulation reduces welfare.
  33
    Present focus and naivete have smaller effects on welfare (in Table 5) than they do on interest payments (in
Table 4) for two reasons. First, while present focus and naivete can prolong borrowing spells and thus increase the
monetary costs of borrowing, longer borrowing spells allow borrowers to repay when it is less costly to utility to do
so. Second, borrowers in our model derive substantial surplus from payday loans: column 4 of Table 5 shows that
the gains from borrowing are large even if fees increase substantially to 25 percent.




                                                         32
    Fourth, we model borrowing and repayment choices for an exogenous set of potential borrowing
spells with exogenous initial liquidity demand, instead of modeling individuals who choose when to
borrow over their lifetimes. As a result, we do not capture the possibility that rollover restrictions
might result in more potential borrowing spells by breaking up single long spells into multiple short
spells, or that people might keep larger buffer stocks in response to payday borrowing restrictions.
However, additional analyses provide no empirical support for the latter concern: Appendix Table
A5 shows that in the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics, households do not hold more liquid assets
in states with payday loan bans or in years after their state imposes a ban.
    Fifth, our analyses assume that there are no market failures or behavioral biases other than
present focus and misprediction. For example, we do not consider market power or the potential
effects of regulation on lender profits, although Section 3 argued that payday lending has the
hallmarks of a relatively competitive market. We also do not consider the possibility that borrowers
might overestimate the benefits of payday lending because they are not fully aware of cheaper
sources of credit, such as credit cards. Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009) find that some
payday borrowers have access to cheaper credit, although Bhutta, Skiba, and Tobacman (2015)
find that the amount of available credit is quite limited, and they argue that the Agarwal, Skiba,
and Tobacman (2009) findings may have limited generalizability.
    Sixth, our results about the welfare benefits of payday lending consider markets with existing
regulations such as moderate loan size caps and truth-in-lending requirements, and thus do not
speak to the effects of deregulation.
    Seventh, our structural model assumes that if people reborrow, they must reborrow the same
amount as their initial loan. As discussed in Sections 3 and 7.1, this assumption seems to be a
reasonable approximation.
    Finally, our results on learning are limited: we have only cross-sectional (not experimental or
quasi-experimental) variation in experience, and our data include only six months of prior borrow-
ing.


9      CONCLUSION
This paper contributes new empirical facts and theoretically grounded policy analysis to the con-
tentious debate about payday lending regulation. We find that experience matters: inexperienced
borrowers underestimate their likelihood of borrowing, while more experienced borrowers predict
correctly. One natural explanation is that payday lending is a high-stakes setting with regular and
repeated opportunities to observe one's behavior. We also find that borrowers are willing to pay a
premium for an incentive to avoid future borrowing, which implies that they perceive themselves
to be time inconsistent. Our novel approach to estimating  and ~ in a dynamic stochastic setting
could be useful in other applications.
    In the context of our structural model of borrowing and repayment, our finding of present focus
with limited naivete implies that payday loan bans and tightened loan size caps are likely to harm


                                                 33
borrowers. Rollover restrictions could increase welfare by inducing faster repayment in line with
long-run preferences. The disagreement and uncertainty among experts and regulators highlights
the potential value of additional work carrying out behavioral welfare analyses grounded in theory
and data.
   An additional consideration is that even if borrowers' decisions are close to optimal given their
liquidity needs, as our results suggest, the initial liquidity needs that drive people to demand payday
loans may still be due to suboptimal consumption and savings decisions (e.g., Leary and Wang
2016). Policies and financial products that encourage more precautionary saving might therefore
increase welfare. Bridging analyses like ours with a broader view of consumer decision making is
an important next step for researchers and policymakers.




                                                  34
    References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. "Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence from
  Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." American Economic Review 101 (4):1180­1210.

Acland, Dan and Matthew R. Levy. 2012. "Naivete, Projection Bias, and Habit Formation in Gym Atten-
  dance." Working Paper: GSPP13-002.

------. 2015. "Naivet´
                     e, Projection Bias, and Habit Formation in Gym Attendance." Management Science
  61 (1):146­160.

Agarwal, Sumit, Paige Marta Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2009. "Payday Loans and Credit Cards: New
  Liquidity and Credit Scoring Puzzles?" American Economic Revew: Papers and Proceedings 99 (2):412­
  417.

Ali, S. Nageeb. 2011. "Learning Self-Control." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):857­893.

Allcott, Hunt, Matthew Gentzkow, and Lena Song. 2021. "Digital Addiction." Working Paper.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2019. "Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Application
  to the Optimal Soda Tax." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3):1557­1626.

Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. "Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experimental
  Evidence from the Lightbulb Market." American Economic Review 105 (8):2501­2538.

Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger. 2012a. "Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 102 (7):3333­3356.

------. 2012b. "Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences." American Economic Review 102 (7):3357­
  3376.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. "Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Com-
  mitment Savings Product in the Philippines." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2):673­697.

Augenblick, Ned. 2018. "Short-Term Discounting of Unpleasant Tasks." Working Paper.

Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. "Working Over Time: Dynamic Inconsistency
  In Real Effort Tasks." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3):1067­1115.

Augenblick, Ned and Matthew Rabin. 2019. "An Experiment on Time Preference and Misprediction in
  Unpleasant Tasks." Review of Economic Studies 86 (3):941­975.

Bai, Liag, Benjamin Handel, Edward Miguel, and Gautam Rao. 2018. "Self-Control and Demand for Pre-
  ventive Health: Evidence from Hypertension in India." NBER Working Paper No. 23727.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 2016. "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: A Unified Approach to Behavioral Welfare
  Economics." Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 7 (1):12­68.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel. 2009. "Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic Founda-
  tions for Behavioral Welfare Economics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1):51­104.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. Behavorial Public Economics, vol. 1, chap. 5. Elsevier,
  1 ed.

Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse. 2011. "Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday Bor-
  rowing." Journal of Finance 66 (6):1865­1893.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Jung Sakong.
  2015. "Self-Control and Commitment: Can Decreasing the Liquidity of a Savings Account Increase
  Deposits?" Working Paper: NBER WP No. 21474.

                                                  35
Bhutta, Neil, Jacob Goldin, and Tatiana Homonoff. 2016. "Consumer Borrowing after Payday Loan Bans."
  Journal of Law and Economics 59 (1):225­259.

Bhutta, Neil, Paige Marta Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2015. "Payday Loan Choices and Consequences."
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47:223­260.

Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2015. "Do Pharmacists
  Buy Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4):1669­
  1729.

Browning, Martin and Jeremy Tobacman. 2015. "Discounting and Optimism Equivalences." Working Paper.

Burke, Kathleen, Jesse Leary, and Jialan Wang. 2016. "Information Disclosure and Payday Lending in
  Texas." Working Paper.

Carrell, Scott and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. "In Harm's Way? Payday Loan Access and Military Personnel
  Performance." Review of Financial Studies 27 (9):2805­2840.

Carrera, Mariana, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2021. "Who Chooses
  Commitment? Evidence and Welfare Implications." Working Paper.

Carter, Susan Payne, Kuan Liu, Paige Marta Skiba, and Justin Sydnor. 2019. "Time to Repay or Time to
  Delay? The Effect of Having More Time Before a Payday Loan is Due." Working Paper.

Carter, Susan Payne and William Skimmyhorn. 2017. "Much Ado About Nothing? New Evidence on the
  Effects of Payday Lending on Military Members." Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (4):606­621.

Carvalho, Leandro, Arna Olafsson, and Dan Silverman. 2019. "Misfortune and Mistake: The Financial
  Conditions and Decision-Making of High-Cost Loan Borrowers." Working Paper.

CFA. 2019. "Legal Status of Payday Loans by State."         URL https://paydayloaninfo.org/state-
  information.

CFPB. 2016. "Payday Loans, Auto Title Loans, and High-Cost Installment Loans: Highlights from CFPB
  Research." Tech. rep., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

------. 2017.     "CFPB Finalizes Rule To Stop Payday Debt Traps."          URL https://
  www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-finalizes-rule-stop-payday-debt-traps/.

Chaloupka, Frank J., Matthew R. Levy, and Justin S. White. 2019. "Estimating Biases in Smoking Cessation:
  Evidence from a Field Experiment." Working Paper: NBER WP No. 26522.

Chetty, Raj. 2006. "A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion." American Economic Review 96 (5):1821­
  1834.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence." American
  Economic Review 99 (4):1145­1177.

Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl. 2007. "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 122 (2):831­877.

Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav. 2007. "Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice." American
  Economic Review 97 (3):745­788.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. "Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and Evi-
  dence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2):353­402.

------. 2006. "Paying Not to Go to the Gym." American Economic Review 96 (3):694­719.



                                                   36
DellaVigna, Stefano and Devin Pope. 2018. "Predicting Experimental Results: Who Knows What?" Journal
  of Political Economy 126 (6).

Dobbie, Will and Paige Marta Skiba. 2013. "Information Asymmetries in Consumer Credit Markets: Evi-
  dence from Payday Lending." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4):256­282.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. "Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory
  and Experimental Evidence from Kenya." American Economic Review 101 (6):2350­2390.

Ericson, Keith. 2011. "Forgetting We Forget: Overconfidence and Memory." Journal of the European
  Economic Association 9 (1):43­60.

Ericson, Keith Marzilli and David Laibson. 2019. Intertemporal Choice, vol. 2, chap. 1. Elsevier, 1 ed.

Ernst&Young. 2009. "The Cost of Providing Payday Loans in a US Multiline Operator Environment." Tech.
  rep., Ernst & Young LLP.

Evans, Tim. 2019. "Will Indiana payday loan rates remain above state's 'loan shark' threshold?"

Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman. 2004. "Time Inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation: Evidence
  from the NLSY." Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1465.

Fekrazad, Amir. 2020. "Impacts of interest rate caps on the payday loan market: Evidence from Rhode
  Island." Journal of Banking and Finance 105 (105750):1­31.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2017. "Behavioral Macroeconomics Via Sparse Dynamic Programming." Working Paper:
  NBER WP No. 21848.

Gagnon-Bartsch, Tristan, Matthew Rabin, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2019. "Channeled Attention and
  Stable Errors." Working Paper: HBS WP 18-108.

Gathergood, John, Benedict Guttman-Kenney, and Stefan Hunt. 2019. "How Do Payday Loans Affect
  Borrowers? Evidence from the U.K. Market." Review of Financial Studies 32 (2):496­523.

Gine, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. "Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A Com-
  mitment Contract for Smoking Cessation." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:213­235.

Goda, Gopi Shah, Matthew R. Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sojourner, and Joshua Tasoff.
  2015. "The Role of Time Preferences and Exponential-Growth Bias in Retirement Savings." Working
  Paper: NBER WP No. 21482.

Grubb, Michael D. and Matthew Osborne. 2015. "Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning, and
  Bill Shock." American Economic Review 105 (1):234­271.

Handel, Benjamin. 2013. "Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging
  Hurts." American Economic Review 103 (7):2643­2682.

Handel, Benjamin and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2015. "Health Insurance for "Humans": Information Frictions,
  Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare." American Economic Review 105 (8):2449­2500.

Handel, Benjamin, Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2019. "Information Frictions and Ad-
  verse Selection: Policy Interventions in Health Insurance Markets." Review of Economics and Statistics
  101 (2):326­340.

Harris, Cristopher and David Laibson. 2001. "Dynamic Choices of Hyberbolic Conusmers." Econometrica
  69 (4):935­957.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond K oszegi. 2009. "Futile Attempts at Self-Control." Journal of the European
  Economic Association 7 (2):423­434. URL https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-lookup/doi/
  10.1162/JEEA.2009.7.2-3.423.

                                                    37
Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi. 2010. "Exploiting Na¨
                                                       ivete about Self-Control in the Credit Market."
  American Economic Review 100:2279­2303.

Heidhues, Paul and Philipp Strack. forthcoming. "Identifying Procrastination from the Timing of Choices."
  American Economic Review .

Holt, Charles A. and Susan K. Laury. 2002. "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects." American Economic
  Review 92 (5):1644­1655.

John, Anett. 2020. "When Commitment Fails - Evidence from a Field Experiment." Management Science
  66 (2).

Karlan, Dean, Maggie McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2016. "Getting to the Top
  of the Mind: How Reminders Increase Savings." Management Science 62 (12).

Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2015. "Self-Control at Work." Journal of
  Political Economy 123 (6):1227­1277.

Knight, Thaya Brook. 2017. "This Government Agency Is Seriously Overstepping Its Bounds." URL
  https://www.cato.org/publications/commentary/government-agency-seriously-overstepping-
  its-bounds.

Kuchler, Theresa and Michaela Pagel. 2018. "Sticking to Your Plan: The Role of Present Bias for Credit
  Card Paydown." Working Paper: NBER WP No. 24881.

Laibson, David. 1997.   "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting."       Quarterly Journal of Economics
  112 (2):443­478.

------. 2015. "Why Don't Present-Baised Agents Make Commitments?"            American Economic Review
  105 (5):267­272.

------. 2018. "Private Paternalism, the Commitment Puzzle, and Model-Free Equilibrum." AEA Papers
  and Proceedings 108:1­21.

Laibson, David, Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2015. "Estimating Discount Func-
  tions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle." Working Paper.

Leary, Jesse and Jialan Wang. 2016. "Liquidity Constraints and Budgeting Mistakes: Evidence from Social
  Security Recipients." Working Paper.

Mahajan, Aprajit, Christian Michel, and Alessandro Tarozzi. 2020. "Identification of Time-Inconsistent
 Models: The Case of Insecticide Treated Nets." Working Paper: NBER WP No. 27198.

Mann, Robert. 2013. "Assessing the Optimism of Payday Loan Borrowers." Supreme Court Economic
 Review 21 (1):105­132.

Martinez, Seung-Keun, Stephan Meier, and Charles Sprenger. 2020. "Taxes and Procrastination: Evidence
 from Boston Tax-Filers." Working Paper.

Melzer, Brian T. 2011. "The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday Lending Market."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1):517­555.

------. 2018. "Spillovers from Costly Credit." Review of Financial Studies 31 (9):3568­3594.

Milgrom, Paul and Ilya Segal. 2002.    "Envelope Theorems for Arbitrary Choice sets."      Econometrica
  70 (2):583­601.

Morgan, Donald P., Michael R. Strain, and Ihab Seblani. 2012. "How Payday Credit Access Affects Over-
 drafts and Other Outcomes." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (2-3):519­531.


                                                   38
Morse, Adair. 2011. "Payday lenders: Heroes or villains?" Journal of Financial Economics 102 (1):28­44.

Mueller, Andreas I., Johannes Spinnewijn, and Giorgio Topa. 2019. "Job Seekers' Perceptions and Employ-
 ment Prospects: Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias." Working Paper.

NCSL. 2019. "Payday Lending State Statutes." URL https://www.ncsl.org/research/financial-
 services-and-commerce/payday-lending-state-statutes.aspx.

O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 1999. "Doing It Now or Later." American Economic Review
  89 (1):103­124.

------. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1):121­160.

Paserman, M. Daniele. 2008. "Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and Policy
  Evaluation." Economic Journal 118:1418­1452.

Rabin, Matthew. 2000. "Risk Aversion and Expected-utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem." Econometrica
  68 (5):1281­1292.

Read, Danieal and Barbara van Leeuwen. 1998. "Predicting Hunger: The Effects of Appetite and Delay on
  Choice." Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 76 (2):189­205.

Rees-Jones, Alex and Dmitry Taubinsky. Forthcoming. "Measuring Schmeduling." Review of Economic
  Studies .

Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. "Incentives, Commitments, and Habit Formation
  in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500 Company." American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (3):51­84.

Sadoff, Sally, Anya Samek, and Charles Sprenger. Forthcoming. "Dynamic Inconsistency in Food Choice:
  Experimental Evidence from Two Food Deserts." Review of Economic Studies .

Schilbach, Frank. 2019. "Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India." American Economic
  Review 109 (4):1290­1322.

Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. "Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition cycle."
  Journal of Public Economics 89:303­325.

Shui, Haiyan and Lawrence M. Ausubel. 2005. "Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market." Working
  Paper.

Skiba, Paige Marta and Jeremy Tobacman. 2018. "Payday Loans, Uncertainty, and Discounting: Explaining
  Patterns of Borrowing, Repayment, and Default." Working Paper.

------. 2019. "Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?" Journal of Law and Economics 62 (3):485­519.

Strack, Philipp and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2021. "Dynamic Preference "Reversals" and Time Inconsistency."
  working paper .

Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones. 2018. "Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and Evidence
  from a Tax Salience Experiment." Review of Economic Studies 85 (4):2462­2496.

Toussaert, Severine. 2018. "Eliciting Temptation and Self-Control Through Menu Choices: A Lab Experi-
  ment." Econometrica 86 (3):859­889.

van Gaudecker, Hans-Martin, Arthur van Soest, and Erik Wengstrom. 2011. "Heterogeneity in Risky Choice
  Behavior in a Broad Population." American Economic Review 101 (2):664­694.

Wilson, Eric and Eva Wolkowitz. 2017. "2017 Financially Underserved Market Size Study." Tech. rep.,
 Center for Financial Services Innovation.

                                                  39
Yaouanq, Yves Le and Peter Schwardmann. 2019. "Learning about one's self." Working Paper.

Zinman, Jonathan. 2010. "Restricting consumer credit access: Household survey evidence on effects around
  the Oregon rate cap." Journal of Banking and Finance 34 (3):546­556.




                                                  40
                     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and External Validity


                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)
                                                  Valid    Customers on    2017 loans
                                                 sample     survey days    nationwide
                     Loans in past six months     5.35                        6.03
                                                 (2.94)                      (4.22)
                     Annual income ($000s)        34.0          31.8          28.9
                                                 (21.1)       (21.3)         (38.0)
                     Internal credit score         862          870            861
                                                 (122)         (193)         (125)
                     Pay cycle length (days)      16.0          18.1          17.3
                                                  (7.7)        (9.1)          (8.2)
                     Loan length (days)           17.3          18.7          17.5
                                                  (5.9)        (6.8)          (8.4)
                     Loan amount ($)               373          359            366
                                                 (161)        (165)          (166)
                     N                           1,205        13,191         33,194


Notes: This table presents the means (with standard deviations in parentheses) of key variables in data from
the Lender. "Customers on survey days" means all customers who got a loan from a Lender's store on a
day when the survey was available in that store. "2017 loans nationwide" is a random sample of people who
took out a payday loan from the Lender in 2017. Loans in past six months is not available for all customers
on survey days.




                                                    41
          Table 2: Misprediction and Behavior Change Premium by Experience

                                         Misprediction (percent)          Behavior change premium ($)
                                      (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
      Loans in past six months        -2.74    -2.23                      1.09     1.13
                                     (0.68)   (0.71)                     (0.38)   (0.39)
      Loans in current spell                            -2.69    -2.23                      0.98     1.11
                                                       (0.68)   (0.71)                     (0.38)   (0.38)
      Loans before current spell                        -3.34    -2.18                      2.92     3.01
                                                       (1.17)   (1.25)                     (0.71)   (0.75)
      High predicted
      demand response                                                    13.45    12.00    13.23    12.04
                                                                         (2.24)   (2.24)   (2.23)   (2.23)
      Observations                    633      633      633      633     1,205    1,205    1,205    1,205
      Controls                        No       Yes      No       Yes      No       Yes      No       Yes
      p-value (current = before)                       0.526    0.959                      0.002    0.003

Notes: Columns 1­4 present regressions of misprediction Ri - µ  ~i (0) on the reported covariates, where Ri is
an indicator for whether person i got another payday loan in the next eight weeks. Columns 5­8 present
regressions of the behavior change premium w(100)i - w (100)i on the reported covariates, where w(100)i is
person i's valuation of the $100 no-borrowing incentive and w (100)i := 100 - 100 µ~ (0)i +~
                                                                                           µ(100)i
                                                                                           2       is the modeled
valuation of the $100 no-borrowing incentive if person i were risk-neutral and time consistent. Columns 1­4
include only the Control group, while columns 5­8 include all participants with valid survey data. "High
predicted demand response" is an indicator for people who reported that they would have a lower borrowing
probability with the incentive compared to without. "Controls" are annual income, internal credit score,
pay cycle length, loan length, loan amount, took survey in store, and valuation of coin flip. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses.




                                                       42
                      Table 3: Partially Naive Present Focus Parameters


                                                             (1)               (2)            (3)
                                                        Estimated /~       Estimated ~    Estimated 
        Full sample                           0.0064            0.98           0.76           0.74
                                                            (0.95, 0.99)   (0.73, 0.78)   (0.71, 0.77)
        Full sample                            0.002            0.96           0.77           0.74
                                                            (0.93, 0.99)   (0.74, 0.79)   (0.70, 0.77)
        Full sample                           0.0005            0.95           0.83           0.79
                                                            (0.91, 1.00)   (0.80, 0.85)   (0.75, 0.83)
        Full sample                           0.0002            0.95           0.85           0.81
                                                            (0.90, 0.99)   (0.83, 0.88)   (0.77, 0.85)
        Full sample                              0              0.95           0.87           0.83
                                                            (0.90, 0.99)   (0.85, 0.90)   (0.78, 0.87)
        0 - 3 loans in past six months        0.0064            0.89           0.78           0.70
                                                            (0.71, 0.94)   (0.74, 0.82)   (0.52, 0.75)
        0 - 3 loans in past six months           0              0.79           0.92           0.73
                                                            (0.59, 0.91)   (0.87, 0.97)   (0.54, 0.85)
        4+ loans in past six months           0.0064            1.00           0.75           0.75
                                                            (0.97, 1.01)   (0.72, 0.78)   (0.71, 0.77)
        4+ loans in past six months              0              1.00           0.86           0.86
                                                            (0.95, 1.05)   (0.83, 0.89)   (0.80, 0.90)
        Group by loans in past six months     0.0064            0.96           0.76           0.73
                                                            (0.90, 0.98)   (0.73, 0.78)   (0.68, 0.75)
        Group by loans in past six months        0              0.94           0.87           0.82
                                                            (0.86, 0.98)   (0.85, 0.90)   (0.75, 0.86)


Notes: This table presents estimates of sophistication /       ~, perceived present focus ~, and actual present
focus  for different values of the coefficient of absolute risk aversion , using equations derived in Appendix
E.4 from Propositions 1 and 2. The bottom two rows define groups of observations for estimation using both
loan size and above/below median loans in past six months. 95 percent confidence intervals calculated using
the bias-corrected percentile bootstrap are in parentheses.




                                                       43
                              Table 4: Simulated Borrower Behavior
                                       (a) Higher Demand Elasticity

                                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                                Average     Probability of     Average
  Row    Scenario                                               loan size    reborrowing     amount repaid
  1       = 1, ~=1                                                 403           0.42              488
  2       = 0.74, ~ = 0.77 (primary estimates)                     394           0.78             610
  3               ~
          = 0.74,  = 0.77, consume in t = 0                        426           0.79              666
  4      Heterogeneous                                             386           0.66              665
  5       = 0.74, ~=1                                              403           0.85             724
  6       = 0.74, ~ = 0.74                                         391           0.76             592
  7       = 0.74,  ~0 = 0.88, ~1 = 0.74 (learning)                 400           0.83             686
  8      Primary, heterogeneous, learning, consume in t = 0        423           0.68             944
  9       = 0.63, ~ = 0.86 (expert forecast)                       400           0.91              908
  10      = 0.63, ~ = 0.86, consume in t = 0                       445           0.91             1017

                                       (b) Lower Demand Elasticity

                                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                                Average     Probability of     Average
  Row    Scenario                                               loan size    reborrowing     amount repaid
  1       = 1, ~=1                                                 410           0.43              496
  2       = 0.74, ~ = 0.77 (primary estimates)                     393           0.78             610
  3               ~
          = 0.74,  = 0.77, consume in t = 0                        445           0.79              700
  4      Heterogeneous                                             379           0.67              644
  5       = 0.74, ~=1                                              410           0.85             737
  6               ~
          = 0.74,  = 0.74                                          389           0.76             589
  7       = 0.74,  ~0 = 0.88, ~1 = 0.74 (learning)                 405           0.83             694
  8      Primary, heterogeneous, learning, consume in t = 0        438           0.69             990
  9       = 0.63, ~ = 0.86 (expert forecast)                       403           0.91              917
  10      = 0.63, ~ = 0.86, consume in t = 0                       470           0.91             1079


Notes: Panels (a) and (b) are calibrated assuming borrowers have higher and lower demand elasticities,
respectively. Panel (a) assumes that 0 = 0.002. Panel (b) assumes that 0 = 0.0002. Rows 3 and 8 present
alternative analyses where the benefits of the loan accrue fully in t = 0, so borrowers overborrow relative to
the welfare criterion. Rows 4 and 8 model heterogeneity, where half the population is time consistent and
the other half has  and    ~ such that the population averages correspond to the assumptions in rows 2 and
7, respectively. Row 7 models learning, assuming  = 0.74,      ~0 = 0.88 in periods 0  t  3, and    ~1 =  in
periods t  4. Rows 9 and 10 set  and      ~ to match expert forecasts.




                                                     44
               Table 5: Borrower Welfare Under Payday Lending Regulations
                                        (a) Higher Demand Elasticity

                                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                  Baseline       $400      Rollover      25%
Row      Scenario                                                ($500 cap)       cap     restriction     fee
1         = 1,  ~=1                                                100.0%       92.0%       99.8%        94.9%
2         = 0.74, ~ = 0.77 (primary estimates)                      95.9%       88.7%       97.4%        90.3%
3         = 0.74, ~ = 0.77, consume in t = 0                       95.2%        88.3%       96.8%        89.4%
4        Heterogeneous                                              90.8%       84.4%       97.3%        84.4%
5         = 0.74, ~=1                                              91.1%        84.8%       97.1%        84.5%
6         = 0.74, ~ = 0.74                                          96.7%       89.3%       97.4%        91.2%
7         = 0.74,  ~0 = 0.88, ~1 = 0.74 (learning)                 95.1%        88.0%       97.2%        88.8%
8        Primary, heterogeneous, learning, consume in t = 0         90.2%       84.5%       96.0%        82.8%
9         = 0.63, ~ = 0.86 (expert forecast)                        80.8%       76.4%       95.8%        71.8%
10        = 0.63, ~ = 0.86, consume in t = 0                       77.0%        74.3%       94.3%        66.2%

                                        (b) Lower Demand Elasticity

                                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                  Baseline       $400      Rollover      25%
Row      Scenario                                                ($500 cap)       cap     restriction     fee
1         = 1,  ~=1                                                100.0%       89.3%       99.5%        86.1%
2         = 0.74, ~ = 0.77 (primary estimates)                      88.8%       80.4%       92.8%        74.6%
3         = 0.74, ~ = 0.77, consume in t = 0                       86.0%        78.9%       90.5%        70.4%
4        Heterogeneous                                              76.3%       69.7%       92.5%        61.7%
5         = 0.74, ~=1                                              75.2%        69.6%       91.9%        59.0%
6         = 0.74, ~ = 0.74                                          90.8%       82.0%       92.9%        76.7%
7         = 0.74,  ~0 = 0.88, ~1 = 0.74 (learning)                 86.4%        78.3%       92.3%        70.3%
8        Primary, heterogeneous, learning, consume in t = 0         70.9%       68.1%       88.0%        50.1%
9         = 0.63, ~ = 0.86 (expert forecast)                        47.0%       46.6%       88.3%        26.4%
10        = 0.63, ~ = 0.86, consume in t = 0                       32.2%        38.8%       82.8%         1.7%


Notes: In each cell, we present welfare as a percent of the surplus that time-consistent borrowers derive
from the availability of payday loans under a $500 loan size cap. Panels (a) and (b) are calibrated assuming
borrowers have higher and lower demand elasticities, respectively. Panel (a) assumes that 0 = 0.002. Panel
(b) assumes that 0 = 0.0002. "Rollover restriction" in column 3 refers to the requirement that borrowers
repay by period t = 3 at the latest. "25% fee" in column 4 refers to an increase in the borrowing fee from 15%
to 25%, which might be caused by substitution to higher-cost credit after a payday loan ban. Rows 3 and
8 present alternative analyses where the benefits of the loan accrue fully in t = 0, so borrowers overborrow
relative to the welfare criterion. Rows 4 and 8 model heterogeneity, where half the population is time-
consistent and the other half has  and   ~ such that the population averages correspond to the assumptions
in rows 2 and 7, respectively. Row 7 models learning, assuming  = 0.74,        ~0 = 0.88 in periods 0  t  3,
     ~                                                  ~
and 1 =  in periods t  4. Rows 9 and 10 set  and  to match expert forecasts.




                                                     45
       Figure 1: Identification of Misprediction and Perceived Time Inconsistency



                                    Predicted      Actual
                                    demand         demand


                               Desired
                               demand
                           D                          A


       
                                                      F
                                                                         B      G
                           C
                                                                                H
                                                                     E
        Next period debt




                           Borrowing probability    ()              (0)      (0)


Notes: This figure illustrates our model of misprediction and time inconsistency assuming that the perceived
continuation value is linear in debt owed. The y-axis plots the next period debt that results from borrowing.
The x-axis plots the probability of borrowing given the distribution of unpredictable shocks. Predicted and
desired demand are from the perspective of the previous period self. b is the amount of the no-borrowing
incentive, and µ(b) and µ  ~(b) are the actual and predicted reborrowing probabilities.
In the present focus model, the period 1 self determines actual demand; that self discounts period 2 debt
cost C~ by  relative to period 1 utility. The period 0 self predicts that the period 1 self will instead discount
 ~
C by   ~ . The period 0 self would prefer that the period 1 self discount C~ by only  instead of the predicted
 ~
 relative to period 1 utility. Thus, the difference between actual and predicted demand is increasing in
 ~ -  , while the difference between predicted and desired demand is increasing in 1 -   ~. With linear demand
curves and risk neutrality, the vertical difference between actual and predicted demand is a linear function
of  ~ -  , and the vertical difference between predicted and desired demand is a linear function of 1 -      ~.




                                                          46
                                         Figure 2: Predicted and Actual Borrowing




                            1
                            .9
                 Borrowing probability
                  .6      .7.5
                            .4    .8




                                              Predicted                       Actual
                                         (without incentive)              (Control group)


Notes: The left spike presents the average predicted probability of getting another payday loan in the next
eight weeks without the no-borrowing incentive. The right spike presents the actual probability of getting
another payday loan in the next eight weeks for the Control group, which did not receive the no-borrowing
incentive. Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                               47
                                                           Figure 3: Misprediction by Experience




                                     .3
                Actual - predicted borrowing probability
                         0          .1
                                     -.1        .2




                                                           0-3          4-5               6-7      8+
                                                                       Loans in past six months

Notes: This figure presents the actual borrowing probability minus the average predicted borrowing prob-
ability within four subgroups defined by the number of loans taken out from the Lender in the six months
before taking the survey. This figure includes only the Control group. Error bars represent 95 percent
confidence intervals.




                                                                              48
     Figure 4: Experts' Beliefs about Borrowers' Predicted Borrowing Probability




                            20
                                                                                                 True average
                                                                                                 told to experts

                                    15
                 Percent of experts
                       10   5
                            0




                                         0             20              40             60             80            100
                                         What do you think is the average borrower's predicted reborrowing probability?


Notes: This is a histogram of experts' beliefs about the average borrower's predicted probability of borrowing
again over the next eight weeks. Data are from our survey of expert opinion, which was administered before
our paper was released. As a benchmark, we told experts that the true reborrowing probability was 70
percent, which was slightly lower than the Control group's actual average of 74 percent.




                                                                           49
            Figure 5: Predicted and Actual Effects of No-Borrowing Incentive




                           .2        0
                 Effect of incentive
                         -.2
                           -.4
                           -.6




                                           Low predicted                  High predicted
                                         demand response                 demand response

                                                  Actual effect   Predicted effect


Notes: This figure presents the predicted and actual effects of the no-borrowing incentive on the probability
of getting another loan in the next eight weeks after the survey. "High predicted demand response" includes
people who reported that they would have a lower borrowing probability with the incentive compared to
without. "Low predicted demand response" includes people who reported that they would have the same or
higher borrowing probability with the incentive. About five percent of people reported that they would have
a higher borrowing probability with the incentive; this is to be expected due to noise in survey responses.
Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                             50
                    Figure 6: Behavior Change Premium and Risk Aversion




                    55
                    50
                 Dollars
                   45
                    40
                    35




                             Valuation of      Valuation of incentive     Valuation of
                            $100 incentive         if risk-neutral       $100 coin flip
                                                and time-consistent


Notes: The first and third spikes are the average valuation of the $100 no-borrowing incentive and the $100
coin flip, respectively. The second spike is the average of w (100), the modeled valuation for a risk-neutral
and time-consistent borrower. Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                     51
              Figure 7: Responses to Qualitative Time Consistency Questions
                                                         (a) Desire for Motivation




                             60    40
                    Percent of sample
                   20        0




                                              Not at all                 Somewhat                  Very much
                                        Would you like to give yourself extra motivation to avoid payday loan debt?


                                             (b) Personal Impact of Rollover Restrictions
                           40
                           30
                  Percent of sample
                         2010
                           0




                                         Very bad   Somewhat bad          Neutral    Somewhat good Very good
                                           Do you think [a rollover restriction] would be good or bad for you?



Notes: These are histograms of borrowers' responses to qualitative questions relatived to time consistency
asked at the end of the survey. Panel (a) presents responses to the question, "To what extent would you
like to give yourself extra motivation to avoid payday loan debt in the future?" Panel (b) presents responss
to the question, "Some states have laws that prohibit people from taking out payday loans more than three
paydays in a row. Do you think such a law would be good or bad for you?"




                                                                       52
      Figure 8: Heterogeneity in Behavior Change Premium by Survey Responses
                                                            (a) Heterogeneity by Stated Desire for Motivation




                                                     20
                       Behavior change premium ($)
                                                     15
                                                     10
                                                     5
                                                     0




                                                          Not at all                       Somewhat                        Very much



               (b) Heterogeneity by Beliefs About Personal Impact of Rollover Restric-
               tions
                                               25
                 Behavior change premium ($)
                                               20
                                               15
                                               10
                                               5
                                               0




                                                          Very bad          Somewhat bad   Neutral    Somewhat good        Very good



                                                            (c) Heterogeneity by Predicted Demand Response
                                               25
                 Behavior change premium ($)
                                               20
                                               15
                                               10
                                               5
                                               0




                                                                         Low predicted                    High predicted
                                                                       demand response                   demand response




Notes: The behavior change premium equals w(100) - w (100), the valuation of the $100 no-borrowing
incentive minus the modeled valuation for a risk-neutral and time-consistent borrower. Panel (a) presents
heterogeneity by response to the question, "To what extent would you like to give yourself extra motivation to
avoid payday loan debt in the future?" Panel (b) presents heterogeneity by response to the question, "Some
states have laws that prohibit people from taking out payday loans more than three paydays in a row. Do you
think such a law would be good or bad for you?" In Panel (c), "High predicted demand response" includes
people who reported that they would have a lower borrowing probability with the incentive compared to
without, and "Low predicted demand response" includes people who reported that they would have the same
                                                      53 bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.
or higher borrowing probability with the incentive. Error
                                       Figure 9: Timing of Model

              = 0                                = 1                              = 2

                                                                             + )
                                                                           -(                              ...
                                           Pay , reborrow 

                                                      -(, 1 )
      Borrow  , take survey
                                   1
                                                    -( + , 1 )

                                               Repay  + 
                                                                            
                                                                           -(-)                            ...


Notes: This figure illustrates the timing of the model used for estimation in Section 7. We focus on three
periods of a potentially longer or infinite-horizon model. In period 0, the borrower gets a loan of amount l
and then takes our survey. The next eight weeks after the survey are period 1. At the beginning of period 1,
the borrower receives a smoothly distributed transitory repayment cost shock . In period 1, the borrower
chooses to either repay or reborrow . If she repays, she pays the principal and fee l + p(l) in period 1 and
receives no-borrowing incentive b in period 2. If she reborrows, she pays only the fee p(l) in period 1, owes
l + p(l) in period 2, and does not receive the no-borrowing incentive. The cost of repaying amount x in
period 1 is k (x, ). C~ (x) is the cost of period 2 debt: specifically, the reduction in period 2 continuation
value (as perceived before period 2) from starting period 2 with debt x.




                                                     54
          Figure 10: Experts' Beliefs about Borrowers' Perceived Present Focus




                          25
                                                    Empirical         Empirical
                                                    estimate,         estimate,
                                                     lottery              =0

                          20
                 Percent of experts
                  10      5
                          0  15




                                      .5    .6            .7           .8          .9   1
                                           What do you think is borrowers' average ?

Notes: This is a histogram of experts' predictions of the average borrower's perceived present focus parameter
~; this question was only asked of experts who reported that they had a PhD in economics. Data are from

our survey of expert opinion, which was administered before our paper was released.




                                                           55
                                Figure 11: Experts' Beliefs about Payday Loan Regulation



           Percent of experts
            0    20     40




                                   Very bad                             Neutral                         Very good
                                                    Is prohibiting payday loans good for consumers?
           Percent of experts
            0    20     40




                                   Very bad                             Neutral                         Very good
                                                      Is a cooling off period good for consumers?
           Percent of experts
            0     20     40




                                   Very bad                             Neutral                         Very good
                                              Is limiting loan amount to 5% of income good for consumers?



Notes: These are histograms of experts' beliefs about whether specific payday loan regulations are good or
bad for consumers overall. Data are from our survey of expert opinion, which was administered before our
paper was released.




                                                                       56
                                Figure 12: Welfare Effects of Payday Loan Regulation




                              Marginal
                              benefit ( )
                                                                             Actual marginal
                                                                             cost ()



                           Welfare gain
                           from borrowing
                                                              Welfare loss
                                 (G)
                                                              from over-
                                                              borrowing          Perceived marginal
                                                                   (L)           cost  ()
        Marginal utility




                           Loan size                                      

Notes: This figure illustrates loan size choice and resulting borrower welfare. u (l) is the marginal utility
benefit from borrowing an additional dollar. C (l) and C  ~ (l) are the actual and perceived marginal costs of
repaying (or defaulting on) an additional dollar starting in period 1, discounted to period 1 using the period
0 self's discount function. Optimizing borrowers would choose l to equate marginal benefit u (l) and actual
expected marginal repayment cost C (l), giving loan size l . The resulting welfare gain is the triangle G.
Borrowers who misperceive repayment costs choose l to equate u (l) and perceived marginal repayment cost
C~ (l), giving loan size l that exceeds the optimum l . The resulting welfare loss from overborrowing is the
triangle L.




                                                         57
