                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF SPATIAL FRICTIONS

                                         Sebastian Heise
                                         Tommaso Porzio

                                       Working Paper 28792
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28792


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Michael Peters for a very insightful discussion of the paper. We also thank Andy
Atkeson, Gharad Bryan, Paco Buera, Julieta Caunedo, Lorenzo Caliendo, Kevin Donovan, Niklas
Engbom, Ben Faber, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Tarek Hassan, Kyle Herkenhoff, Fatih Karahan, Pete
Klenow, David Lagakos, Mushfiq Mobarak, Ben Moll, Simon Mongey, Melanie Morten, Todd
Schoellman, and Jonathan Vogel for very useful comments that improved the paper. Rachel
Williams provided excellent research assistance. The views and opinions expressed in this work
do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. This study uses
the weakly anonymous Establishment History Panel (Years 1975 - 2014) and the Linked-
Employer-Employee Data (LIAB) Longitudinal Model 1993-2014 (LIAB LM 9314). Data access
was provided via on-site use at the Research Data Centre (FDZ) of the German Federal
Employment Agency (BA) at the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) and remote data
access. The study also uses data made available by the German Socio-Economic Panel Study at
the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW), Berlin. Neither the original collectors of the
data nor the archive bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations presented here. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sebastian Heise and Tommaso Porzio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Spatial Frictions
Sebastian Heise and Tommaso Porzio
NBER Working Paper No. 28792
May 2021
JEL No. J6,O1,R1

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a general equilibrium model of frictional labor reallocation across firms and regions,
and use it to quantify the aggregate and distributional effects of spatial frictions that hinder
worker mobility across regions in Germany. The model leverages matched employer-employee
data to unpack spatial frictions into different types while isolating them from labor market
frictions that operate also within region. The estimated model shows sizable spatial frictions
between East and West Germany, especially due to the limited ability of workers to obtain job
offers from more distant regions. Despite the large real wage gap between East and West of
Germany, removing the spatial frictions leads, in equilibrium, to only a small increase in
aggregate productivity and it mostly affects the within-region allocation of labor to firms rather
than the between-region allocation. However, spatial frictions have large distributional
consequences, as their removal drastically reduces the gap in lifetime earnings between East and
West Germans.


Sebastian Heise
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research and Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
sebastian.heise@ny.frb.org

Tommaso Porzio
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
tommaso.porzio@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
In many countries, large di erences in wages and labor productivity across regions have persisted
for decades (Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014), Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017)). Spatial
frictions (e.g., moving costs that prevent workers from moving to high-wage regions) may be an
important factor, as the regional di erences cannot be explained by compensation for regional
amenities or spatial sorting alone.1 Spatial frictions could imply a misallocation of workers
across regions and entail large aggregate productivity costs (Bryan and Morten (2019); Hsieh,
Hurst, Jones, and Klenow (2019)).
    Large di erences in wages and labor productivity are also observed across firms, even within
the same region.2 These wage di erences plausibly reflect labor market frictions (e.g., Burdett
and Mortensen (1998)), which could a ect the gains from removing spatial barriers. For exam-
ple, moving workers to high-wage regions is not su cient to generate aggregate gains if workers
do not reach the high-paying firms in those regions. Moreover, workers' willingness to migrate
influences how easily low productivity firms can expand relative to high productivity firms,
and hence spatial frictions a ect the within-region distribution of labor. To provide a proper
quantitative assessment of the costs of spatial frictions, we must therefore take into account the
allocation of labor both between and within regions, hence we should study space taking into
account the role of firms.
    In this paper, we build a general equilibrium framework of frictional labor reallocation across
firms and regions, which we use to quantify the aggregate costs of spatial frictions in Germany.
Our main result is that, despite the large and persistent real wage gap of 26% between the East
and West of Germany, removing all spatial frictions only modestly raises aggregate output, and
these aggregate gains are purely driven by the reallocation of labor within rather than between
the two German regions.3 This result is due to several counteracting forces. While removing
spatial frictions allows workers to reach the most productive firms more easily regardless of their
location ­ raising aggregate productivity ­ it also makes it easier for low productivity firms to
attract unemployed workers from anywhere in Germany. This second mechanism allows low
productivity firms to expand and o sets most of the gains. Moreover, we find large equilibrium
e ects: without spatial frictions, East-born workers move towards the more productive West,
congesting the local labor market, which leads more West-born workers to move East. Overall,
we do not find any net reallocation of workers towards the West in equilibrium.
    The estimated model yields two additional results. First, despite the limited aggregate e ects
of spatial barriers, they have large distributional consequences. Without spatial barriers, the gap
    1
      See Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2008); Young (2013); Hicks, Kleemans, Li, and Miguel (2017);
Lagakos, Marshall, Mobarak, Vernot, and Waugh (2020); Lagakos (2020)
    2
      See, among others, Sorkin (2018); Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom, and Von Wachter (2019).
    3
      This result is in contrast to previous work which focused solely on the reallocation between regions and
found large e ects (e.g. Bryan and Morten (2019)).


                                                      1
                                Figure 1: Average Real Daily Wage, 2009-2014




Source: BHP, Bundesagentur für Arbeit. The figure shows real wages in each county, expressed in 2007 euros valued in Bonn, the
former capital of West Germany, and using county-specific prices. Former East-West border is drawn in black for clarification. We
exclude Berlin since we cannot assign it unambiguously to "East" or "West".



in lifetime earnings between East and West Germans is drastically reduced since workers' job
decisions and opportunities no longer depend on their location. Second, our framework allows
us to distinguish spatial search frictions, which prevent workers from accessing job opportunities
across regions, from moving costs and home bias, which a ect workers' willigness to move, and
to study separately the aggregate e ect of each spatial friction. We show that spatial search
frictions have the largest independent e ect on aggregate output while eliminating moving costs
actually slightly reduces GDP since it worsens the within-region allocation of workers to firms.
    In the first part of the paper, we use micro data from the German Federal Employment
Agency to document three sets of facts. These facts show that Germany is an ideal setting
to study regional wage gaps and motivate the ingredients of our model. First, we use the
Establishment History Panel (BHP), a 50% sample of all establishments in Germany, to study
wage gaps between and within the East and West of Germany. We show that there exists a
large real average wage gap between the two regions (see Figure 1), and this wage gap has been
constant over time and is not driven by observables such as industry or education. At the same
time, we find that the within-region wage heterogeneity across establishments is larger than
the average wage gap between regions, and that there is significant overlap between the East
and the West German wage distributions. Second, we use the Linked Employer-Employee Data
(LIAB) to show that all workers obtain large real wage gains when moving from East to West
Germany. Conditional on observables, these gains are higher for East Germans than for West
Germans, suggesting that workers need to be compensated to leave their home. Importantly,
we find that workers also obtain substantial wage gains when moving jobs within East or West

                                                               2
Germany. Since any move across space is also a move across firms, the wage gains of cross-region
movers thus combine the returns from switching across firms and the returns from migrating.
Third, based on the LIAB data we document that there is substantial worker mobility between
East and West Germany, but that, even conditional on current region, workers are much more
likely to move towards their home region.
     Next, we develop a general equilibrium framework to estimate the aggregate costs of spatial
frictions. We build on a job-posting model à la Burdett-Mortensen (e.g., Burdett and Mortensen
(1998)), in which workers move between heterogeneous firms subject to labor market frictions,
but we extend this previous work to consider worker mobility across regions, subject to spatial
barriers. The model is based on the micro empirical evidence: we allow for di erent types of
spatial frictions to match the features of cross-region workers flows and wage gains, and we
incorporate labor market frictions to capture the within-region wage dispersion. Our theory al-
lows for an arbitrary number of regions characterized by an exogenous productivity distribution
of firms, and an arbitrary number of worker types characterized by di erences in skills, moving
costs, location preferences, and search e ciency towards each region. Firms choose the wage to
post and decide how many job vacancies to open. Workers decide how many job applications to
submit to each region and receive random job o ers, moving into and out of unemployment and
across firms both within and between regions. Workers and firms meet according to a match-
ing function that is concave in applications and vacancies, as in Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides
models (e.g., Pissarides (2000)), generating endogenous labor market tightness. We derive a
tractable solution to the model represented by a system of di erential equations.
     Our model provides a framework to structurally identify the di erent components of spatial
frictions and to isolate them from general labor market frictions. While all model parameters
and frictions are jointly identified, we provide a heuristic identification argument. Within-region
data on the joint distribution of wages and firm size, the average wage gains of job movers, and
the frequency of job changes discipline the unobservable endogenous distribution of job o ers
in each region. Given a set of within-region distributions, the spatial frictions are identified by
comparing the wage gains and job flows across regions to their within-region analogues. The
key identifying assumption of the model is that the job o er distributions do not depend on the
location or identity of the worker, and thus all workers draw o ers from the same distributions
irrespective of their current location. Under this assumption, higher observed wage gains for
movers into a region compared to movers within that region reflect the presence of moving costs,
as cross-region job switchers need to be compensated to move. Similarly, higher observed wage
gains for workers moving out of their home region relative to other worker types making the
same move identify home preferences. The relative frequency of job switches, instead, disciplines
the search e ciency. Relatively lower worker flows across regions, compared to between firms
within region, indicate that workers are less successful in applying for jobs in other regions.


                                                3
    We estimate the model with four sub-regions of Germany ­ which we refer to as locations
­ corresponding to the Northwest, Southwest, Northeast, and Southeast, and incorporate four
worker types reflecting the four possible home locations. The model matches the data well,
despite being relatively parsimonious with 21 parameters being used to match 305 micro and
aggregate moments.
    The model estimates imply substantial spatial barriers. The most important of these barriers
is a lower search e ciency across locations: for a given search e ort, workers generate only
1/20th as many job applications when searching for jobs across locations as within. Search
e ciency is also biased towards each individual's home: a given search e ort across locations
directed towards the home location results in four times as many applications as the same e ort
directed to jobs outside of it. In contrast to the large spatial search frictions, we estimate
a direct cost of moving between any two locations of only between 3.1% and 5.3% of life-time
income, dependent on the distance, which is considerably smaller than most previous estimates.4
These relatively small moving costs reflect our model's ability to distinguish actual moving costs
from other spatial frictions and to control for the frictional labor market. In terms of home
preferences, we find that workers need to be paid 7.4% of their yearly income to move away
from their home location and maintain the same utility.
    Our model also allows us to quantify the contribution of unobserved individual characteristics
to the East-West wage gap. The wages of East German workers are approximately 10% lower
than those of West German workers even while working at the same firm, which, structurally
interpreted through our model, implies a 10% di erence in unobserved ability. Due to the
sorting of workers towards their home location, these ability di erences explain more than one
third of the East-West regional wage gap.
    We use the model to study the aggregate and distributional impact of spatial frictions in
Germany. We find that eliminating all spatial barriers would decrease the wage gap between
East and West Germany by half, mostly due to the reduction in workers' sorting towards
their home location. However, aggregate GDP per capita would increase by a mere 2%. The
reason for this result is that the estimated labor misallocation is mainly across firms within
locations, rather than between East and West Germany, and the e ect of spatial frictions
on the within-location allocation of labor is mediated by several counteracting forces. While
removing spatial frictions allows workers to find more jobs and to climb a country-wide job
ladder ­ thus increasing labor productivity ­ eliminating spatial frictions also makes it easier
for low productivity firms to hire unemployed workers from far away locations, which depresses
productivity. In addition, eliminating spatial barriers raises the share of East German workers
in the West by 40 percentage points, but the additional competition for jobs encourages more
West German workers to migrate to the East, resulting in no net labor reallocation towards the
   4
       See, for example, Bryan and Morten (2019) and Kennan and Walker (2011).


                                                     4
West.
    In contrast to the small aggregate gains, the distributional consequences of spatial frictions
are large. Workers' home location has persistent e ects on their earnings throughout their
lifetime: the average wage per e ciency unit of East Germans is about 11% below the one of
West Germans. Removing spatial frictions almost eliminates this gap since all workers have
equal access to jobs in East and West Germany and climb a similar job ladder.
    Overall, our results highlight the importance of studying the allocation of labor within and
across regions in a unified general equilibrium framework, hence to study space and firms jointly.

Literature. Our paper contributes to several strands of literature.
     First, we contribute to the literature quantifying the size of spatial barriers and their aggre-
gate e ects (Caliendo, Opromolla, Parro, and Sforza (2017) and Bryan and Morten (2019)).5
This literature has used observed worker flows and average wage di erentials across space to
estimate the size of the moving costs. Since worker flows in response to average wage gaps
are relatively modest, even after accounting for compensating disamenities, the papers infer
large moving costs, which suggest substantial aggregate gains from reallocating workers. Our
framework allows us to benchmark worker mobility across space to mobility across firms in
a frictional labor market. We find that, despite sizeable spatial barriers, the aggregate gains
from removing them are modest because most of the labor misallocation is within regions, and
removing spatial barriers does not substantially improve the within-region allocation of workers
to firms. Overall, we argue that firms, and firm level-data, should have a prominent role in the
analysis of spatial wage gaps.
     Second, a recent literature has used panel data to study the observational returns from
migration and to quantify the contribution of workers' sorting to regional wage gaps (see Hicks,
Kleemans, Li, and Miguel (2017), Alvarez (2018), and Lagakos, Marshall, Mobarak, Vernot, and
Waugh (2020)).6 We show that the interpretation of panel data used in this literature can be
misleading. In our setting, the wages of East-born workers increase steeply when moving West,
which the cited literature would interpret as evidence of a large causal e ect of working in the
West, hence of large returns from reducing spatial barriers. This conclusion does not take into
account, however, that labor markets are frictional, and that all job movers are selected  they
must have received a good enough job o er to move. Moreover, removing spatial barriers can
lead to equilibrium e ects. Our work controls for movers' selection by benchmarking the wage
gains of movers between regions to those within regions, and computes the aggregate gains in
equilibrium. We conclude that removing spatial frictions provides smaller gains than implied
by an a-theoretical interpretation of the data.
   5
      See also Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010), Kennan and Walker (2011), Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro
(2019).
    6
      Other relevant papers on sorting, using di erent methods, are Young (2013), Lagakos and Waugh (2013).


                                                    5
    Third, our work is related to job ladder models à la Burdett and Mortensen (1998) with
labor mobility across sectors or space. Schmutz and Sidibé (2018) build a partial equilibrium
model where identical workers receive job o ers both from their current location and from
other locations. Consistent with our work, they estimate relatively small moving costs and
sizable search frictions across space. However, due to the partial equilibrium assumption their
paper cannot study the aggregate e ects of removing these spatial barriers, and due to the
assumption of homogeneous labor the paper cannot study the distributional e ects of spatial
frictions. Bradley, Postel-Vinay, and Turon (2017) analyze wage posting and employment in a
Burdett-Mortensen setup in the presence of an exogenous public sector, and Meghir, Narita,
and Robin (2015) develop a general equilibrium model with two sectors to study the allocation
of labor between the formal and informal sectors in Brazil. In both papers, workers receive
identical job o ers from both sectors independently of their current employment status. As a
result, there is one unified labor market, and the wage function is continuous as in the standard
Burdett-Mortensen model. In our model, workers' probability of receiving and accepting o ers
depends on their identity and their current location due to the presence of spatial frictions,
which could make the wage functions discontinuous in principle. We resolve this problem by
introducing extreme value shocks, building on earlier insights to obtain tractable solutions for
discrete choice problems from the trade literature (e.g., Eaton and Kortum (2002)).7
    Last, our work is related to the literature on East German convergence (or the lack thereof)
after the reunification (e.g., Burda and Hunt (2001), Burda (2006)). This literature has studied
the possible drivers behind the East-West wage gap and the nature of migration between the
two regions (Krueger and Pischke (1995), Hunt (2001, 2006), Fuchs-Schündeln, Krueger, and
Sommer (2010)). Uhlig (2006, 2008) shows that the persistent East-West wage gap is consistent
with network externalities, which could discourage firms from moving to the East. In contrast
to this work, we take the distribution of firms in each region as exogenously given and do not
explicitly model the source of the productivity di erences.8 Instead, we focus on spatial barriers
to worker mobility and estimate the aggregate e ects of removing them.

    Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe our data, and Section 3 documents
stylized facts on the German labor market. Section 4 introduces the model and Section 5
discusses how to unpack spatial frictions. We estimate the model in Section 6 and we use it
to quantify the aggregate and distributional e ects of spatial frictions in Section 7. Section 8
concludes.
   7
     Two other related papers are Ho mann and Shi (2016) and Bilal (2019). The first studies a two-sector
Burdett-Mortensen model with no mobility frictions; the second studies unemployment di erences across space.
   8
     For recent related work that models the endogenous productivity di erences across regions, see Fajgelbaum
and Gaubert (2020); Bilal (2019); Schmutz and Sidibé (2021).




                                                      6
2       Data
We use two main datasets provided by the German Federal Employment Agency (BA) via the
Institute for Employment Research (IAB): i) the Establishment History Panel (BHP) and ii)
the longitudinal version of the Linked Employer-Employee Dataset (LIAB).
    The BHP is a panel containing a 50% random sample of all establishments in Germany with
at least one employee liable to social security on June 30th of a given year. The data are based
on mandatory social security filings and exclude government employees and the self-employed.
Each establishment in the BHP is defined as a company's unit operating in a distinct county
and industry.9 For simplicity, we will refer to these units as "firms" from now on. For each such
firm in each year, the dataset contains information on location, average wages, the number of
employees, and employee characteristics (education, age, gender). The data are recorded since
1975 for West Germany and since 1992 for East Germany, and they cover about 1.3 million
firms per year in the recent period.
    The LIAB data contain records for more than 1.9 million individuals drawn from the In-
tegrated Employment Biographies (IEB) of the IAB, which cover all individuals that were
employed subject to social security or received social security benefits since 1993. These data
are linked to information about the approximately 400,000 firms at which these individuals
work from the BHP. For each individual in the sample, the data provide the entire employment
history for the period 1993-2014, including unemployment periods as long as the individual
received unemployment benefits. Each observation is an employment or unemployment spell,
with exact beginning and end dates within a given year.10 A new spell is recorded each time an
individual's employment status changes, for example due to a change in job, wage, or employ-
ment status. For individuals that do not change employment status, one spell is recorded for
the entire year. Variables include the worker's firm's location at the county level, the worker's
daily wage, education, and year of birth.
    An important variable for our analysis is each worker's county of residence, reported in the
LIAB since 1999, which we will use to analyze workers' mobility across space. In contrast to
the other variables, which are newly reported at each spell, the location of residence is recorded
at the end of each year for employed workers and at the beginning of an unemployment spell
for unemployed workers and then added to all observations of that year. Since the social secu-
rity reporting regulations do not prescribe which residence to report for workers with multiple
residences, some workers can report very large distances between residence and work location
even though they live in a second home closer to work. To deal with the potential measurement
    9
      Since several plants of the same company may operate in the same county and industry, the establishments
in the BHP do not always correspond to economic units such as a plant (Hethey-Maier and Schmieder (2013)).
   10
      We use the term unemployment spell to refer to the period in which an individual is receiving unemployment
benefits. After the expiration of the benefits, individuals are not in our dataset until they are employed again.



                                                       7
error, we will define several alternative measures of migration below.
    We use three additional datasets. First, we obtain information on cost of living di erences
across German counties from the Federal Institute for Building, Urban A airs and Spatial
Development (BBSR (2009)), which we will use to construct real wages. The BBSR conducted
a study assessing regional price variation in 2007 across 393 German micro regions covering
all of Germany that correspond to counties or slightly larger unions of counties.11 Second,
we supplement our main analysis with data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP),
an annual survey of around 30,000 individuals in Germany since 1984, to examine additional
demographic characteristics and to corroborate some of our main findings. Finally, we use
information on firms' profit shares from the ORBIS database by Bureau van Dijk to compute
additional targets for the model's estimation.

Sample Construction. Since we are interested in the persistent divide between East and
West Germany, our analysis focuses on the years 2009 to 2014, the latest years available in the
IAB data. We refer to this period as our baseline sample. For some empirical specifications that
require a longer sample, we use the years 2004 to 2014. We construct real wages for each county
using the BBSR's price index, which we deflate forward and backward in time using state-
specific GDP deflators from the statistics o ces of the German states. We use time-consistent
industry codes at the 3-digit WZ93 level provided by the IAB based on the concordance by
Eberle, Jacobebbinghaus, Ludsteck, and Witter (2011). Since wages are only reported to the
IAB up to the upper limit for statutory pension insurance contributions, the BHP contains an
imputed average wage variable which estimates the censored wages based on Card, Heining, and
Kline (2013). For the LIAB, no such variable is provided and we replicate the imputation steps
ourselves. We use the corrected wages for all our analyses. We use full-time workers only, and
exclude Berlin, which cannot be unambiguously assigned to East or West since it was divided
between the two. We provide additional details on the datasets and on data construction in
Appendix A.



3        Motivating Facts
We next document three sets of facts on the German labor market. These facts highlight that
Germany is a good setting to study regional wage gaps and serve as motivation for the main
    11
     The data cover about two thirds of the consumption basket, including housing rents, food, durables, holi-
days, and utilities. We provide further information on the data in Appendix A and provide a map of county-level
price levels. East Germany has a 7% lower population-weighted average price level.




                                                      8
                                                                Figure 2: Wages Between and Within Regions
                                                      (a) East-West Real Wage Gap                  (b) Within-Region Real Wage Distributions




                                                                                                      .08
                             0           -.1
               East-West Wage Gap (in Logs)




                                                                                                      .04
                               -.2




                                                                                                   Density
                                                                                                      .02
                      -.3




                                                                                                      .01
             -.4




                                                                                                      .005
                                                                                                             West Germany   East Germany
                             -.5




                                               1990      1995   2000          2005   2010   2015             20              40            80   160
                                                                       Year                                                         Wage



Source: BHP and authors' calculations. Notes: The left figure plots the coe cients on the East Germany dummy obtained from
running specification (1) separately for each year without controls, where firms are weighted by size. The right figure plots the
density of wages across firms separately for East and West Germany for the period 2009-2014. Wages are residualized by regressing
the log real wage on 3-digit industry dummies and time dummies, for East and West Germany separately. We generate the cleaned
wage as the residuals from this regression plus the mean of the log wage in the given region and transform these log wages back
into levels. We then find the twentiles of the residualized wage distribution, compute the average wage within each twentile, and
transform it into a density. While all firms are weighted equally, only a very small share of overall employment is at the lowest wage
firms.


ingredients of our model.
3.1       Wage Gaps Between and Within Regions
We first show that a sizable and persistent real wage gap remains between East and West
Germany, despite the absence of a physical or legal border or language di erence, since the
reunification in 1990.12 We run, in the BHP, firm-level regressions of the form13

                                                                         log(w
                                                                             ¯jt ) = " Ij,East + -- Xjt + "t + `jt ,                                  (1)

where w ¯jt is the average real wage paid by firm j in year t, Ij,East is a dummy for whether firm
j is located in the East, Xjt is a vector of controls, and "t are time fixed e ects. We weight
by firm size, measured by full-time workers, since we are interested in the average wage gap in
Germany.
    In Figure 2a we plot coe cients "t from running regression (1) separately for each year in
the data and without any additional controls. The real wage gap between East and West has
been closing very slowly since the mid-1990s, and remains at around 25%.14
    We next pool the data for our core sample period (2009-2014) and investigate, in Table 1,
the role of di erent controls in explaining the wage gap. Worker gender and education (column
   12
      Supplemental Appendix K provides a brief discussion of the reunification process. This Supplemental
Appendix is not meant for publication and includes additional material. It is available on the authors' websites.
   13
      Recall that we refer to establishment units as "firms".
   14
      In Supplemental Appendix L we use aggregate data on GDP to perform a growth accounting exercise to
show that most of the sizable GDP gap between East and West Germany today is due to TFP di erences.


                                                                                               9
                                      Table 1: E ect of Region on Real Wage

                      Dep var.: log(w
                                    ¯jt )              (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)

                            Ij,East                .2609úúú            .2695úúú      .2467úúú         .2052úúú
                                                     (.0074)            (.0058)        (.0031)          (.0027)

                           Year FE                      Y                  Y              Y                Y
                     Gender & Education                                    Y              Y                Y
                       Age & Firm Size                                                    Y                Y
                         Industry FE                                                                       Y
                         Observations               4, 797, 798        4, 741, 107    4, 725, 435      4, 725, 210

Source: BHP and authors' calculations. Notes: The table presents the estimates on the East Germany dummy from specification
(1) for the period 2009-2014, where firms are weighted by size. ú, úú, and ú ú ú indicate significance at the 90th, 95th, and 99th
percent level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.



2) and worker age and firm size (column 3) do not contribute significantly to the wage gap.
Controlling for 3-digit industries narrows the gap slightly (column 4), but overall about 80% of
the real wage gap remains unexplained.
     While, on average, firms pay a higher wage in the West, the distribution of wages paid in
the East and West of Germany show substantial overlap. In fact, many firms in the East pay
higher wages than some West firms and, even looking within the same 3-digit industry, the gap
between the firms at the top and at the bottom of the within-region distribution is larger than
the average wage gap between regions. This result can be seen in Figure 2b, which plots PDFs
of firms' average real wage from the BHP, separately for both East and West Germany. We
pool all observations from our core sample period and residualize log real wages by regressing
them on year dummies and 3-digit industry dummies to remove across industry variation. We
then find the twentiles of the residualized wage distribution, compute the average real wage (in
levels) for each twentile, and plot the associated density.
     In Supplemental Appendix M15 , we provide some additional robustness checks and show
that the between-region wage gap is similar for all industries and across counties of di erent
education or gender composition. Moreover, we show that the wage gap is not driven by a
few outlier counties, that there are no clearly delineated regional di erences in tax rates, and
that the wage gap is accompanied by a large gap in unemployment. We also provide additional
details on the within-region joint distribution of wages and firm size, and show that there is
substantial wage heterogeneity across firms even within the same county.


3.2        Wage Gains of Movers
Second, we investigate the wage gains that individuals obtain when moving between East and
West Germany and between firms. The large East-West wage gap would suggest that workers
   15
        Available on the authors' websites and not meant for publication.


                                                                  10
can obtain substantial gains from moving to the West. We confirm this hypothesis. However, we
show that focusing on migrants' wage gains alone provides a misleading picture. A move across
space is also a move across firms, and job switchers within-region also obtain large wage gains.
Therefore, to isolate the returns from migration, we need to compare moves across regions to
those within region.

Empirical Specification. We define job-to-job movers as workers that change jobs between
two firms without an intermittent unemployment spell. For moves between East and West
Germany, we distinguish between migration and commuting. The distinction is useful because
we expect that commuters to a new job are paid a smaller wage premium than workers that also
have to move their residence. We classify job-to-job movers between East and West Germany as
migrants if they report a di erent county of residence in the year of the move from the previous
year.16 All other moves between East and West are defined as commuting. As discussed above,
the residence variable is subject to measurement error. Our migration measure only includes
workers that actively change their recorded residence in the year of the move. We provide
several summary statistics on our migration measure in Appendix B.
    Our analysis distinguishes individuals based on their "home region", either East or West
Germany. The migration literature has shown that individuals display home bias : the birth-
place is a key determinant of job flows across space even among adults (see Kennan and Walker
(2011)). Since our social security data do not contain information on birth location, we classify
individuals as East (West) German if at the first time they appear in our entire dataset since
1993, either employed or unemployed, they are in the East (West). Appendix A provides
additional details on the construction of the home region. Our measure is imperfect, since some
individuals migrated between the reunification and 1993. In Appendix C, we use survey data
from the SOEP, which include individuals' actual birth location, to provide several validation
exercises of our measure of home region. Overall, our results suggest that our measure properly
classifies individuals into the region in which they were born in more than 90% of the cases.
For this reason, we will interpret workers' home region also as their birth region going forward,
and refer to individuals whose home is East as East-born.17
    Let dxit be a dummy for a job switch of type s oe S, where S is the set of the six possible types of
moves: i) from East to West via migration or ii) commuting; iii) from West to East via migration
or iv) commuting; v) within-East, and vi) within-West. To visualize an individual's wage
dynamics around the time of a job-to-job move, we run a standard system of local projections,
  16
      We compare residence location across years since, as discussed above, the variable is only updated at the
end of each year.
   17
      None of our results hinge on the home region being the birth region, though it does alter the interpretation.
An alternative interpretation would be that an individual's location when they first enter the labor market
shapes their attachment and biases.



                                                        11
consisting of one regression for each time period · oe {t  3, ..., t  1, t + 1, ..., t + 5} around t:18

                                ÿ                                ÿ
                  log(wi· ) =          --s, · dit (1  Ii
                                         W est s       East
                                                            )+            East s East
                                                                        --s, · dit Ii + B· Xit + `it ,   (2)
                                soeS                             soeS

where wi· is an individual's weighted average wage across all employment spells in year · , where
we use each spell's length as its weight. The variable log(wi· ) is the log change of this average
wage between year · and the previous year except for t + 1, where it is the di erence with
respect to t  1. We drop wages from the year of the move to avoid contaminating our results
by other types of payments in the year of the move.19 The variable IEast
                                                                       i   is a dummy for whether
an individual's home region is East Germany. Finally, the controls Xit include dummies for the
current work region, home region, and their interaction, distance dummies since moves further
away could lead to higher wage gains, the total number of past job-to-job switches, age controls,
and year fixed e ects. Since the left hand side variable is wage growth, any di erence across
individuals in the wage level would be netted out. Therefore, we do not include individual fixed
e ects in our main specification. The coe cients --s, W est
                                                       ·    and --s,
                                                                  East
                                                                     · capture the real wage gains
from making a job-to-job transition relative to the wage growth obtained by staying at the same
firm, which is the omitted category.

Results. Figure 3a plots the estimated wage gains for East-to-West migration ­ i.e. the pre-
dicted wage from the relevant coe cients --s,W est
                                              ·    and --s, · , translated into levels, and normalized
                                                         East

around the wage level prior to the year of the migration. Figure 3b presents the wage gains for
West-to-East migration. The figures highlight that workers moving out of their home region
see their wage increase steeply. East-born movers to the West receive on average almost a 35%
real wage increase relative to their average within-firm wage growth, which is almost double the
wage gain obtained by West-born workers making the same move. Moves to the East, instead,
are associated with sizable wage gains for West-born workers and almost no e ect for East-born
ones. Average wage gains for moves to the East tend to be smaller, consistent with the lower
average wage level in the East.
    The large wage gains from moving West could imply the presence of substantial moving
costs, and their asymmetry suggests that workers need to be compensated to leave their home
region. However, any move across regions is also a move across firms. Figures 3c-3d plot the
estimated wage gains for within-region job-to-job switches from regression (2) against the wage
gains from a migration away from home. We find that workers experience fairly large gains
even moving jobs within-region, suggesting that they are climbing a job ladder in the presence
  18
      We pool together all the data for time periods t from 2004 to 2014 thus creating an unbalanced panel.
In general, working with an unbalanced panel could be problematic. In our application, we are less concerned
because: i) we do not observe post-trends; and ii) we are mostly interested in the wage growth on impact.
   19
      The results are similar if we include year t, see Supplemental Appendix N.



                                                        12
                                     Figure 3: Wage Gains for Job-to-Job Moves
                      (a) East-to-West Migration                                   (b) West-to-East Migration




           (c) Within East vs East-to-West (East-born)                  (d) Within West vs West-to-East (West-born)




Source: LIAB and authors' calculations. Notes: The figure is constructed by taking the point estimates for di erent sets of
coe cients --s,
             W est and -- East from the regressions (2) for · oe {t  3, ..., t  1, t + 1, t + 5}. We then sum up the coe cients starting at
               ·         s,·
                                             q·                                                                              q1
· = 3 to obtain for each period · the sum     u=3 s,u
                                                     -- i , where i oe {West, East}, and subtract from this sum the term   u=3 s,u
                                                                                                                                  --i
to normalize the coe cients with respect to period · = 1. The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. The top left
panel shows the normalized coe cients for --EW,
                                             W est and -- East . The top right panel shows the normalized coe cients for -- W est and
                                                 ·         EW,·                                                            W E,·
--W E,· . The bottom left panel shows --EE,· and --EW,
  East                                  East        East , and the bottom right panel shows -- W est and -- W est .
                                                         ·                                      W W,·        W E,·




of labor market frictions. As a result, to properly infer the cost of moving between regions, we
need to benchmark the cross-regional wage changes with the within-region gains, taking into
account that workers moving between regions are selected: they are the ones that received job
o ers su ciently appealing to make them migrate. Our model will allow us to do so structurally.
    In Supplemental Appendix N, we list the full estimates from specification (2), and show that
our results are robust to alternative definitions of job-to-job switches and migration. We also
present the results for commuting moves, which exhibit wage gains that are, as expected, smaller
but show the same qualitative features as migration moves. We also show that the results are
robust to the inclusion of individual fixed e ects that account for di erences across individuals
in the steepness of their experience profiles (as in Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2015)).
Finally, we perform the regression for di erent demographic subgroups of workers. Across all
results we find asymmetric wage gains, compatible with home bias.


                                                                   13
3.3     Workers' Flows
Last, we study the flows of workers across regions. We show that, although the persistent wage
gap would suggest otherwise, the labor markets of East and West Germany are, in fact, quite
integrated: workers frequently move across the former border; however, worker flows are biased
towards their home region. While many workers leave for a few years, most eventually return.

Summary Statistics on Cross-Regional Mobility. Table 2 presents mobility statistics
for workers with at least one employment spell in our core sample period 2009-2014. Row 1
shows that in our core period 2.9% of employment spells by West-born workers and 17.5% of
spells by East-born workers are not in their home region. Of the workers in our sample, 4.6%
of West-born and 23.9% of East-born have at some point had a full-time job in the other region
(row 2). However, a sizable fraction of job changes are via commuting: only 1.8% of West-born
and 10.2% of East-born have resided in the other region.20 Row 3 indicates that between one
third and one half of the workers taking a job in the other region have since returned to a job
at home, after spending on average only 2-3 years away (row 4). The average non-returner is
employed in the other region, until her employment history ends, for longer than the average
returner, as expected due to a simple selection argument (row 5). The final three rows present
characteristics of workers that never left their home region ("Stayers"), took a job in the other
region ("Movers"), or took a job and have returned ("Returners"). Overall, while we find some
selection on observables, the data show that both workers with and without college education
migrate between regions. In fact, less educated workers comprise about three quarters of all
cross-region switchers.21 We present additional statistics on movers in Appendix B, and show
that the share of workers away from their home region has been relatively stable in the recent
period.

Empirical Gravity Specification on Worker Flows. We next estimate a gravity equation
for workers' flows between counties to separate the role of geographical barriers and identity
(home bias) barriers between East and West Germany.
    Let nh
         o,d,t be the number of workers with home region h that were in a job in county o in year
t  1 and that have made any job switch to a new job in county d in year t, including both via
migration and commuting for cross-region moves.22 We compute the share of these job-to-job
switchers from county o moving to county d (where d can be equal to o) across all years in our
  20
      As discussed, however, the residence variable may be misreported. We provide further statistics on workers'
residence in Appendix B.
   21
      We observe a higher share of males than in the general population since our sample consists only of full-time
workers.
   22
      We include all moves to maximize the number of county-pairs for which we observe positive flows and
minimize the risk of biases due to granularity in our data, see Dingel and Tintelnot (2020). In Supplementary
Appendix O we show that our results are robust to alternative definitions, such as using only migrants.


                                                        14
                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics on Mobility

                                                                         (1)                                 (2)
                                                                 Home: West                              Home: East

        (1)    FT job spells in foreign region                       2.9%                                  17.5%
        (2)   Crossed border (job / residence)                   4.6% / 1.8%                            23.9% / 10.2%
        (3)          Returned movers                                 46.3%                                 36.1%
        (4)     Mean years away (returners)                           2.90                                  2.41
        (5)   Mean years away (non-returners)                         9.41                                  7.47

                                                   Stayers           Movers       Returners   Stayers      Movers       Returners
        (6)          Age at first move                                34.4             34.0                 32.0          31.8
        (7)            Share college                 0.22             0.30             0.29    0.20         0.19          0.18
        (8)             Share male                   0.70             0.78             0.82    0.56         0.74          0.80

Source: LIAB. Notes: The table shows statistics for workers with at least one full-time employment spell in 2009-2014. For these
workers, row 1 shows the share of full-time employment spells at jobs not in their home region. Row 2 shows the share of these
workers that have ever had a full-time job / resided in their non-home region over the entire sample since 1993. Row 3 shows the
share of workers that returned to a job in their home region after their first job in the non-home region, and row 4 presents the
average number of years away. Row 5 shows the time passed between the last year the worker is in the data and the year of the
first job away from home for workers that never again take a job in their home region. Rows 6-8 present the average age at the
time of the first move away from the home region, college share, and male share among workers that have never taken a job outside
of their home region ("Stayers"), workers that have moved ("Movers"), and workers that have moved and returned ("Returners").



core period as                                                       q
                                                                          nh
                                                         =q q
                                                                      t     o,d,t
                                                  sh
                                                   o,d                          h
                                                                 t       doeD no,d,t

where D is the set of all the 402 counties in both East and West Germany.23 We use these
shares to fit the gravity equation
                                                            ÿ
                              log sh
                                   o,d = "o + "d +
                                          h    h
                                                                 ,,x Dx,o,d + flIR(o)"=R(d) + `h
                                                                                               o,d ,                             (3)
                                                         xoe X


where "oh
          and "dh
                  are county of origin and destination fixed e ects, respectively, which di er by
workers' home region, Dx,o,d are dummies for buckets of distance traveled between origin and
destination, and IR(o)"=R(d) is a dummy that is equal to one if the job switch is between East and
West Germany. The set of buckets X contains seven 50km intervals from 50km-99km onward
to 350km-399km and an eighth group for counties that are further than 399 km apart.
    The regression investigates three channels that could a ect worker flows. First, the dum-
mies Dx,o,d capture the role of distance. Second, the term involving IR(o)"=R(d) reflects the role
of geographical barriers a ecting mobility between East and West Germany. If all workers, re-
gardless of their home region, are less likely to make a job switch that involves moving between
East and West Germany, then the coe cient fl on the dummy should be negative. Finally, the
   23
     We observe at least one job-to-job flow in some year for 75,937 out of the 160, 801 possible origin-destination
pairs. When we include also job switches with an intermittent unemployment spell ­ in Supplemental Appendix
O ­ we have 95,275.


                                                                 15
               Figure 4: Results from the Gravity Equation: Geography versus Identity
                        (a) Geography                                              (b) Identity: Destination FE




Source: LIAB. The figures plot results from specification (3). The left panel shows the point estimates for the coe cients for
           ^x , in black and the distance coe cients for a cross-border move, ,,
distance, ,,                                                                      ^x + fl
                                                                                        ^, in gray, where each coe cient is plotted at
the mid-point of the relevant distance interval and the 400+ category is plotted at 500km. All coe cients are transformed into
levels by taking their exponent and then normalized into interpretable shares by dividing by their sum plus exp(0) for the omitted
category of short-distance moves. Dotted lines represent the 95% confidence interval. The right panel plots the di erence between
the destination fixed e ects for East- and West-born, "d
                                                       East  " W est , as a function of the distance of each county d to the East-West
                                                               d
former border. We normalize the fixed e ect coe cients for each worker type by their mean and plot counties in the East with a
negative distance.



home-region specific fixed e ects "oh
                                      and "dh
                                              capture the fact that some counties may be more
attractive to workers of home region h, for example due to preferences, comparative advantage,
or possibly due to a social network that allows them to find job opportunities. For example,
if "d
    h
      is high for a destination then a high share of job-to-job movers of type h move into that
county regardless of the location of their previous job and regardless of whether these workers
have to cross the East-West border. We refer to this channel as home bias.

Results. We show the full list of estimated coe cients of regression (3) in Supplemental Ap-
pendix O and present here the key take-aways. In Figure 4a, the black line plots the distance
coe cients ,,x , which we re-normalize into interpretable shares of switchers. As expected, work-
ers are less likely to move to counties that are further away. The gray line plots the same
results for cross border flows (the coe cients ,,^x + fl
                                                      ^), taking the origin and destination e ects
as constant. The lines are almost on top of each other. Thus, conditional on distance and
fixed e ects, we do not find a substantial role for geographical barriers at the former East-West
border.
    Figure 4b shows that there is strong home bias. For each county, we compute the di erence
between the destination fixed e ect for East- and West-born workers, "d     East
                                                                                  "dW est
                                                                                          . We then
plot these di erences against each county's distance to the East-West border, defined so that




                                                                 16
East counties have negative distance.24 The figure shows that East individuals have significantly
higher destination fixed e ects for the East, indicating that they are relatively more likely to
move to counties in the East than West workers regardless of their current county. Conversely,
East-born workers are less likely to move to counties in the West.
    In Supplemental Appendix O, we plot the origin fixed e ects and find that workers are also
less likely to move out of counties in their home region. We also show that the results are similar
for di erent sub-groups of the population, for di erent definitions of cross-border mobility, if
we include controls for the distance of the origin county to the former border, and if we include
transitions between jobs that are separated by an unemployment spell.


4        Model
We develop a model to leverage our matched employer-employee data to quantify and struc-
turally decompose the spatial barriers that impede worker mobility, taking into account labor
market frictions. Our general equilibrium framework embeds the on-the-job search model of
Burdett and Mortensen (1998) into a multi-region economy inhabited by heterogeneous firms
and workers that are subject to di erent types of spatial frictions.
    The design of our model is motivated by four empirical facts. First, since the East-West
wage gap has been constant and the number of workers away from their home region has been
relatively balanced in recent years (see Appendix B), we perform our analysis in steady state.
Second, since job movers obtain significant wage increases even within-region, a model with
heterogeneous firms and labor market frictions is needed. Third, the presence of frequent and
repeated moves across East and West leads us to design a framework in which multiple regions
are partially integrated and individuals draw (infrequently) jobs from di erent regions. Finally,
the salient asymmetries, in both wage gains and job flows, call for a model with home biases.


4.1      Environment
Let time be continuous and all agents discount future income at rate r. There are J = {1, ..., J }
sites, which we refer to as locations, in an economy inhabited by a continuum of workers of
types i oe I {1, .., I } with mass D¯ i , where qioeI D
                                                      ¯ i = 1.25 Throughout the text, we will use
superscripts for worker types and subscripts for locations. Workers of type i have a preference
parameter ·ji for being at location j , and consume both a tradable and a local good, such as
housing. Their utility is Uji = ·ji c÷ h1÷ , where c and h are the amounts of tradable good and
    24
      As known in gravity equations, the level of the fixed e ects is not identified. We normalize the fixed e ects
for both East-born and West-born workers relative to their average value. This normalization is without loss of
generality since we are interested only in the relative fixed e ects across counties.
   25
      We introduce the term "locations" to di erentiate it from the two regions in the empirical section. We will
estimate the model below with four locations.

                                                        17
local good, respectively. A worker of type i produces j     i
                                                              units of output per time unit in location
j . Hence if this worker is employed at wage rate w per e ciency unit, she earns an income of
w j i
      . Worker i's indirect utility from receiving wage rate w in location j is then Vj     i
                                                                                              = w j   ·j /Pj ,
                                                                                                    i i

where Pj = (Pc ) (Ph,j )
                   ÷      1 ÷
                              is the location's price level, Pc is the price of the tradable good, and
Ph,j the price level of the local good in location j .26 We normalize Pc = 1.
      Workers and firms operate in a frictional and local labor market. We define by ei       j and uj the
                                                                                                        i

mass of employed and unemployed workers of type i in location j , respectively. Workers of type
i currently in location j must spend search e ort sx to send ai        jx (sx ) = zjx sx job applications
                                                                                    i

towards location x. Here, zjx   i
                                    is the worker's relative search e ciency, which depends on the
worker's current and destination locations (j, x) to capture that it may be easier to find job
opportunities locally. Search e ciency also depends on the worker's type i, reflecting that it may
be easier for workers to find open positions in their home location, for example due to reliance
on social networks or referrals (as in, e.g., Galenianos (2013)). Search e ort is subject to a cost,
                                                                                                     1+`
to be paid in each location x in which the worker files applications, given by Â (sx ) = s           x
                                                                                                    1+`
                                                                                                            for
                                                                            1+`
employed workers. Unemployed workers face a cost Âu (sx ) = < 1+` , where < Ø 1 modulates
                                                                        ` sx

a potential di erence in search intensity between employed and unemployed workers along the
lines of Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2016).
      On the firm side, there is a continuum of firms exogenously assigned to locations j oe J,
                                                          q
where Mj is the mass of firms in location j and j oeJ Mj = 1. Within each location, firms
                                                                                  j (p)
are distributed over labor productivity p according to density function "M           j
                                                                                        with support in a
location-specific closed set [pj , p
                                   ¯j ] TM R . Each firm p in location j decides how many vacancies
                                            + 27

vj (p) to post, subject to a vacancy cost >j (v ), and what wage rate wj (p) to o er, determining
the endogenous distributions of wage o ers {Fj }j oeJ . Firms cannot discriminate between worker
types, hence they must o er identical wages per e ciency unit to all their workers.
      Matches in location j are created as a function of the total mass of applications filed by
workers, a ¯j , and vacancies posted by firms, v  ¯j , according to a matching function M (¯           ¯j ) =
                                                                                                  aj , v
   1                                                            ¯j
¯j v
a   ¯j . We define market tightness in location j as Ëj © a     v
                                                                ¯j
                                                                   . Thus, the rate at which a vacancy
is filled is Ëj , and the rate at which an application is accepted and becomes a job is Ë1
               
                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                              .
O ers are randomly drawn from the endogenous wage o er distributions {Fj }j oeJ .
      Upon receiving an o er from location x, workers draw idiosyncratic preference shocks for
locations x and j and decide whether to accept or decline the o er. Movers between j and x
incur a utility cost Yijx that captures any monetary and non-monetary one-time cost associated
with the move across locations, similar to Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019). Workers can
always separate from a match and engage in home production with a backyard technology
that has productivity per e ciency unit given by Rj . Workers separate into unemployment at
  26
    We omit the constant in the indirect utility.
  27
    Thus, "j (p) will integrate to the mass of firms in location j , Mj . This definition will simplify notation
below.


                                                      18
location-type-specific rate "j
                             i
                               and receive an unemployment benefit rate equal to bi
                                                                                  j per e ciency
unit when unemployed.
    We denote by lj  i
                       the measure of workers of type i employed per vacancy of a firm, and
      q
thus ioeI j lj is the measure of e ciency units of labor used by one vacancy. Vacancies can
            i i

produce any combination of the two goods according to the production functions c = pnc and
h = (pnh )1­ k ­ , where 0 < ­(1  ÷ ) < 1, and nc and nh are the e ciency units of labor per
                                                                            q
vacancy used in the production of the two goods, which satisfy nc + nh = ioeI j      lj . The term
                                                                                    i i

k is a factor that is in fixed supply, such as land, with aggregate supply in location j of Kj
and equilibrium price flj . Firms decide how to allocate labor across the production of the two
goods, taking prices in the output market as given.
    In our model, firms compete for all worker types in one unified labor market. That seems
an adequate description of the German labor market since we will define worker types based
on their home region below, and firms cannot explicitly hire only West Germans, for example.
Previous work with heterogeneous types (e.g. Moser and Engbom (2018)) assumes that the
labor market is segmented by type. In our framework, each firm posts a single wage rate wj (p),
which determines the composition of worker types it attracts.
    We next describe the equilibrium in the goods market, which pins down local price levels. We
then turn to the workers' and firms' optimization problems and the labor market equilibrium.

                                                                      q
Goods Market. Consider a firm that has hired nj (w) © ioeI j   lj (w) e ciency units of labor
                                                              i i

per vacancy by posting wage w. The firm's remaining problem is

                            ^j (w) = max pnc + Ph,j (pnh )1­ k ­  flj k
                            fi                                                                    (4)
                                     nh ,nc ,k

subject to nc + nh = nj (w). Standard optimization and market clearing conditions imply that
in equilibrium the relative price between any two locations j and x satisfies
                                         3           4­(1÷) 3        4­(1÷)
                               Pj            Pj Yj              Kj
                                  =                                           ,                   (5)
                               Px            Px Yx              Kx

where Pj Yj is the nominal output of location j . If more labor moves to location j , increasing
output Yj relative to Yx , then the relative local price index Pj /Px rises, due to the presence of
the fixed factor. As a result, there is local congestion as typical in spatial models (e.g. Allen and
Arkolakis (2014)). Substituting in the optimal choices and equilibrium price, we can simplify
^ (w) to
fi
                                                        ÿ
                                  ^j (w) = pnj (w) = p
                                  fi                        j lj (w).
                                                             i i
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                            ioeI

The firm's profits thus boil down to a linear expression in the total number of workers, as in
the standard Burdett-Mortensen framework. We provide details in Appendix D.1.


                                                      19
Workers. Workers choose search e ort for each location x, file applications, and randomly
and infrequently receive o ers from firms. Workers accept an o er if it provides higher expected
value than the current one. As is known, this class of models yields a recursive representation
(e.g., Burdett and Mortensen (1998)). We next derive the expected value of a job o er and the
value functions for employed and unemployed workers, respectively.
    Given an o er from a firm in location x paying wage wÕ , the acceptance decision of an
employed worker of type i earning wage w in location j solves

                                                  Ó                                                               Ô
                                      max Wji (w) + Áj ; Wx
                                                          i
                                                            (wÕ )  Yi
                                                                    jx + Áx ,

where Wji (w) is the value of employment at wage w in location j , Wx       i
                                                                              (wÕ ) is the value of
employment in location x at wage wÕ , and Yijx = 0 if j = x. The terms Áj and Áx are idiosyncratic
shocks drawn from a type-I extreme value distribution with zero mean and standard deviation
 , as in, for example, Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), which capture shocks to workers'
preferences for being in a specific location. These shocks simplify the model characterization
and computation. We assume that workers operating the backyard technology are subject to
the same shocks, which fixes a lower bound for wages in each location.
   Given the properties of the type-I extreme value distribution, the probability that an em-
ployed worker of type i accepts an o er is given by
                                                                                 1                        21
                                                                       exp            i
                                                                                     Wx   (w ) 
                                                                                            Õ
                                                                                                    Yi       

                                (w, w ) ©
                                                                                                     jx
                        µE,i
                         jx
                                             Õ
                                                              1              21                 1                           21
                                                      exp Wji (w)                 
                                                                                      + exp Wx
                                                                                             i (w Õ )  Yi
                                                                                                        jx
                                                                                                                                 




and the expected value of an o er is
                                                          3       1                  21             1                               21 4
                  E,i
                Vjx     (w, w ) ©  log exp
                                  Õ
                                                                      Wji   (w)       
                                                                                          + exp          i
                                                                                                        Wx   (w ) Õ
                                                                                                                            Yi
                                                                                                                             jx
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                            .

   Similarly, an unemployed worker of type i in location j receiving an o er wÕ from x solves

                                                      Ó                                                   Ô
                                         max Uji + Áj ; Wx
                                                         i
                                                           (wÕ )  Yi
                                                                   jx + Áx .
                                                                                                                      1          2
The probability of an unemployed worker accepting this o er is µU,i
                                                                jx bj , w , defined analogously
                                                                    i    Õ

to the acceptance probability of employed workers. The expected value of an o er is
                           1             2                    3        1         21             1                               21 4
                     U,i
                   Vjx         bi
                                j, w
                                     Õ
                                                 ©  log exp                Uji    
                                                                                      + exp          i
                                                                                                    Wx   (w ) Õ
                                                                                                                          Yi
                                                                                                                           jx
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                        .

    The discounted expected value of employment Wji (w) of a worker i earning wage w in location
j consists of the flow value of employment, wj  ·j /Pj , a continuation value for drawing new job
                                               i i

o ers from location x at rate ajx (sx ) Ëx , which is a function of the optimal search e ort sx ,
                                 i       1 



                                                                            20
and a continuation value for separating into unemployment at rate "j
                                                                   i


                i i
                                         A                        C^                                       D           B
              w j ·j             ÿ
                                                  1 
 rWji   (w) =        + max              jx (sx ) Ëx
                                       ai                                E,i
                                                                       Vjx     (w, w ) dFx (w ) 
                                                                                       Õ         Õ
                                                                                                     Wji (w)    Â (sx ) (7)
               Pj     { s  }
                          x xoeJ
                                 xoe J
                    Ë                È
             + "j
                i
                  Uji  Wji (w) .

Defining the expected value gain from location x as V  ¯jx
                                                         E,i
                                                             (w) © Vjx  (w, wÕ ) dFx (wÕ )  Wji (w),
                                                                  ´ E,i

replacing the functional forms for ai
                                    jx (·) and Â (·), and solving out the optimal search e ort of
a worker at wage w searching in location x, we get


                              i i
                            w j ·j     ` ÿ Ë i 1 ¯ E,i         È 1+`   Ë             È
             rWji (w) =            +             zjx Ëx Vjx (w) ` + "j
                                                                     i
                                                                         Uji  Wji (w) .                                 (8)
                             Pj      1 + ` xoe J
                                                   1          2
                       ¯jx
   Similar steps, with V U,i
                             (b) ©             U,i
                                                    j , w dFx (w )  Uj , yield the unemployment value:
                                                   bi    Õ      Õ    i
                                         ´
                                             Vjx

                                     bi  i i
                                      j j ·j      ` ÿ Ë i 1 ¯ U,i È 1+     `
                          rUji =             +<             zjx Ë Vjx (b) ` .                                           (9)
                                        Pj      1 + ` xoe J

   We denote by sE,i
                   jx (w ) and sjx (b) the optimal search e orts of an employed worker with wage
                                U,i

w and an unemployed worker with benefit b, respectively, that are currently in location j and
searching in location x. We define by aE,i jx (w ) and ajx (b) the associated mass of applications.
                                                        U,i

The total mass of applications filed for jobs in location j by workers of type i is then
                                             C^                                            D
                                     ÿ
                             ¯i
                             a j ©                aE,i
                                                   xj      (w) dEx
                                                                 i
                                                                   (w) +       aU,i
                                                                                xj    (b) ui
                                                                                           x ,
                                     xoe J


where Eji
          (w) is the mass of employed workers of type i at firms in location j receiving at most
                                                                                 q
w, with Ej i
                pj )) = ei
             (w(¯        j . The total number of applications by location is a
                                                                             ¯j © ioeI a
                                                                                       ¯ij.


Firms. Since the firms' production functions are linear, the firm-level problem of posting
vacancies and choosing wages can be solved separately. Employers choose the wage rate that
maximizes their steady state profits for each vacancy
                                                                       ÿ
                                     fij (p) = max (p  w)                       lj (w) ,
                                                                              i i
                                                                              j                                       (10)
                                                       w
                                                                       ioeI

         q
where p ioeI j lj (w) are the net revenues from the goods market from (6). As in the standard
              i i

Burdett-Mortensen setup, a higher wage rate allows firms to hire and retain more workers, but
cuts down the profit margin, p  w. The complementarity between firm size and productivity
implies that more productive firms o er a higher wage.

                                                              21
   Firms choose the number of vacancies by solving

                                       Íj (p) = max fij (p) Ëj v  >j (v ) ,
                                                              
                                                                                                                                        (11)
                                                         v


where fij (p) are the maximized profits per vacancy from (10). The overall size of a firm p in
location j is given by lj (wj (p))vj (p), where wj (p) is the profit-maximizing wage.
    Firms' vacancy posting policy gives the total mass of o ers posted in each location,

                                                              ¯j
                                                             ^p
                                           ¯j =
                                           v                       vj (p) "j (p) dp,                                                    (12)
                                                             p
                                                             j



and the wage policy gives the endogenous distribution of o ers

                                                                   ^
                                                                   pj (w )
                                            1
                                                                   ^
                                   Fj (w) =                                  vj (p) "j (p) dp,                                          (13)
                                            ¯j
                                            v
                                                                   p
                                                                    j


                  1
where p^j (w) © wj  (w) is the productivity of the firm paying wage w. This inverse of the wage
function exists since the wage function within a given location is strictly increasing as in the
standard framework.

Labor Market Clearing. To close the model, we need to describe how the distribution of
workers to firms is determined. We obtain the steady state value of lj
                                                                     i
                                                                       (w) from its law of motion

                                    ¯j i
                                    a
                                           i
                        lj
                         i
                           (w) = Ë    P (w)  qj
                                              i
                                                (w) lj
                                                     i
                                                       (w)                                    if w Ø Rj ,                               (14)
                                  j
                                    ¯j j
                                    a

and lj
     i
       (w) = 0 if w < Rj . The first term is the hiring rate, which consists of the product of three
endogenous terms: i) Ë j , the arrival rate of workers for vacancies posted in location j , which
                          

                                                                                             ¯i
is a decreasing function of the local market tightness Ëj ; ii) a
                                                                                             a
                                                                  j
                                                                 ¯j
                                                                    , the share of applications going
towards location j that is filed by workers of type i; and iii) Pj (w) oe [0, 1], the probability that
                                                                  i

an o er w posted in location j is accepted by workers of type i. Since there is random matching
within location, the acceptance probability is a weighted average of the acceptance probabilities
of workers of type i that are submitting applications to location j ,
                                  C^                                                                                            D
                      1 ÿ
            i
           Pj   (w) © i                 aE,i   (w   Õ
                                                        ) µE,i   (w     Õ
                                                                            , w) dEx
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       (w ) +
                                                                                         Õ
                                                                                                  aU,i   (b) µU,i   (b, w) ui       .   (15)
                      ¯ j xoe J
                      a                  xj                xj                                      xj         xj            x




                                                                    22
   The second term in (14) is the separation rate, where

                                                 ÿ
                                                                             ^
                         i
                        qj   (w) ©     i
                                      "j   +             Ë1  E,i
                                                          x ajx        (w)        jx (w, w ) dFx (w ) ,
                                                                                 µE,i     Õ        Õ
                                                                                                          (16)
                                                 xoe J


which consists of the exogenous separation rate into unemployment plus the rate at which
workers receive and accept o ers from other firms ­ i.e. poaching within and across locations.
   In steady state, the mass of workers per vacancy solves lj
                                                            i
                                                              (w) = 0, and thus

                                                                            ¯i
                                                            (w) Ë
                                                          i        j        a
                                                         Pj        ¯j
                                                                 j a
                                      i
                                     lj (w) =                                      if w Ø Rj              (17)
                                                                 i
                                                                qj (w)

and zero otherwise.
   The mass of employed workers i in location j at firms paying at most w satisfies

                                                          ^
                                                          p
                                                          ^j (w )

                                 i
                                Ej (w) =                          i
                                                                 lj (wj (z )) vj (z ) "j (z ) dz,         (18)
                                                           p
                                                            j



where lj
       i
         (w) is given by (17). The mass of unemployed workers is defined via the flow equation

                                                         i
                                                         u j = "j ej  Ïj uj ,
                                                                i i    i i



where Ïi
       j is the rate at which workers leave unemployment, given by

                                         ÿ
                                                                       ^
                               Ïi
                                j   =            Ë1  U,i
                                                  x ajx          (b)         jx (b, w ) dFx (w ) .
                                                                            µU,i     Õ        Õ

                                         xoe J


In steady state, the mass of unemployed workers is then
                                                                     i
                                                                    "j   ¯j
                                                          ui    © i      D i
                                                                             ,                            (19)
                                                           j
                                                                 Ïj + "j
                                                                       i


      ¯ i © ei + ui .
where D j    j    j



4.2    Stationary Equilibrium
As discussed, we focus on the steady state equilibrium of the economy, which we now define.

Definition 1: Stationary Labor Market Equilibrium. A stationary equilibrium in the
labor market consists of a set of wage and vacancy posting policies {wj (p) , vj (p)}j oeJ , search
       Ó                    Ô
e orts sE,i
         jx (w ) , sU,i
                    jx  (b )      , wage o er distributions {Fj (w)}j oeJ , acceptance probabili-
                              j oeJ,xoeJ,ioeI


                                                                       23
      Ó                                  Ô                                                                                                        Ó           Ô
      jx (w, w ) , µjx (b, w )
ties µE,i                                                      , labor per vacancy for each worker type lj (w)                                                                  ,
              Õ     U,i     Õ                                                                            i
                Ó      Ô                     j oeJ,xoeJ,ioeI                                                                                                       j oeJ,ioeI
unemployment ui
              j                      , and market tightness {Ëj }j oeJ such that
                        j oeJ,ioeI

  1. workers file applications and accept o ers to maximize their expected present discounted
     values taking as given tightness {Ëj }j oeJ and the wage o er distributions, {Fj (w)}j oeJ ;

  2. firms set wages to maximize per vacancy profits, and choose vacancies to maximize overall
                                                                          Ó      Ô
     firm profits, taking as given the function mapping wage to firm size, lj
                                                                            i
                                                                              (w)      ;
                                                                                                                                                      j oeJ,ioeI

  3. the arrival rates of o ers and wage o er distributions are consistent with aggregate appli-
     cations, vacancy posting, and wage policies, according to equations (10), (12) and (13);

  4. firm sizes and worker distributions satisfy the stationary equations (17), (18), and (19).

Our model does not admit an analytical solution. However, the following proposition shows
that the wage policies follow a system of di erential equations, which facilitates significantly
the computation of the model.

Proposition 1. The J location-specific equilibrium wage functions {wj (p)}j oeJ solve a system
of di erential equations

                                                                                        ^p
                                                                     1       2                   ^ wj (z )
                                        wj (p) = wj pj +                                                   "j (z ) dz
                                                                                                    ^z
                                                                                        p
                                                                                         j



                ~(p) © x(w(p)) for any x,
where, defining x
                                                                     Q                       ~ i (p)
                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                            ^P                          ~i (p)
                                                                                                                       ^q
                                                                         q                     j
                                                                                                     ~j
                                                                                                     q i (p)P   ~ i (p) j           ¯i
                                             (p  wj (p)) a                        i
                                                                             ioeI j
                                                                                              ^p
                                                                                                          ~ji (p)2
                                                                                                                  j      ^p
                                                                                                                                 Ë a
                                                                                                                                    ¯j
                                                                                                                                  j a
                                                                                                                                      jb

                      ^ wj (p)
                                                                                                          q
                               =                                      3                 ~i
                                                                                                                 4
                         ^p                                               q           i Pj (p)  a¯i
                                                                                 ioeI j q     Ë ¯j
                                                                                        ~i (p) j a j
                                                                                                 j



and
                                        ÿ
                                                                                           ~ Õ
                                                                      ^
               ~j
               q i
                     (p) ©    i
                             "j   +             Ë1 ~jx
                                                    E,i
                                                 x a           (p)             jx (z, z ) dFx (z )
                                                                             ~E,i
                                                                             µ         Õ

                                        xoe J
                                             C^                                                                                                   D
              ~j           1         ÿ
                                                                                             ~x
              P i
                     (p) © i                      ~E,i
                                                  a      (z    Õ
                                                                   )µ
                                                                    ~E,i     (z   Õ
                                                                                      , z ) dE i
                                                                                                     (z ) +
                                                                                                         Õ
                                                                                                                 aU,i       ~U,i
                                                                                                                        (b) µ         (b, p) ui
                          ¯j
                          a          xoe J
                                                    xj                xj                                          xj          xj              x


                                                                         1       2
together with J boundary conditions for wj pj satisfying
                                                         Y                                                                        Z
                                  1      2               ]                                   1               2ÿ                   ^
                           wj pj = max [Rj , arg max pj  w
                                                         ^                                                             lj (w
                                                                                                                     i i
                                                                                                                     j     ^ )\ .
                                                                             ^
                                                                             w                                ioeI


                                                                                 24
Proof. See Appendix D.2.

Comparison to Burdett-Mortensen. Our framework is a rich generalization of the bench-
mark Burdett-Mortensen model (see Mortensen (2005)). In the benchmark case ­ as is well
known ­ the equilibrium wage policy is as follows: the lowest productivity firm sets the min-
                                                                       1 2
imum wage that allows it to hire workers from unemployment, i.e. w p = b, and the wage
policy is an increasing and continuous function of productivity. Workers separate either exoge-
nously or upon receiving a job o er from any firm with a higher productivity. Lemma 1 shows
that our model collapses to the standard framework under the appropriate assumptions.

Lemma 1. If ai  jx (sx ) = 1 and Yjx = 0 for all i, j , and x, j = 1, ·j = ·j , "j = " , bj ·j Pj
                                  i                            i       i         i        i     1
                                                                                                  =^
                                                                                                   b,
and Rj ·j Pj1 = R ^ for all i and j , < = 1,  = 0, and  æ 0, then the ODEs for the wage
functions simplify to

                                                            ~(p)
                                    ^ (p)
                                   ^w       2 (p  w^ (p)) ^ q
                                          =                 ^p
                                    ^p           ~ (p)
                                                 q
where
                                      ~(p) = " + v
                                      q               ~ (p)]
                                                 ¯[1  F
                                         ~ (p) = E
                                         P       ~ (p) + u

and
                                                     ^
                                             ^ (p) = R,
                                             w

where w ^ © w·j Pj1 is the real wage in terms of utility, hence accounting for local amenities and
prices.

Proof. See Appendix D.3.

    Our setting generalizes the insights of the benchmark model, subject to some refinements.
First, since workers receive wage o ers from firms in any location, their decision to quit to
another firm no longer depends only on the wage o ered but instead on the overall value of
the job, reflected in the acceptance probability P~j
                                                   i
                                                     (p). Second, firms take into account that by
changing the posted wage rate they can a ect the composition of workers they attract. Within
a given type i-location j pair, the firm size depends only on the ranking of firms' wage o ers,
just as in the benchmark model. However, across locations and worker types, the level of the
wage is also relevant. While in principle this feature of the model can lead to discontinuities
in the wage policy, in practice the presence of the preference shocks preserves the continuity of
the wage function. Third, due to the presence of the stochastic shocks, the lowest productivity
firms might be willing to o er a higher or lower wage than the value of unemployment within


                                                 25
their location. Our solution bounds the minimum wage by Rj since the backyard technology is
subject to the same shocks as regular production.
    The framework closest to ours is Meghir, Narita, and Robin (2015), which builds a two-
sector Burdett-Mortensen framework. Crucially, however, their model does not consider switch-
ing costs between sectors, and assumes one unified labor market rather than multiple semi-
integrated local labor markets as in our framework. As a result, their model cannot be easily
adapted to study our research question.


5     Unpacking Spatial and Labor Market Frictions
Our model contains four frictions that could hinder the mobility of workers across space: i)
moving costs Yi  jx , as in spatial models with frictional labor mobility (e.g., Bryan and Morten
(2019), Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019)); ii) comparative advantage towards the home
location, governed by j    i
                             ; iii) location preference ·ji , as in migration models with home bias (e.g.,
Kennan and Walker (2011); Caliendo, Opromolla, Parro, and Sforza (2017)); and iv) di erences
in search e ciency across locations, governed by zjx           i
                                                                 . In addition, the model contains three
sources of general labor market frictions that prevent the most productive firms from hiring all
the workers within in a given location: i) vacancy posting costs, >j (v ); ii) costs faced by workers
to file applications, Â (s); and iii) preference shocks Á that limit the allocative power of wages.
     While all model parameters and frictions are jointly identified, we next provide a heuristic
argument to clarify how our data can be used to identify the di erent spatial frictions, taking
into account the presence of labor market frictions.


5.1     Overall Identification Strategy
To isolate the spatial frictions from the labor market frictions, we rely on the insight that the
labor market frictions directly impact the within-location moments as in the standard Burdett-
Mortensen model, while spatial frictions mostly a ect cross-location moments. Specifically,
labor market frictions impact the within-location job flows of workers and the within-location
wage gains of job movers, and therefore the joint distributions of firm sizes and wages. As a
result, they directly influence the market tightness, Ëj , the probability that within-location o ers
are accepted, µE,i
                 jj (·, ·), the distributions of wage o ers, Fj (·), the mass of employed workers,
Ej (·), and the mass of within-location applications, aE,i  jj (·) . In our empirical implementation
in Section 6, we target a rich set of within-location moments to discipline these endogenous
objects, and hence the labor market frictions, following a large literature on estimating Burdett-
Mortensen models (see, e.g., Bontemps, Robin, and Van den Berg (2000)). Conditional on the
labor market frictions, the cross-location moments help to isolate the spatial frictions.


                                                   26
5.2        Identifying the Spatial Frictions
We next show how di erent cross-location moments discipline the size of the spatial frictions.

Comparative Advantage: . The model, due to wage posting, yields a log additive wage
equation decomposing the wage into an individual-location e ect and a firm e ect

                                            log wj
                                                 i
                                                   (p) = log j
                                                             i
                                                               + log wj (p) .

This equation is similar to the specification by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), which
relates wages to an individual and a firm fixed e ect. The main di erence is that in our
specification the individual fixed e ect is location-specific. As we describe in Appendix E, we
can include additional dummies for workers not in their home location in the AKM regression
to identify the comparative advantage term.

Moving Costs and Location Preferences: · and Y. The key empirical moments that
help to pin down the moving costs and location preferences are the wage gains of cross-location
job-to-job movers. The average wage gain conditional on a move for an individual of type i,
employed in location j , and taking a job in location x is28
       Ë                            È                  1   2           1 2
  E log(wx x )  log(wj
         i i
                       j )
                     i i
                                        = log x
                                              i
                                                 log j
                                                     i
                                                       +                                                                         (20)
  ¸               °                           ¸                °             
       Average Observed Wage Gain              Comparative Advantage
                                Q                                                                    R
                            ^ c                                                                     d
                                                                        jx (w, w )
                                                                       µE,i                                  jx (w )
                                                                                                            aE,i
                              c^                                                Õ                   d
                                c
                                c       (log w  log w)
                                                   Õ
                                                                                           dFx (w ) d
                                                                                                 Õ
                                                                                                    d                  dEj
                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                           (w)     ,
                                c
                                a
                                        ¸              °                   ¯E,i
                                                                           µ jx   (w)      ¸ °  d
                                                                                                    b          ¯E,i
                                                                                                               a jx
                                              Wage Gain                ¸        °          O ers CDF       ¸          °      
                                                                      Rel. Prob. Accept                  Weighted Employment CDF


where a¯E,i       ajx (w) dEj (w) and µ
                                      ¯i,E
                                        jx (w ) ©   µjx (w, wÕ ) dFx (wÕ ) . Thus, the average wage
               ´ E,i        i
                                                  ´ i,E
         jx ©
gain depends on: i) whether the individual has comparative advantage towards location x
relative to j ; ii) which o ers she is willing to accept, as given by µi     jx (w, w ); iii) the o er
                                                                                     Õ

distribution in the destination location x, Fx (wÕ ); and iv) the employment distribution in the
origin location, weighted by the relative share of applications.
    Given o er distributions Fx (·), employment distributions Ej   i
                                                                     (w), and the share of applica-
                                        aE,i (w)
tions coming from each firm jx  ¯E,i
                                a
                                     , which are all mostly shaped by labor market frictions, as
                                  jx
well as an estimate of skills , the equation directly relates the moving costs Y and local pref-
erences · to the relative wage gains of cross-location movers. Consider the limiting case when
 æ 0 ­ i.e. there are no preference shocks. In that case, workers accept an o er if and only if
  28
     The flow utility of an individual i employed at a firm that pays wage w per e ciency unit in location j is
         1 i i
given by P  ·  w. However, the observed nominal wage is simply j
           j j j
                                                                    i
                                                                      w, since ·j
                                                                                i
                                                                                  does not enter into the wage.


                                                                      27
Wx i
     (wÕ )  Yi
             jx Ø Wj (w ) . Since the value functions are increasing, the cuto wage level w
                     i
                                                                                              ^jx
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                  (w)
at which an individual of type i employed in location j would accept an o er from location x
is an increasing function of w. An increase in Yi  jx , or a decrease in ·x , would raise this cuto
                                                                          i

wage for any level of w, since workers need to be compensated for the moving cost or the lower
utility received from income earned in location x. As the worker accepts only relatively better
o ers, the expected wage gain of a move increases in Yi    jx and decreases in ·x .
                                                                                i

     The identification argument relies on a key assumption of our model: individuals draw
random o ers from the same o er distribution Fx (·), irrespective of their current location. In
other words, firms cannot discriminate and post di erent wages for workers that are in di erent
locations, nor can workers direct their search e ort to specific firms within the location. As a
result, given Fx (·), which is mostly disciplined by within-location moments, the cross-location
moments allow us to pin down spatial frictions.
     Without further restrictions, we cannot separate the moving costs from the location pref-
erence parameters. In our empirical implementation, we will disentangle the two by assuming
that moving costs are identical for all worker types. Under this assumption, we can identify
the location preferences from the di erences in wage gains for individuals of di erent types that
make the same migration move.

Search E ciency: z . Given an estimate of the labor market frictions, as well as estimates
of skills, moving costs, and preferences (, Y, · ), we can recover the relative search e ciencies
from the relative job-to-job flows within and between locations. The rate at which workers of
type i currently employed in location j move towards a job in location x is given by
                                         S                                                              T
                   S                 T        Q                          R
                                            W^                                                          X
                                          X W                                     jx (w )
                                                                                 aE,i
                   W 1                         c
                                                 ^
                                                                          d                             X
      i
     Âjx       =   W Ë        ¯E,i
                              a           XW   c   µE,i (w, wÕ ) dFx (wÕ )d                 dEj
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                  (w)   X
                                                                                                        X(. 21)
                   U ¸x                   V W  a                          b
                                                                                    ¯E,i
                                jx          W        jx                                                 X
     ¸°                °        ¸°                 ¸     °       ¸ °                a
                    TightnessApplications
                                            U                    O er CDF
                                                                                      jx                V
   Quit Rate                                        Prob. Accept                ¸          °        
                                                                              Weighted Employment CDF


The quit rate is the product of the rate at which o ers arrive (first bracket) and the average
probability that an o er is accepted (second bracket). Since a      ¯E,i
                                                                     jx = zjx s ¯x , where s
                                                                              i E,i
                                                                                              ¯E,i
                                                                                               x   ©
  sjx (w) dEj   (w), a lower search e ciency zjx leads to lower job-job flows from location j to x,
´ E,i         i                               i

given the acceptance probability µjx (w, w ), which is not directly a ected by zjx
                                     E,i    Õ                                       i
                                                                                      itself.
    The argument relies on the same assumption as before: irrespective of their current location,
workers file job applications to the same labor market within each location. Thus, they draw
o ers from the same distributions and face the same job market tightness Ëx . Therefore, we
can compare job flows within and across locations to infer the implied search e ciencies.




                                                   28
Decrease x                                         Figure 5: Identifying Spatial Frictions
           i

Increase ijx
Decrease zjx
           i


                                            i
                                         w
                                         ^jx   (w ) E
                                      Decrease     zEW                                                                      Decrease zEW
                                                                                                                                       E
                              !                                                                                         "
                                   i
                                  zjx O ff
                                       sx 1ers  Accepted
                                                f                                                                           Offers Accepted
                                            x     x (w )
                                      Offers not Accepted                                     Decrease x i                  Offers not Accepted
                                     i
                                   zjx    1
                                               fx ( w )                                       Increase ijx
                                          x
                                                                                   E          Decrease zjx
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                     E
               Decrease x i                                                       zEW sW Decrease
                                                                                          W fW ( w x)
                                                                                                    i                                                               zEW sW   W fW   (w )
               Increase ijx         Decrease  E
                                             zEW                                                  Increase i
                                                                                                           jx                            ^jx
                                                                                                                                         w i
                                                                                                                                             (w )
                                                                                                E                                                                          E
               Decrease zjx
                          i         Offers Accepted       Decrease zEW
                                                                     E
                                                                                              w
                                                                                              ^EW    (w) zjx
                                                                                                  Decrease  i
                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                    zjx sx   1
                                                                                                                                                     fx ( w )
                                                                                                                                                                         w
                                                                                                                                                                         ^EW (w )
                                    Offers not Accepted   Offers Accepted                                                                    x
                                                          Offers not Accepted
                                                     w i
                                                     ^jx (wz
                                                           )EW
                                                             E
                                                               sW
                                                                                                    w                                        w i
                                                                                                                                             ^jx (w )
                                                                                                                                                                             w
                                                                              W fW     (w )
                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                   zEW sW    W fW    (w )
                                                                ^E
                                                                w              (w )
                              #     Decrease i E 1
                                              zEW
                                            zjx             EW
                                                sx x fx ( w )                                             w E
                                                                                                          ^EW (w )                   i
                                                                                                                                    zjx sx       1
                                                                                                                                                        fx ( w )




                                                                                           Decrease zjx
                                                                                           Increase jx
                                                                                           Decrease x
                                                                                                                                                 x
                                                              w
                                    Offers Accepted                                                         w

                                    Offers not Accepted




                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                      i


                                                                                                      i
                                                                                   E
                        Decrease x i                                              zEW sW             W fW       (w )
                        Increase ijx
                                                                                                E
                        Decrease zjx
                                   i                                                          w
                                                                                              ^EW (w )
                                                                                                   w
                                                                   zjx
                                                                    i




                                                                  i
                                                                w
                                                                ^jx (w )
                                                                       sx

                                                                                w
                                                                                ^jx
                                                                                  i
                                                                   x
                                                                   1




                                                           i           1
                                                          zjx sx                 fx ( w )
                                                                                    (w )




                                                                       x
                                                                   fx ( w )




Notes: Each panel shows the mass of job o ers with a given wage w that is generated by a unit of search e ort directed towards
location x from location j , Ë1x
                                 i
                                   zjx fx (w). Moving from panel (a) to panel (b) illustrates the e ect of an increase in spatial search
frictions (i.e. a decrease in zjx
                               i ) on the the distribution of accepted o ers; moving from panel (a) to panel (b) illustrates the e ect
                                                                                                                                                                   ! "
of either an increase in moving costs (Yi
                                        jx ) or a decrease in preferences for the destination location ·x .
                                                                                                        i




Summary of the Identification. Figure 5 illustrates how the search e ciency, moving costs,
and location preferences can be separetely identified. Each panel shows the mass of job o ers
with a given wage w that is generated by a unit of search e ort directed towards location x
from location j , Ë1
                   x zjx fx (w ). The accepted o ers, assuming again that  æ 0, are at the right
                      i
                                                                   1
of w^jx
     i
        (w), and hence the mass of job flows per1 unit of search e ort is the integral under the
wage o er density to the right of w ^jx
                                     i 1
                                        (w). Going from panel (a) to (b), a decrease in the search
e ciency zjx reduces the mass of o ers received, and hence the worker flows. For comparison,
            i

panel (c) shows the e ect of a decline in the worker's preference for location x, ·xi
                                                                                      , which shifts
                          1
the acceptance location to the right (a similar argument applies for the moving cost). This
shift changes the average wage1 gain. Since · and Y also a ect worker1     flows across locations,
we need both flows and wage gains to separate the e ect of the search e ciency from location
preferences and moving costs.                  1                                  1



5.3       Discussion of Model Assumptions
Our identification argument is based1 on two assumptions that are at the core of the Burdett
and Mortensen (1998) framework: wage posting and random search.
   The wage posting protocol implies that firms
                                            1
                                                cannot discriminate based on workers' type or
current location. This assumption is supported by recent evidence that shows that the outside
option has a very limited e ect on workers' wages (Jäger, Schoefer, Young, and Zweimüller


                                                                                                          29
(2020)) and that, conditional on the current firm, a worker's previous firm has almost no e ect
on current wages (Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019)). Nonetheless, we note that under a
di erent wage setting method what we infer as a lower skill level of a given type i could represent
some type of discrimination from firms, rather than a lower level of human capital. Similarly,
larger wage gains for movers between locations could be driven by firms o ering wage premia to
compensate workers that have to migrate to accept a job o er. In our framework, these premia
would be identified as moving costs as long as they are common across workers.
    Random search within location implies that, for any given application, workers are equally
likely to draw o ers from each firm in the distribution. Since we do not observe o ers received,
this is an unverifiable assumption. It a ects the interpretation of the search e ciencies zjx    i
                                                                                                   .
For example, lower observed flows from location j to location x could be driven not by a low
search e ciency, but, for example, by workers i employed in location j being more likely to
sample from the left tail of the distribution in location x. While our assumption is strong, it
does not a ect the overall interpretation of zjx
                                               i
                                                 : whether workers receive fewer or worse o ers
from a particular location, they still have a hard time accessing job opportunities, hence a low
search e ciency. A related assumption of our model is that only workers can direct their search
e ort towards locations, while firms cannot post vacancies targeted to a specific labor market.
This is an identifying assumption driven by the fact that, given our data, we cannot distinguish
between firms' or workers' behavior in generating matches.


6     Estimation
We use simulated method of moments to estimate our model for the German labor market.
First, we discuss how we parametrize the model and present the parameters that are directly
calibrated outside of the model. Next, we discuss the targeted moments and describe our
estimation algorithm. Finally, we present the model fit and the estimation results.


6.1    Parametrization and Calibrated Parameters
Solving the model requires the computation of several endogenous and interrelated distributions.
To keep the problem tractable, we limit the number of locations to four, two in the West and two
in the East. Analogously, we choose four worker types, which are distinguished by their home
location. This is the minimum number of locations and types that allows us to distinguish the
role of the former East-West border from more general local identity and migration frictions.
Going forward, we will continue to refer to East and West Germany as "regions", as in the
empirical section. The four locations we use  Northwest (j = N W ), Southwest (j = SW ),
Northeast (j = N E ), and Southeast (j = SE )  combine federal states so that, within the


                                                30
East and within the West, each has approximately the same number of workers. Appendix F
provides further details.
    Even with four locations and types, the model entails a very large number of parameters.
We thus directly calibrate all the ones that have an empirical counterpart and, facing the usual
trade-o between model flexibility and parsimony, we choose functional forms and structural
restrictions, explained below, to reduce the total number of estimated parameters to 21.

Functional Forms. We set a unit interval of time to be one month.29 Firms' log productivity
is drawn from a log-normal distribution with equal variance in all locations, , and mean Aj .
We normalize AN W = 1 and refer to Aj as the relative aggregate productivity in location j .
                                                                         >1
                                                                     >
    We parametrize the vacancy cost function as >j (v ) = 1+ 0,j
                                                               >1
                                                                         ¯j (p), where >0,j and >1 are
                                                                  v 1+>1 fi
parameters to be estimated, and fi
                                ¯j (p) is the average firm profit in location j . This parametriza-
tion implies that the equilibrium mass of vacancies posted by a firm with productivity p is
              1     2   1
                  j (p) >1
vj (p) = >0,j fi
               ¯j (p)
               fi
                           . We assume that the curvature >1 is constant across locations but allow
>0,j to be specific to the overall region ­ i.e. we estimate >0,W and >0,E .
                                                              1 1 22
     We fix the unemployment benefits bi   j so that Uj = Wj wj pj
                                                      i     i
                                                                       . Under this assumption our
                                                                                                    1   2
model simplifies to the standard Burdett and Mortensen (1998) formulation, with wj pj = Rj ,
once we remove preference shocks and spatial frictions.
     Finally, we set the backyard technology to Rj = ÿpj , where ÿ Æ 1 determines how profitable
it is to set up a firm since Rj provides a lower bound on workers' wages.

Spatial Frictions. We interpret the moving cost as an opportunity cost of foregone wages
(Sjaastad (1962)), and assume that the moving cost of a given worker type is symmetric and
proportional to her average value, Yi   jx = Y
                                                   ¯ i , where W
                                              ^ jx W           ¯ i = 1i qj oeJ Wji (w) dEj
                                                                                         i
                                                                                           (w) and
                                                                              ´
                                                                     e
      q
e © j oeJ ej . Otherwise, if Yjx were a constant for all i, then the moving cost would be more
 i          i                  i

binding for East-born workers since these have on average lower wages at any firm, as we show
below.
    We assume that Y^ jx is equal to zero within each location and that it is a symmetric function
of distance between locations j and x, identical for all workers,
                                              Y
                                              ]0
                                              _
                                                               if j = x
                                       ^ jx = _
                                       Y                                   .
                                              [Y0 eY1 distjx   if j "= x

The symmetry across worker types is important for identification because it loads all asymme-
tries on the preference parameter ·ji .
  29
    For example, we measure empirically the average probability that a worker moves into unemployment during
a month, call it P robu , and then ­ since the model is in continuous time ­ we can recover the Poisson rate " at
which unemployment shocks arrive such that P robu = 1  e" .


                                                       31
   We specify worker preferences ·ji to be the product of three terms:


                                            1                                  21                     2
                       ·ji =       ·j           1  ·l I(i"=j )fl(r(i)=r(j ))        1  ·r Ir(i)"=r(j ) ,
                                  ¸° ¸                      °                  ¸           °          
                                Amenities          Home Location Bias              Home Region Bias


where ·j captures general amenities of location j , ·l captures a worker's utility cost to live
outside of her home location but inside her home region, and ·r is the cost to live outside the
home region, where r(i) maps locations to regions. This specification allows individuals to value
both their home location and their overall home region, i.e., East or West Germany.
   We specify the search e ciency zjx
                                    i
                                       to be a function of both geography and identity:
                      Y
                      ](1  zl,1 Ii"=j )
                      _
                                                                                                      if j = x
               i
              zjx =    1              2               1                            2                              .
                      _
                      [ z0 ez1 distjx (1 + zl,2 Ii=x ) 1 + zr I(r(i)=r(x))fl(i"=x)                    if j "= x

In the first expression, which governs within-location moves, the parameter zl,1 captures that
workers might be less e ective in filing applications when they are away from their home location.
In the second expression, which governs across-location moves, the parameters z0 and z1 allow
workers' search e ciency to decay with distance. The parameters zl,2 and zr allow workers'
search e ciency to be relatively higher towards their home location, if zl,2 Ø 0, and region, if
zr Ø 0.
    To reduce the number of parameters to be estimated we make two further assumptions. First,
we restrict AN E = ASE since average wages and GDP per capita are similar in the Northeast
and the Southeast, see Appendix F. Second, matching this assumption, we assume that local
amenities are the same, ·N E = ·SE = ·E . In our estimation below, we show that despite these
restrictions, we match well the location-specific moments of the Northeast and Southeast.

Calibrated Parameters. We calibrate eight sets of parameters, which we discuss briefly
here. We provide more details on how they are computed in Appendix G.
     We compute the mass of firms in each location, Mj , from the BHP data. We obtain the
                                        ¯ i , based on the population shares in 1991 from the the
share of workers born in each location, D
Growth Accounting of the States (Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung der Länder, VGRdL)
since the LIAB data start only in 1993 and are not nationally representative. More than 80%
of firms are in West Germany, and 76% of the workers are born there. Within the East and the
West, the North and the South have roughly equal sizes.
     We assume that the separation rates "j   i
                                                depend only on the work location j and set them
equal to the monthly probabilities, computed in the LIAB data, that workers separate into
unemployment or permanent non-employment (i.e. either retired or dropping out of the labor


                                                             32
force).
    To set the price levels Pj , we take the prices from the BBSR (2009) for each state and
compute a population-weighted average across all the states within each of the locations.
    Interpreting the fixed factor in the model as land, we set ­ (1  ÷ ) equal to 5%, which is
the estimate of the aggregate share of land in GDP for the United States, see Valentinyi and
Herrendorf (2008). We are not aware of estimates for Germany. It is worthwhile to note that
­ (1  ÷ ) does not a ect the estimation of the model since we feed in the local price levels
directly. It is only relevant for the general equilibrium counterfactuals.
    We assume that the matching function has constant returns to scale - as standard in the
literature, see Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001) - and puts equal weight on applications and
vacancies,  = 0.5. The value of  only a ects the parameters of the vacancy costs and does
not influence the other parameters in the estimation procedure, as it is not separately identified
from >0,j and >1 .
    Since individuals in our model are infinitely lived, the interest rate r accounts for both
discounting and rates of retirement or death. We pick a monthly interest rate equal to 0.5%.
    Finally, we estimate workers' skills j   i
                                               using the augmented-AKM regression described in
Appendix E. Our estimation indicates that workers do not have regional comparative advan-
tages, and therefore we set j   i
                                  = i for all j . We recover {i }ioeI as the average individual fixed
e ects of workers with home location i, and we find that conditional on age, gender, and school-
ing, West-born workers earn, within the same firm, nearly 10% higher wages. The di erences
between locations within the East and within the West are small.
    A recent literature has shown several concerns related to the estimation of second moments
in AKM regressions.30 For our application, these concerns do not apply since we focus on first
moments, which are unbiased (Andrews, Gill, Schank, and Upward (2008)).


6.2       Targeted Moments and Identification
We are left with 21 parameters that we jointly estimate through simulated method of moments.
We target the 305 moments shown in Table 3. The table indicates the appendices where we list
the values of the moments and provide details on how each moment is constructed. The table
also lists the parameters that are primarily pinned down by each set of moments, as we describe
below through an heuristic identification argument.

Identification of Parameters and Choice of Moments. The spatial frictions are disci-
plined by the wage gains of job-to-job movers and the worker flows across firms within and
across locations, as discussed. Therefore, we target the 64 wage gains and 64 rates of job flows,
by type i, location of current firm j , and location of destination firm x (rows 1 and 2 of Table 3).
  30
       See Andrews, Gill, Schank, and Upward (2008, 2012); Bonhomme, Lamadon, and Manresa (2019).

                                                    33
Since the model is in steady state, the size of the spatial frictions together with firms' vacancy
costs determine labor demand and supply in each location. Therefore, we also target the distri-
bution of employed and unemployed workers across locations and the firm component of wages
in each location and for each type relative to (i, j ) = (N W, N W ) (rows 3, 4 and 5). Overall,
                                                      Ó Ô                      Ó Ô
these moments help us to pin down the preferences ·ji , search e ciencies zjx    i
                                                                                    , moving costs
Ó        Ô
   jx , and vacancy costs {>j }.
  Yi
     The productivity shifters {Aj } are mainly related to the relative average wage paid by firms
in each location, since a higher productivity leads firms, everything else equal, to o er higher
wages. A higher productivity is also reflected in a higher relative GDP per worker, which we
target as well (rows 6 and 7). The local unemployment rates (row 8) allow us to identify the
relative search intensity from unemployment < , given the separation rates that we calibrated
directly.
     As described, our model needs to be consistent with the joint distributions of firm wage and
size, Gi j (w ), in each location. Therefore, we target the share of employment in each decile of the
firm size distribution (row 9) and the relationship between firm wage and size (row 10). These
moments are relevant to discipline firms' vacancy costs {>j } since lower posting costs imply that
more labor is concentrated at the most productive firms. The moments also help determine the
variance of the firm productivity since the variance of wages increases in .
     The variance of taste shocks  governs how directed workers' moves are. As  æ OE, the
idiosyncratic preference shocks dominate workers' acceptance decisions and workers become
equally likely to accept o ers that give a wage increase or decrease. The cost of search e ort
` modulates the relationship between workers' search intensity and the value of employment
at their current firm. When ` æ OE, workers search at equal intensity irrespective of their
current job's value, while for any ` < OE workers in low paying jobs search more intensively. To
separately identify  and `, we target the relationship between workers' wage and their wage
gains upon a job-to-job move (row 11), and the relationship between workers' separation rates
(including job-to-job moves) and their wage (row 12). The former increases in  , while the latter
increases in `.31 We also target the standard deviation of the job-to-job wage gains by type i,
location of the current firm j , and location of the destination firm x (row 13). This standard
deviation is increasing in  because a high  makes workers more likely to accept o ers with a
negative wage change.
     Finally, the ratio of firms' profits to labor costs (row 14) helps us to pin down the productivity
of the backyard technology ÿ. Since workers have the possibility to leave employment and get
ÿpj , a larger ÿ implies that workers need to be compensated more and firms' profits are lower.
    31
         Both relationships are negative, hence when they increase, they become less steep.




                                                          34
Computing the Moments. While all moments have a clear correspondence between the
model and the data, there are two conceptional issues that arise in their empirical computation.
    First, we need to decide which controls to add in the empirical regressions that construct
the moments. In our model, di erences across firms in size and wages are purely driven by
di erences in productivity and by labor market frictions. We thus want to control for other
sources of empirical variation that may be a ecting firm size and wage but that are not in
our model. For this reason, when calculating the moments for the joint distributions of firm
wage and size, we control for industry dummies and for a set of demographic controls that
capture the composition of the labor force along observable characteristics (but not birth place,
of course, since it is a key variable in the model). Similarly, when we calculate the wage gains
for individuals that make a job-to-job move, we control for age, gender, and education to avoid
for example capturing the fact that young individuals might be more likely to move across firms.
Further details on all the controls are in Appendix G.
    Second, we need to take a stand on how to define a cross-location move for the estimation.
While we do not introduce separate residence and work location choices in the model to keep it
tractable, a sizable share of individuals in our data report to be working in a location di erent
from their residence.32 As a result, we face a trade-o . Defining cross-location movers as only
those workers that change the location of their job and update their residence, similar to the
cross-region definition in Section 3, could overestimate the search frictions and moving costs
since some of the received o ers lead workers to commute rather than migrate. On the other
side, including all job-to-job moves regardless of residence could underestimate the frictions since
commuters most likely do not pay the same fixed costs of relocating as migrants. Moreover,
some movers report to be already living in the location of their new job, and hence are in fact
reducing their commuting cost as a result of the move.
    To strike a balance between these concerns, our baseline definition of a cross-location move
includes all movers that change their work location and update their residence, similar to Section
3, plus all cross-location moves that take the worker further away from her current residence
as long as the worker's residence remains within 200km of her job.33 To be consistent with
this definition we target the distribution of labor in rows 3, 4, and 5 of Table 3 using workers'
residence location, as it more closely reflects the way in which we define a cross-location move.
    In Supplemental Appendix P, we re-estimate our model with two alternative definitions of
cross-location moves: first, the broadest possible definition by defining all job changes across
locations as cross-location moves, regardless of residence. In this alternative, we target the
distribution of labor using individuals' work location rather than their residence. Second, we re-
  32
     About 7% of workers work in a location di erent from their residence.
  33
     As mentioned in Section 2, the living location is self-reported and subject to misreporting. We therefore
exclude individuals that report to be living far away from their job as it is likely that these observations are
misreported.


                                                      35
estimate the model with the narrow definition of only workers who update their residence when
they move. Appendix F provides statistics on the number of movers and their distance. The
estimation results are broadly consistent across the three alternatives, with the main di erence
being that, as expected, the estimated search frictions and moving costs in our benchmark
estimation lie between the two alternatives.

Estimation. Proposition 1 allows us to solve the model in just a few seconds despite its high
dimensionality. Appendix H provides further details on the solution algorithm. Our estimation
algorithm is otherwise standard: we solve for a vector of parameters ,, satisfying
                                                    ÿË                              È
                                 ,,ú = arg min                            ^ x ))2
                                                         Êx (T (mx (,,) , m
                                            ,,oeF   x


where T (·) is the log di erence between the model, {mx (,,)}, and data, {m ^ x }, moments, unless
the moments are in logs. In this latter case, T (·) is the di erence expressed as a percentage of
the empirical moment. We also pick a weighting vector, {Êx }, so that each row of moments in
Table 3 receives the same weight.34 Otherwise, rows that are by origin-destination-type would
receive higher weight than moments that are by region only. For example, we have 64 moments
for standard deviation of wage gains, but we only have three for the GDP di erences across
regions. Our procedure assigns to the GDP di erences 64    3
                                                             times more weight.


6.3     Model Fit
The model provides a good fit to the data along several dimensions: most importantly, the
model closely matches the key moments that help to identify the spatial frictions ­ the wage
gains associated with the di erent types of job-to-job moves, and the frequency of job flows
within and across locations. The left panel of Figure 6 plots the wage gains of job-to-job movers
in the data against those in the model (from row 1 of Table 3).35 Each dot is for one of the 64
di erent types of moves by origin-destination-home location, which we color code by direction
and type of worker. The dots are close to the 45 degree line, indicating a good fit. As in the
data, the model generates larger wage gains for moves towards the West (blue symbols), for
within-region moves away from the home location (gray stars) and for moves away from the
home region, in particular to the West (blue stars). The right panel presents a similar plot
for the monthly share of movers in all employed workers (from row 2). As in the data, in our
model individuals are more likely to move within-location (gray circles) and to move back to
their home location and region (diamonds) than away from home (stars).
  34
      Details are in Appendix H. Crucially, Figure A5 shows that all parameters seem to be properly estimated,
at least based on the likelihood being locally single-peaked.
   35
      For brevity, we present the model fit in figures in the main draft. In Supplemental Appendix Q, we list all
the targeted and estimated moments explicitly.


                                                          36
                                                Table 3: Targeted Moments

                       Moments                           N      Source            Model Fit              Key Parameters
                                                                                                           ) i* )              *
  (1)    Wage gains of job-job moves, by (i, j, x)       64   Sect G.2.1            Fig 6                   ·j ;         Yi
                                                                                                                          jx
                                                                                                           )       *
  (2)    Frequency of job flows, by (i, j, x)            64   Sect G.2.2            Fig 6                       i
                                                                                                               zjx ; {>j }
                                                                                                        ) i* )           *
  (3)    Employment shares, by (i, j )                   16   Sect G.2.3           Fig A6                 ·j ;      i
                                                                                                                   zjx ; {>j }
                                                                                                        ) i* )           *
  (4)    Unemployment shares, by (i, j )                 16   Sect G.2.4           Fig A6                 ·j ;      i
                                                                                                                   zjx ; {>j }
                                                                                                            ) i*
  (5)    Firm component of wages, by (i, j )             15   Sect G.2.5           Fig A6                      ·j ; {Zj }
  (6)    Average firm component of wages, by j           3    Sect G.2.6           Fig A6                         {Zj }
  (7)    Relative GDP per worker, by j                   3    Sect G.2.7           Fig A6                         {Zj }
  (8)    Unemployment rates, by j                        4    Sect G.2.8           Fig A6                           <
  (9)    Deciles of firm-size distributions, by j        40   Sect G.2.9           Fig A7                     , `, {>j }
  (10)   Slope of wage vs firm size relationship, by j   4    Sect G.2.10   Table A29 and Fig A8                  , {>j }
  (11)   Slope of J2J wage gain vs firm wage, by j       4    Sect G.2.11   Table A29 and Fig A8                  , `,
  (12)   Slope of separation rate vs firm wage, by j     4    Sect G.2.12   Table A29 and Fig A8                  , `
  (13)   Std of job-job wage gains, by (i, j, x)         64   Sect G.2.13   Table A29 and Fig A9                  ,
  (14)   Profit to labor cost ratio, by j                4    Sect G.2.14         Table A29                         ÿ

Notes: The table reports the moments used in the estimation. The column titled "N" lists the number of moments in the group.
Column "Source" links to the appendix section where the moment is computed, and column "Model fit" lists the table or figure
that compares the empirical moment to the model-computed moment. The last column lists the key parameters that are pinned
down by each set of moments.



    We discuss the fit of all other moments in Appendix I, and we summarize here the main
takeaways.
    The model matches well the steady state distributions of workers and the average GDP,
wages, and unemployment rates by location, consistent with the hypothesis that the German
labor market is in a steady state. Higher productivity firms o er higher wages to increase their
size, leading workers to climb a job ladder and to separate with higher probability from low
productivity firms. This core mechanism allows the model to do a reasonable job in matching the
empirical joint distribution of firm wages, sizes, and separation rates, as well as the standard
deviations of the wage gains of job movers and firms' profit shares. The model somewhat
overestimates the relationship between firm wage and firm size, and generates a smaller standard
deviation of wage gains of movers than the data. These results are possibly expected: in the
model, wage dispersion across firms is purely generated by labor market frictions, while in
the data there may be other sources of wage dispersion that our empirical controls are not
capturing.36
    Overall, the model displays a good fit. Several structural restrictions imposed by the model
on the joint distributions of firm wages, employment, wage gains, and labor flows are satisfied
in the data, building confidence in our estimated spatial frictions, which we discuss next.
   36
     In Figure A9, we show that adding individual fixed e ects in wage growth brings the empirical estimates for
the standard deviations of wage growths very close to the model's ones. In Figure A8 we show the non-parametric
relationships for the moments in rows 10, 11, and 12 of Table 3.


                                                               37
                                       Figure 6: Wage Gains and Frequency of Job Flows

                                               Wage Gains                                                             Labor Flows
                      0.35
                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                 10

                        0.3


                      0.25


                        0.2                                                                      10 -3
              Model




                                                                                         Model
                      0.15


                        0.1
                                                                                                 10 -4
                                                                                                                                To West, Back Home
                      0.05                                                                                                      To West, Away from Home
                                                                                                                                To East, Back Home
                                                                                                                                To East, Away from Home
                          0                                                                                                     Within Location
                                                                                                                                Within Region, Back Home
                                                                                                                                Within Region, Away from H
                      -0.05                                                                           -5
                                                                                                 10
                          -0.05   0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35                     10 -5   10 -4               10 -3                 10 -2
                                                   Data                                                                  Data

Notes: The left panel shows the average wage gains of di erent types of job-to-job moves in the data (x-axis) against the average
wage gains in the model (y-axis). The right panel shows the frequency of each type of job-to-job move in the data (x-axis) against
the frequency in the model (y-axis). Di erent types of moves are identified by a mix of colors and symbols, listed in the right panel.
In total, there are 64 possible types of moves by origin location, destination location, and home location. The data moments are
listed in Appendix G.2.1 and G.2.2. Gray symbols are moves within-region, blue symbols are moves to the West, and red symbols
are moves to the East. Diamonds symbolize cross-location moves within-region back to the home location (in gray) or cross-region
moves back to the home region (blue or red). Stars symbolize cross-location moves within-region away from the home location (in
gray) or cross-region moves away from the home region (blue or red). Gray circles are moves within-location.



6.4        Estimation Results
Table 4 presents the spatial frictions estimated by the model. Row (1) reports the estimated
one-time moving costs as a fraction of the present discounted value of income, Y ^ jx . Since these
costs vary with distance, we present a range of costs for moves between the closest two locations
and moves between the farthest two locations. Our estimates indicate moving costs in the range
of 3  5% of the PDV of income, implying that an individual earning a yearly salary of 36,000Ä
for a work life of 45 years faces a moving cost of between 17,453 Ä and 29,704 Ä.37
    Rows (2) and (3) show strong preferences for living in the home location and region. A
worker employed not in her home location but still in her home region would need to be paid,
in real terms, about 7.4% more than in her home location to obtain the same utility. Moving
away from both home location and region requires a yearly compensation almost 10% higher.
    Both the estimated migration and preference costs are an order of magnitude smaller than
previous estimates in the literature (see Kennan and Walker (2011); Bryan and Morten (2019))
for two main reasons: first, our estimation identifies these costs by comparing the wage gains
of cross-location movers to those of within-location job-to-job movers. Since any cross-location
move is also a move between firms, we should expect migrants to experience a wage increase
even in the absence of moving costs, simply due to general frictions in the labor market. Only
the di erence between across- and within-location wage gains reflects moving costs. Second,
   37
        We discount at the model interest rate of 0.5% per month.



                                                                                    38
our framework allows us to distinguish between moving costs and search frictions. A lack of
movement away from the home location can either be due to migration and preference costs or
due to a lack of job opportunities resulting from search frictions.
    Rows (4) and (5) report the estimated search e ciencies, relative to the within-home location
level, which is normalized to 100%. Individuals that are in a location away from home and
search within that location are slightly less e ective than at home, filing only about 90% as
many applications per unit of search e ort as at home (row 4). More importantly, however,
all individuals have a much lower search e ciency for cross-location searches (row 5). Since
the search e ciency depends on distance, we again provide a range for searches between the
two closest locations and between the two farthest locations. Row (5.i) shows that one unit of
search e ort used to search across locations in the non-home region translates into filing only
about 1/20th as many applications as in the home location. Cross-location searches directed
towards the home region, but not to the home location, are only slightly more e ective (5.ii).
Row (5.iii) shows that the search e ciency has a sizable home bias: one unit of search e ort
by workers currently away from their home location that is directed towards the home location
generates 24.11% to 17.22% as many applications as searches within the home location. Hence,
workers searching across locations are about four times as e cient in searching in their home
location than in their non-home region, possibly due to stronger social connections (Bailey,
Farrell, Kuchler, and Stroebel (2020), Burchardi and Hassan (2013)). These results show that
search frictions play an important role in hampering labor market integration.
    To illustrate more formally the importance of search frictions, we decompose the variance of
                                                      Ë        È
workers' log job-to-job flows from equation (21), Var log Âjxi
                                                                 , into variation due to di erences
                                      Ë        È
in workers' search e ciency, Var log zjx   i
                                              , and variation due to the remaining endogenous com-
ponents. These endogenous components explain only approximately 21% of the variance of
         38

log flows for all the pairs (j, i, x). The remaining empirical variance is due to the large estimated
di erences in the search e ciency.
    We present all 21 estimated parameters in Appendix H. While the main parameters of inter-
est are those related to the spatial frictions, it is worthwhile to mention that unemployed workers
have approximately six times the search intensity of employed workers and that the estimated
application cost is quite convex, making it very costly to improve labor market outcomes simply
by searching more intensively.
    We present the estimated parameters for the alternative definitions of cross-location moves
  38
      From equation (21), we can write log Âjx
                                             i
                                                = log zjx i       ~i where log z i is the search e ciency and
                                                            + log Â
                     3 1                       2 aE,i (w)        4 jx           jx

    ~ © Ë
log Â i     1 
               ¯jx
                 E,i
                           µjx (w, w ) dFx (w ) a
                            E,i     Õ        Õ
                                                          dEj (w) is the endogenous component given by the
                                                            i
                      ´  ´                        jx
      jx    x  s                                   ¯E,i
                                                    jx
matching rate, the
                 # search$ intensity
                                  # and   $the acceptance
                                                  #                   # We can then
                                                            $probability.           $ decompose the variance
                                                                                                       #      of
                                                                                                               $
job flows as Var log Âjx
                      i
                           = Var log zjx
                                       i
                                             + Var log Â                       ~i . We find that Var log Â
                                                       ~i + 2Cov log z i , log Â                           ~i
                                   #       $             jx               jx     jx                         jx
explains 21% of the variance, Var log zjx
                                        i
                                             38%, and the remaining 41% is due to the covariance term.



                                                         39
                                        Table 4: Estimated Spatial Frictions

  Moving Costs {Y}
  (1)   Moving cost as share of PDV of income: Y0 eY1 distjx (b/w closest to b/w furthest locations)                      3.12% to 5.31%


  Preferences {· }
  (2)   Cost of not living in the home location but in the home region, as share of income: ·l                                7.41%
  (3)   Cost of not living in the home region, as share of income: ·r                                                         9.88%


  Relative Search E ciency {z }
  (4)   w/i location, away from home location: 1  zl,1                                                                       90.52%
                                                        5.i) not to home region: z0 ez1 distjx                            6.10% to 4.95%
                                                                                !                  "
  (5)   b/w locations (closest to furthest locations)   5.ii) to home region:       z0 ez1 distjx (1 + zr )               7.32% to 5.23%
                                                                                     !                   "!          "
                                                        5.iii) to home location:         z0 ez1 distjx    1 + zl,2       24.11% to 17.22%



Notes: The table shows the estimated values of the spatial frictions. All parameters used to compute them, according to the
formula included in each row, are in Table A28. Row 1 provides a range of the estimated moving costs, ranging from costs for
moves between the closest two locations to moves between the furthest two locations. Rows 2-3 present the values of the estimated
preference parameters. Search e ciencies in rows 4 and 5 are expressed as a percentage of the e ciency within the home location,
 j
zjj , which is normalized to 1. Rows 5i-5iii show the e ciencies for searching across locations outside of the home region, in the
home region but not the home location, and in the home location, respectively. The e ciencies are again reported as a range for
searching between the two closest locations to searching between the two furthest locations.



in Supplementary Appendix P. When we define cross-location moves including all job switches,
the model estimates moving costs roughly one quarter as large and a search e ciency towards
the home location that is roughly twice as high as in the baseline to match the higher worker
mobility. On the other hand, with our narrower definition using only workers that update their
residence, estimated moving costs double and the search e ciency towards home approximately
halves.
    In Supplementary Appendix R, we further explore one potential source of home preferences
using the SOEP. We show that workers' likelihood of moving back home increases sharply after
the birth of a child, possibly highlighting the importance of family ties.


7       Spatial Frictions' Aggregate and Distributional E ects
We use the estimated model to study the aggregate costs of spatial frictions and their role in
generating earnings inequality between East- and West-born individuals. Beyond the specific
German context, the discussion clarifies the mechanism through which di erent spatial frictions
impact the economy.
   Our analysis is motivated by Figure 7, which shows the model-generated CDFs of real wages
per e ciency unit, wj (p) Pj1 , by location of the firm (Fig. 7a) and by home location of the



                                                                40
                                                 Figure 7: Wage Distributions by Work and Birth Regions
                                                   (a) Work Location                                                                 (b) Home Location

                                      1                                                                                 1
                                                 NW, Benchmark                                                                     NW Born, Bench.
                                     0.9         SW, Benchmark                                                         0.9         NE Born, Bench.
                                                 NE, Benchmark                                                                     SW Born, Bench.
                                     0.8         SE, Benchmark                                                         0.8         SE Born, Bench.


                                     0.7                                                                               0.7
              Labor with wages < x




                                                                                                Labor with wages < x
                                     0.6                                                                               0.6

                                     0.5                                                                               0.5

                                     0.4                                                                               0.4

                                     0.3                                                                               0.3

                                     0.2                                                                               0.2

                                     0.1                                                                               0.1

                                      0                                                                                 0
                                           0.6         0.8       1       1.2   1.4   1.6                                     0.6          0.8        1       1.2   1.4   1.6
                                                                 Wages                                                                               Wages


Notes: The figure shows the CDFs of real wages per e ciency unit by firms' location (left panel) and by workers' birth location
(right panel). The two locations in the East are in red and the two in the West are in blue. The level of wages is normalized based
on AN W = 1, which implies a support of firm productivity in the North-West of [0.5, 2].



worker (Fig. 7b).39 These CDFs are consistent with the data as they reflect several targeted
moments. Figure 7a reveals that firms in the East pay, on average, lower wages than in the
West. The figure also shows that there is large wage dispersion within each region. Spatial
frictions could generate misallocation of labor across locations, as workers might be trapped in
the lower productivity East, and they could keep workers at lower productivity firms within
each location by hampering their ability to climb a more integrated Germany-wide job ladder.
The spatial frictions could also play a key role in generating a persistent e ect of birth location
on wages, as shown in Figure 7b.
7.1      The Aggregate E ects of Removing Spatial Frictions
We recompute the equilibrium, varying the di erent spatial frictions while keeping all other
primitive parameters unchanged, to study the role of spatial frictions in the allocation of labor
within and across locations. To simplify the exposition, our discussion focuses on the comparison
between East and West Germany. This choice is justified by Figure 7, which shows that the
within-region di erences are minor. While we report the results at the regional level, however,
the removal of frictions also a ects the allocation of workers within regions across locations,
which contributes to the aggregate results.
    Figure 8 and Table 5 summarize the results. Each panel in the figure shows the CDFs of
real wages per e ciency unit in East and West Germany in the benchmark (dotted) and in the
counterfactual (solid line). In the table, the first five columns report the values of various key
variables for the aggregate German economy, with the baseline in column 1 normalized to one.
   39
    Recall that individual of type i working in location j for firm p earns the real wage per e ciency unit
multiplied by j
              i
                , i.e., wj (p) Pj1 j
                                   i
                                     .



                                                                                           41
                                        Figure 8: E ects of Spatial Frictions on Wage Distributions by Region
                                               Preferences                                                    Mobility Costs                                             Search Efficiency                                        All Spatial Frictions
                                    1                                                              1                                                          1                                                        1


            Labor with wages < x   0.8                                                            0.8                                                        0.8                                                      0.8




                                                                           Labor with wages < x




                                                                                                                                      Labor with wages < x




                                                                                                                                                                                               Labor with wages < x
                                   0.6                                                            0.6                                                        0.6                                                      0.6


                                   0.4                                                            0.4                                                        0.4                                                      0.4


                                                    West, Benchmark
                                   0.2              East, Benchmark
                                                                                                  0.2                                                        0.2                                                      0.2
                                                    West, Counterfactual
                                                    East, Counterfactual

                                    0                                                              0                                                          0                                                        0
                                         0.5      1                1.5                                  0.5        1           1.5                                 0.5         1         1.5                                0.5           1          1.5
                                                 Wages                                                            Wages                                                       Wages                                                      Wages
Notes: The figure reports the CDFs of real wages per e ciency unit by firms' region, East in red and West in blue. In each panel,
we compare the benchmark economy (dotted lines) with the counterfactual economy (solid line). We consider four counterfactuals,
left to right: i) no home preferences; ii) no moving costs; iii) equal search e ciency towards each region; iv) no spatial frictions.



The last five columns compute the percentage gap between West and East Germany for each
of these variables. Appendix J shows all the aggregate statistics separately for East and West
Germany.

Home Preferences. First, we consider an economy with no home preferences, ·l = ·r = 1.
Column 2 of Table 5 and panel 1 of Figure 8 show that removing home preferences has only
a small e ect on the real wages per e ciency unit paid by firms (row 1). The main e ect is
that the share of East-born workers in the West increases while the share of West-born workers
declines, since workers are no longer attached to their home regions (row 2i and 2ii).
    The increased mobility of workers puts pressure on East German firms, which lose their
comparative advantage in hiring East German workers, shifting the wage distribution slightly
to the right (red lines in Figure 8). This shift reduces the gap in real wages per e ciency unit
between the East and the West from 15% to 12%. While competitive pressure also increases
in the West, the e ect on the wage distribution is smaller since East firms are less able to hire
West German workers due to the firms' lower average productivity.
    The West-East di erence in e ciency units per capita, j   i
                                                                , falls, since more East workers are
in the West, reducing the gap in average wages paid ­ i.e., the average of wj (p) Pj1 j    i
                                                                                             (rows 3
and 4). Aggregate GDP per capita rises (row 5), but just marginally, implying that home bias
does not entail large aggregate productivity costs. The e ect on workers' average value is larger
but still modest (row 6).40

Moving Costs. Next, we compute an economy with no moving costs ­ Y0 = 0. Removing
moving costs also has very small aggregate e ects (Column 3 of Table 5). However, there is
an important di erence relative to home preferences: when home preferences are eliminated,
East German workers stay in the West and climb the West German job ladder, putting pressure
   40
     The average value is computed using the estimated value functions ­ Uj
                                                                          i
                                                                            and Wji (w) ­ and the distribution
of labor across firms, regions, and employment status.


                                                                                                                                     42
                                  Table 5: Aggregate E ects of Spatial Frictions

                                                  Germany Aggregate                             Di erence West - East (%)

                                        (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)    (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)       (10)
                                       Base       ·         Y           z      All     Base        ·         Y        z        All

   (1)    Wage per e ciency unit         1       1.013    0.990     1.140     0.988    15.10%   12.30%    16.00%    11.30%   13.20%

   (2)    % of Labor in West          80.40%    80.40%    79.67%    77.18%    72.33%     /         /         /        /         /

          2.i    West-born            97.26%    92.36%    93.54%    80.94%    73.80%     /         /         /        /         /

          2.ii   East-born            24.28%    41.08%    33.77%    65.03%    67.60%     /         /         /        /         /

   (3)    E ciency units pc              1       1.000    1.000     1.000     0.999    8.10%     5.63%     6.39%    1.54%     0.52%

   (4)    Average wage paid              1       1.012    0.990     1.142     0.988    24.40%   18.40%    23.10%    11.60%   10.80%

   (5)    GDP per capita                 1       1.006    0.997     1.073     1.020    20.47%   16.12%    18.68%    9.65%     8.13%

   (6)    Average value                  1       1.018    1.001     1.129     1.259    13.67%    8.99%    12.20%    3.34%     1.16%




Notes: The table shows the aggregate e ects of spatial frictions by comparing the benchmark (Base) with four hypothetical
economies: i) No home preference (· ); ii) No moving costs (Y); iii) No di erences in search e ciency across regions (z ); iv) No
spatial frictions (All). Columns 1-5 present statistics for the aggregate German economy. Statistics in rows 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 are
normalized relative to the benchmark. Columns 6-10 present, for each statistic, the di erence between West and East Germany,
                                                                                                     1
computed for the same scenarios. Row 1 presents the average wage per e ciency unit, wj (p) Pj          , averaged across all employed
workers in j . Row 3 shows e ciency units per capita, the average of j   i across all workers in j . Row 4 displays the average wage
              1 i
                                                                         q
paid, wj (p) Pj j . Row 5 presents the average output per capita, p ioeI j    i li (w ). Row 6 shows the average value, obtained by
                                                                                 j
averaging across Uj
                  i and W i (w ) using the distribution of labor across firms, regions, and employment status.
                         j




on East German firms to compete. In contrast, when moving costs alone are eliminated, East
German workers are continually attracted back to the East because of their preferences. As
a result, they do not climb much of the West German job ladder and remain at relatively
lower productivity firms. Overall, East firms reduce their wages in response to the larger labor
supply, which decreases aggregate wages per e ciency unit and increases the West-East wage
gap (row 1, and panel 2 of Figure 8). Since more workers are employed at low productivity
firms, aggregate GDP actually slightly declines (row 5).

Search E ciency. In column 4 of Table 5 and panel 3 of Figure 8, we show an economy
in which individuals' search e ciency is identical towards each region ­ z0 = 1, z1 = 0, zl,1 =
zl,2 = zr = 0. Eliminating di erences in search e ciency has large e ects on the distribution
of labor both across and within regions. As workers draw more job opportunities from the
whole German labor market, firms compete more fiercely for workers, which leads all firms to
increase their wages. The increased opportunities allow workers to climb the job ladder more
quickly, which concentrates labor at the more productive firms. Average wages per e ciency
unit therefore rise by 14% and GDP per capita increases by 7%.




                                                                   43
All Spatial Frictions. Finally, Column 5 in Table 5 shows our main result: eliminating all
spatial frictions ­ ·l = ·r = 1, Y0 = 0, z0 = 1, z1 = 0, zl,1 = zl,2 = zr = 0 ­ causes the average
wage per e ciency unit to decrease slightly and GDP per capita to rise by a mere 2%. These
gains are significantly smaller than the gains from eliminating di erences in search e ciency
alone.
    The aggregate e ects are significantly weaker than the large gains found in previous work
(e.g. Bryan and Morten (2019)). Three factors drive this unexpected result in our framework.
First, while a large average wage gap exists between regions, the bulk of the labor misallocation
is within regions across firms, reflected in the large within-region wage dispersion, which is
not directly impacted by spatial frictions. Second, while eliminating all spatial frictions allows
workers to draw more job opportunities from high productivity firms, it also gives firms in each
region access to the pool of unemployed workers of the entire German market. As a result, low
productivity firms can now more easily attract workers. Taken together, these two forces lead to
a rotation of the CDF of wages which concentrates more labor both at the top and at the bottom
of the wage distribution (panel 4 of Figure 8). Through general equilibrium e ects, most firms
end up paying a lower wage, which further decreases average wages (row 1). This mechanism
is not strong enough when we shut down only one of the spatial frictions at a time, since the
remaining frictions are strong enough to keep the regional labor markets separated. Third, the
increase of the share of East German workers in the West creates extra competition for jobs,
which, in equilibrium, favors the migration of about one quarter of West German workers to
the lower productivity East, reducing output (rows 2i and 2ii).
    It is relevant to notice that, while the e ect on GDP is larger if we only shut down search
e ciency, the e ect on the average value (row 6), which is the relevant welfare measure in the
model, is larger, as expected, when we shut down all the frictions.
    Shutting down all spatial frictions has a large e ect on the West-East gap. The gap in wages
paid falls from almost 25% to 11% (row 4), and the gap in GDP per capita declines from 20% to
8%. This result, however, is mostly due to the decline in spatial sorting, hence in the West-East
gap in e ciency units (row 3), rather than to an increase in firm wages per e ciency units or
aggregate productivity in the East.

Within Versus Across-Region Allocation of Labor. We next show that the main alloca-
tive e ect of shutting down spatial frictions is to change the within-region allocation of labor
to firms, rather than the share of labor in each region.
     To illustrate this point, in Figure 9 we compute the density of labor at each level of firm
productivity, aggregated across all regions, and take its ratio with the benchmark density in each
of the four scenarios (gray solid lines). If the densities are identical, the gray solid lines should lie
on top of the horizontal dotted line at 1. As previously discussed, removing preference frictions


                                                   44
   Figure 9: Unpacking Productivity Gains from Within- and Between-Region Reallocation
                                                Preferences                                                     Mobility Costs                                             Search Efficiency                                           All Spatial Frictions
                                      1.5                                                              1.5                                                        1.5                                                         1.5
                                                  Benchmark
                                                  Counterfactual
                                                  Fixed within Region
            Relative Labor Density




                                                                             Relative Labor Density




                                                                                                                                        Relative Labor Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Relative Labor Density
                                     1.25         Fixed across Regions                                1.25                                                       1.25                                                        1.25



                                       1                                                                1                                                          1                                                           1



                                     0.75                                                             0.75                                                       0.75                                                        0.75



                                      0.5                                                              0.5                                                        0.5                                                         0.5
                                         0.5      1      1.5             2                                0.5      1      1.5       2                                0.5       1      1.5       2                                0.5        1      1.5         2
                                               Firm Productivity                                                Firm Productivity                                           Firm Productivity                                            Firm Productivity
Notes: The figure shows, for the four counterfactual economies, how the distribution of labor to firms changes relative to the
benchmark. We compute the densities of labor at each level of firm productivity, in the whole German economy, and take their
ratios (in gray solid line) relative to the benchmark. If the densities are identical, the gray solid line should lie on top of the
horizontal dotted line at 1. The dashed blue line shows hypothetical densities computed keeping the same within-region allocation
of labor to firms as in the benchmark and only varying the share of labor in each region. The dashed green line is the opposite: it
keeps constant the share of labor in each region and only varies the within-region allocations of workers.



allows East-born workers to more easily access the West German job ladder, slightly increasing
the mass of workers at more productive firms (panel 1). The economy without di erences in
search e ciency (panel 3) has significantly more mass at the highest productivity firms, while
the economy without any spatial frictions (panel 4) has a larger mass of workers not only at the
top but also at the bottom.
    The di erences in allocation could either be the result of more workers employed at more
productive firms within each region, or due to a change in the shares of workers located in
East and West Germany, holding the within-region allocation constant. For example, since the
average productivity in the West is higher than in the East, moving more workers West would
increase the mass of workers at high productivity firms.
    We analyze the contribution of each of these channels separately, holding constant the other.
The result is stark: keeping the within-region distribution of labor fixed and only varying the
share of labor in each region barely changes the overall allocation relative to the benchmark (blue
dashed line). Consequently, the e ect of reducing spatial frictions on the overall distribution of
labor mostly operates through within-region changes (green dashed line). Eliminating spatial
frictions allows workers to climb a country-wide job ladder, significantly altering the within-
region allocation of labor.


7.2      The Persistent E ects of Birth Location
Next, we show that spatial frictions have significantly larger e ects on the wage inequality
between East- and West-born workers than on the gap between East and West Germany. The
results are presented in Figure 10 and Table 6.




                                                                                                                                    45
             Figure 10: E ects of Spatial Frictions on Wage Distributions by Birth Region
                                                Preferences                                                  Mobility Costs                                             Search Efficiency                                        All Spatial Frictions
                                     1                                                            1                                                          1                                                        1


             Labor with wages < x   0.8                                                          0.8                                                        0.8                                                      0.8




                                                                          Labor with wages < x




                                                                                                                                     Labor with wages < x




                                                                                                                                                                                              Labor with wages < x
                                    0.6                                                          0.6                                                        0.6                                                      0.6


                                    0.4                                                          0.4                                                        0.4                                                      0.4


                                                      West Born, Bench.
                                    0.2               East Born, Bench.
                                                                                                 0.2                                                        0.2                                                      0.2
                                                      West Born, Count.
                                                      East Born, Count.

                                     0                                                            0                                                          0                                                        0
                                          0.5      1              1.5                                  0.5        1           1.5                                 0.5         1         1.5                                0.5           1          1.5
                                                  Wages                                                          Wages                                                       Wages                                                      Wages
Notes: The figure reports the CDFs of real wages per e ciency units by workers' birth region, East in red and West in blue. In
each panel, we compare the benchmark economy (dotted lines) with one counterfactual economy (solid line). We consider four
counterfactuals, left to right: i) no home preferences; ii) no moving costs; iii) equal search e ciency towards each region; and iv) no
spatial frictions.



Large E ects on Birth-Place Inequality. Column 2, row 1 of Table 6 illustrates that
eliminating home preferences alone reduces the gap in the average wage per e ciency unit
between East and West German workers by 40%. Removing mobility costs, instead, has a
relatively small impact on wage inequality since the e ect is similar for East and West-born
individuals. Eliminating di erences in search e ciency has the biggest independent e ect,
shrinking the gap in the average wage per e ciency unit by more than two thirds (column 4
of Table 6). In this scenario, all workers have identical job opportunities, irrespective of where
they are born, and the only remaining di erence is their willingness to accept these job o ers.
    When all spatial frictions are shut down, only a 2% gap in average wages per e ciency
unit remains between East- and West-born workers, much smaller than the wage gap between
regions. All worker types now have equal access to jobs in both regions and accept similar o ers.
A small gap remains due to the di erent e ciency units of East- and West-born workers, which
a ect their job search behavior due to the complementarity between firms' wages and workers'
e ciency units.41 Summing up, while spatial frictions have a relatively minor role on regional
wage gaps, they are a key driver of the persistent e ect of workers' birth region on their lifetime
earnings.

East- and West-born Workers Climb Parallel, but Distinct, Ladders. To further in-
vestigate the mechanism through which spatial frictions generate the persistent e ect of workers'
home region, we use the model to simulate job histories for 100,000 workers. We assume that
each worker starts unemployed in her home region and simulate her employment history for 30
years. We perform the exercise using the policy functions of the benchmark and then repeat the
analysis for each one of the four alternative economies. The dotted lines in each panel of Figure
11 display the resulting paths for workers' wages per e ciency unit in the benchmark economy,
and the solid lines show the counterfactual paths. To illustrate the general equilibrium e ects,
   41
        West-born workers search slightly more intensively and have a slightly better allocation to firms.


                                                                                                                                    46
                              Table 6: Distributional E ects of Spatial Frictions

                                                                     Base       ·        Y        z        All

                     (1)    Gap in avg. wage per e ciency unit       11.02%   6.65%    9.84%    3.84%     2.11%

                     (2)    Gap in avg. wage paid                    22.00%   17.20%   20.70%   14.11%   12.20%

                     (3)    % of W-born in West                      97.26%   92.36%   93.54%   80.94%   73.80%

                     (4)    % of E-born in West                      24.28%   41.08%   33.77%   65.03%   67.60%


Notes: The table shows the e ects of spatial frictions on the earnings inequality between East and West-born by comparing the
benchmark (Base) with four hypothetical economies: i) No home preference (· ); ii) No moving costs (Y); iii) No di erences in
search e ciency across regions (z ); iv) No spatial frictions (All). Row 1 presents the gap in the average wage per e ciency unit,
        1                                                      1 i
wj (p) Pj . Row 2 displays the average wage paid, wj (p) Pj       j .



we also consider partial equilibrium counterfactuals, in which we let individuals make choices
according to the economy without the corresponding spatial friction but keep the equilibrium
wage, vacancy posting, and regional prices of the benchmark economy (dashed lines).
    Focusing first on the benchmark economy, we notice that East- and West-born workers climb
parallel job ladders starting from unemployment. This outcome is due to the fact that workers
mostly remain in their home region, and the West and East regional labor markets function
similarly.42 Removing spatial frictions shifts the wage profile up, since spatial frictions similarly
a ect individuals at any point of their life-cycle. As noted above, the e ect for moving costs
is negligible due to their small size. When we remove all spatial frictions, East and West-born
workers are climbing roughly the same job ladder.43

Large General Equilibrium E ects. We finally note that accounting for firms' general
equilibrium response is important to understand the overall e ects of spatial frictions on wage
inequality. Comparing the dashed and the dotted lines in Figure 11, the first panel shows that in
partial equilibrium, East-born gains from eliminating home preferences are only approximately
half as large as in general equilibrium. While East workers' wages increase in partial equilibrium
due to their willingness to accept more o ers from West Germany, a large fraction of their overall
wage gains is due to the equilibrium response of East firms, which increase their wages to retain
workers. The equilibrium e ects are even stronger when we eliminate spatial di erences in
search e ciency in the third panel. For West-born workers, all the gains come from the fact
that firms increase their wages to retain workers since search frictions no longer shield them
from competition.
   42
      This result is consistent with detailed analysis in Dauth, Lee, Findeisen, and Porzio (2019). In Appendix
J, we show the share of workers in each region and frequency of cross-region moves.
   43
      The West-born profile is slightly steeper as they search more intensively due to their higher e ciency units,
as explained earlier.




                                                                47
                                                       Figure 11: Simulated Employment Histories: Average Firm Wages
                                                           Preferences                                                                   Mobility Costs                                                        Search Efficiency                                                      All Spatial Frictions
                                                                West Born, Bench.
                                             1.3                                                                            1.3                                                                     1.3                                                                     1.3

             Average Firm Wage of Employed




                                                                                            Average Firm Wage of Employed




                                                                                                                                                                    Average Firm Wage of Employed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Average Firm Wage of Employed
                                                                East Born, Bench.
                                                                West Born, Count.
                                                                East Born, Count.
                                                                West Born, PE Count.
                                             1.2                East Born, PE Count.                                        1.2                                                                     1.2                                                                     1.2



                                             1.1                                                                            1.1                                                                     1.1                                                                     1.1



                                              1                                                                              1                                                                       1                                                                       1



                                             0.9                                                                            0.9                                                                     0.9                                                                     0.9
                                                   0       10             20           30                                         0       10        20         30                                         0       10        20         30                                         0       10        20         30
                                                       Years in the Labor Mkt                                                         Years in the Labor Mkt                                                  Years in the Labor Mkt                                                  Years in the Labor Mkt
Notes: The figures show the average wages per e ciency unit computed from 100,000 simulated job histories, each one started with
individuals being unemployed in their home region. Red is East and blue is West. Dotted lines are the benchmark economy. Solid
lines represent each one of our four counterfactuals. The dashed lines are partial equilibrium counterfactuals, for which we keep
constant the distribution of wage o ers, prices, vacancies, and aggregate applications, but we solve for individual decision rules
based on the relevant set of spatial frictions.



8      Conclusion
This paper has developed a quantitative labor market framework that encompasses frictional
reallocation both across firms and across space to quantify the aggregate and distributional
e ects of spatial frictions. Bringing the model to matched employer-employee data from Ger-
many, we learn three new insights that are relevant beyond our context. First, eliminating even
large spatial frictions can have, as in our estimates, only modest e ects on aggregate wages and
productivity. Second, the aggregate e ects of spatial frictions are mediated by their impact on
the allocation of labor within regions across firms, which can dominate quantitatively. In fact, in
our estimated economy with labor market frictions, the main e ect of removing spatial frictions
is to change the within-region allocation of labor, rather than generating net flows towards the
high productivity region. Third, regional wage gaps and inequality of opportunities by birth
region are not necessarily intertwined. Shutting down spatial frictions does not close the wage
gap between East and West Germany, as labor market frictions are enough to shield low paying
firms in the East from competition. However, it does substantially reduce the wage inequality
between East and West-born individuals, as all workers now have equal access to jobs in all
regions.
    Overall, our analysis shows the importance of studying the labor allocation across firms
and space in a unified framework. The model we build in this paper enables us to do so, and
may prove helpful for future work on regional wage gaps and on the spatial and distributional
consequences of policy interventions.




                                                                                                                                                               48
References
Abowd, J., F. Kramarz, and D. Margolis (1999): "High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms," Econo-
  metrica, 67(2), 251­333.

Allen, T., and C. Arkolakis (2014): "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085­1140.

Alvarez, J. (2018): "The agricultural wage gap: Evidence from brazilian micro-data," .

Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward (2008): "High wage workers and low wage firms:
  negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias?," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A
  (Statistics in Society), 171(3), 673­697.

Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward (2012): "High wage workers match with high wage
  firms: Clear evidence of the e ects of limited mobility bias," Economics Letters, 117(3), 824­827.

Artuç, E., S. Chaudhuri, and J. McLaren (2010): "Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural
  Empirical Approach," American Economic Review, 100(3), 1008­10045.

Bailey, M., P. Farrell, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2020): "Social connectedness in urban areas,"
  Journal of Urban Economics, p. 103264.

BBSR (2009): "Regionaler Preisindex," in Berichte, vol. 30. BBSR, Bonn.

Bilal, A. (2019): "The Geography of Unemployment," .

Bird, R., and E. Slack (2002): "Land Taxation in Practice: Selected Case Studies. Germany.," World Bank
  Conference on Innovations in Local Revenue Mobilization.

Bonhomme, S., T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa (2019): "A distributional framework for matched employer
  employee data," Econometrica, 87(3), 699­739.

Bontemps, C., J.-M. Robin, and G. J. Van den Berg (2000): "Equilibrium Search with Continuous
  Productivity Dispersion: Theory and Nonparametric Estimation," International Economic Review, 41(2),
  305­358.

Bradley, J., F. Postel-Vinay, and H. Turon (2017): "Public Sector Wage Policy and Labor Market
  Equilibrium: A Structural Model," Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(6), 1214­1257.

Bryan, G., and M. Morten (2019): "The Aggregate Productivity E ects of Internal Migration: Evidence
  from Indonesia," Journal of Political Economy.

Burchardi, K. B., and T. A. Hassan (2013): "The economic impact of social ties: Evidence from German
  reunification," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 1219­1271.

Burda, M. C. (2006): "Factor Reallocation in Eastern Germany after Reunification," American Economic
  Review, 96(2), 368­374.

Burda, M. C., and J. Hunt (2001): "From Reunification to Economic Integration: Productivity and the
  Labor Market in Eastern Germany," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 32(2), 1­71.

Burdett, K., and D. T. Mortensen (1998): "Wage Di erentials, Employment Size, and Unemployment,"
  International Economic Review, 39(2), 257­273.

Caliendo, L., M. A. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019): "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General
  Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 87(3), 714­835.

Caliendo, L., L. D. Opromolla, F. Parro, and A. Sforza (2017): "Good and Factor Market Integration:
  A Quantitative Assessment of the EU Enlargement," NBER Working Paper No. 23695.


                                                     49
Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013): "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German Wage
  Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 967­1015.

        (2015): "CHK E ects," FDZ Methodenreport 6.

Chernozhukov, V., and H. Hong (2003): "An MCMC Approach to Classical Estimation," Journal of
  Econometrics, 115(2), 293­346.

Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, and L. Gobillon (2008): "Spatial wage disparities: Sorting matters!,"
  Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2), 723­742.

Dauth, W., S. Y. T. Lee, S. Findeisen, and T. Porzio (2019): "Labor Reallocation and Convergence:
  Evidence from East Germany," in 2019 Meeting Papers, no. 139. Society for Economic Dynamics.

Dingel, J. I., and F. Tintelnot (2020): "Spatial Economics for Granular Settings," Discussion paper,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 70(5), 1741­1779.

Eberle, J., P. Jacobebbinghaus, J. Ludsteck, and J. Witter (2011): "Generation of Time-Consistent
  Industry Codes in the Face of Classification Changes - Simple Heuristic Based on the Establishment History
  Panel (BHP)," FDZ Methodenreport, 05/2011, Nuernberg.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., and C. Gaubert (2020): "Optimal spatial policies, geography, and sorting," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2), 959­1036.

Franzmann, G. (2007): "Bevölkerung in der ehemaligen DDR 1946-1989," GESIS Datenarchiv, Köln histat.,
  Studiennummer 8267.

Fuchs-Schündeln, N., D. Krueger, and M. Sommer (2010): "Inequality Trends for Germany in the Last
  Two Decades: A Tale of Two Countries," Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1), 103­132.

Galenianos, M. (2013): "Learning about Match Quality and the Use of Referrals," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 16(4), 668­690.

Gelman, A., J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, D. B. Dunson, A. Vehtari, and D. B. Rubin (2013): Bayesian
  data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014): "The Agricultural Productivity Gap," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(2), 939­993.

Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2015): "What do data on millions of US workers
  reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hethey-Maier, T., and J. F. Schmieder (2013): "Does the Use of Worker Flows Improve the Analysis of
  Establishment Turnover? Evidence from German Administrative Data," NBER Working Paper No. 19730.

Hicks, J. H., M. Kleemans, N. Y. Li, and E. Miguel (2017): "Reevaluating Agricultural Productivity
  Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hoffmann, F., and S. Shi (2016): "Burdett-Mortensen Model of On-the-Job-Search with Two Sectors,"
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 19, 108­134.

Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. I. Jones, and P. J. Klenow (2019): "The allocation of talent and us economic
  growth," Econometrica, 87(5), 1439­1474.

Hunt, J. (2001): "Post-Unification Wage Growth in East Germany," Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1),
  190­195.



                                                    50
         (2006): "Staunching Emigration from East Germany: Age and the Determinants of Migration," Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 4(5), 1014­1037.

Jäger, S., B. Schoefer, S. Young, and J. Zweimüller (2020): "Wages and the Value of Nonemployment,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(4), 1905­1963.

Jarosch, G. (2016): "Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss," University of Chicago.

Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): "The e ect of expected income on individual migration decisions,"
  Econometrica, 79(1), 211­251.

Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Sølvsten (2019): "It Ain't Where You're From, It's Where You're At..,"
  Presented at the Models of Linked Employer-Employee Data Conference 2019.

Krueger, A. B., and J.-S. Pischke (1995): "A Comparative Analysis of East and West German Labor
  Markets: Before and After Unification," in Di erences and Changes in Wage Structures, ed. by R. B. Freeman,
  and L. F. Katz, pp. 405­446. University of Chicago Press.

Lagakos, D. (2020): "Urban-rural gaps in the developing world: Does internal migration o er opportunities?,"
  Journal of Economic perspectives, 34(3), 174­92.

Lagakos, D., S. Marshall, A. M. Mobarak, C. Vernot, and M. E. Waugh (2020): "Migration costs
  and observational returns to migration in the developing world," Journal of Monetary Economics.

Lagakos, D., and M. E. Waugh (2013): "Selection, agriculture, and cross-country productivity di erences,"
  American Economic Review, 103(2), 948­80.

Leiby, R. A. (1999): The Unification of Germany, 1989-1990. Greenwood Press, Westport, CT.

Lise, J., C. Meghir, and J.-M. Robin (2016): "Matching, sorting and wages," Review of Economic Dynamics,
  19, 63­87.

Meghir, C., R. Narita, and J.-M. Robin (2015): "Wages and informality in developing countries," American
 Economic Review, 105(4), 1509­46.

Mortensen, D. T. (2005): Wage dispersion: why are similar workers paid di erently? MIT press.

Moscarini, G., and F. Postel-Vinay (2016): "Did the Job Ladder Fail after the Great Recession?," Journal
 of Labor Economics, 34(S1), S55­S93.

Moser, C., and N. Engbom (2018): "Earnings Inequality and the Minimum Wage: Evidence from Brazil,"
 mimeo, Columbia University.

Paetzold, J., and M. Tiefenbacher (2018): "Distributional and Revenue E ects of a Tax Shift from Labor
  to Property," International Tax and Public Finance, 25(5), 1215­1251.

Petrongolo, B., and C. A. Pissarides (2001): "Looking into the black box: A survey of the matching
  function," Journal of Economic literature, 39(2), 390­431.

Pissarides, C. A. (2000): Equilibrium unemployment theory. MIT press.

Redding, S. J., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2017): "Quantitative Spatial Economics," Annual Review of
  Economics, 9, 21­58.

Schmutz, B., and M. Sidibé (2018): "Frictional Labour Mobility," The Review of Economic Studies, 86(4),
  1779­1826.

         (2021): "A Dynamic Theory of the Urban Network," .



                                                     51
Sjaastad, L. A. (1962): "The costs and returns of human migration," Journal of political Economy, 70(5, Part
  2), 80­93.

Smolny, W. (2009): "Wage Adjustment, Competitiveness and Unemployment - East Germany after Unifica-
  tion," Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 229(2+3), 130­145.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. Von Wachter (2019): "Firming up inequality,"
  The Quarterly journal of economics, 134(1), 1­50.

Sorkin, I. (2018): "Ranking firms using revealed preference," The quarterly journal of economics, 133(3),
  1331­1393.

Uhlig, H. (2006): "Regional Labor Markets, Network Externalities, and Migration: The Case of German
  Reunification," American Economic Review, 96(2), 383­387.

        (2008): "The Slow Decline of East Germany," Journal of Comparative Economics, 36(4), 517­541.

Valentinyi, A., and B. Herrendorf (2008): "Measuring factor income shares at the sectoral level," Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 820­835.

Young, A. (2013): "Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap, and Migration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4),
  1727­1785.




                                                    52
