                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE LEGAL ORIGINS OF FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE SHANGHAI CONCESSIONS

                                       Ross Levine
                                         Chen Lin
                                       Chicheng Ma
                                        Yuchen Xu

                                    Working Paper 28794
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28794


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 2021




We thank Ying Bai, Peter Koudijs, Luigi Pascali and Hans-Joachim Voth for helpful comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Chicheng Ma, and Yuchen Xu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Legal Origins of Financial Development: Evidence from the Shanghai Concessions
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Chicheng Ma, and Yuchen Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 28794
May 2021
JEL No. G21,K4,N25,O16

                                          ABSTRACT

We assemble new data on the British and French concessions in Shanghai between 1845 and
1936 to assess the legal origins view of financial development. During this period, two regime
changes altered the degree to which the British common and French civil law traditions held
jurisdiction over the respective concessions: the 1869 formation of the Mixed Courts
strengthened Western legal jurisdiction, while the 1926 rendition agreement returned those courts
to Chinese control. By examining the changing application of different legal traditions to adjacent
neighborhoods within the same city, we address identification challenges associated with cross-
country studies. Consistent with the legal origins view, the financial development advantage in
the British concession widened after the formation of the Courts and shrank after their rendition.


Ross Levine                                             Chicheng Ma
Haas School of Business                                 Faculty of Business and Economics
University of California at Berkeley                    The University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)             Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                 macc@hku.hk
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu                           Yuchen Xu
                                                        HSBC Business School
Chen Lin                                                Peking University
Faculty of Business and Economics                       Nanshan District
The University of Hong Kong                             Shenzhen
Hong Kong                                               China
chenlin1@hku.hk                                         xuyuchen@phbs.pku.edu.cn
1. Introduction
       The legal origins view of comparative financial development stresses that economies
with a common law tradition more effectively protect outside investors than economies with
a civil law tradition, especially economies with a French civil law tradition, and protecting
outside investors from expropriation by corporate insiders, government officials, and others is
crucial for financial development (La Porta et al. 1997, 1998). The view further asserts that
legal traditions developed in Europe were spread to other countries through conquest and
colonization so that researchers can exploit differences in legal origin as an exogenous
determinant of legal system differences and hence financial development. An extensive body
of research confirms the prediction of the legal origins view: countries with a common law
tradition have more developed financial systems than those with a French civil law tradition
(e.g., La Porta et al. 1997, 1998, 2002, 2006; Beck et al. 2000; Levine et al. 2000; Barth et al.
2004; Durnev and Kim 2005; Djankov et al. 2007, 2008; Morck et al. 2005; Berkowitz 2011;
Brown et al. 2013; D'Acunto 2019).
       However, as stressed in the review of the legal origins literature by La Porta et al.
(2008), the key challenge to assessing the legal origins view is the degree to which one can
interpret legal origin as an exogenous source of variation in the legal framework shaping
financial development or whether legal origin proxies for something else determining
financial development (e.g., Pistor 2009; Musacchio and Turner 2013). A country's legal
tradition could proxy for culture (e.g., Stulz and Williamson 2003; Licht et al. 2005;
D'Acunto et al. 2019), social capital (e.g., Guiso et al. 2004), politics (e.g., Glaeser and
Shleifer 2002; Rajan and Zingales 2003; Pagano and Volpin 2005; Perotti and von Thadden
2006; Roe 2006), or other factors omitted from the analyses. Aware of this overarching
concern, researchers have controlled for many potential confounding factors to identify the
impact of differences in legal systems on the operation of financial markets (e.g., Beck et al.
2003; Djankov et al. 2003; Fisman and Love 2004; Jappelli et al. 2005; Safavian and Sharma
2007; La Porta et al. 2006, 2008; Brown et al. 2013). Yet, without randomly assigning legal
systems to otherwise similar economies and then assessing the ramifications on financial
development, the challenge of identifying the impact of legal origin on financial development
remains.
       In this paper, we exploit the unique history of Western concessions in China from
1845 through 1936 to assess the legal origins view of financial development. In Shanghai,
China granted the British and French concessions over adjacent, barren, and very similar


                                                 2
plots of land following the First Opium War. The British applied the common law in their
concession, and the French concession used the French civil law. We evaluate the
ramifications of applying the common and civil law on financial development within the
same city. Besides the spatial discontinuity in legal traditions, another unique advantage of
examining the Shanghai concessions is that there were pivotal changes in legal jurisdiction
over the concessions during this period. Thus, we evaluate changes in the degree to which
British common and French civil law shaped financial arrangements in the respective
concessions. Although subject to its own identification concerns that we discuss below,
examining the ramifications on financial development from applying different legal systems
to different plots of land over time within the same city addresses identification challenges
associated with cross-country comparisons.1
        To motivate and frame our econometric strategy, we first provide a brief history of
pivotal changes in legal jurisdiction over the Shanghai concessions. From the founding of the
British (1845) and French (1849) concessions until 1869, legal cases were handled by the
respective consulates. During this period, more Chinese individuals and businesses moved
into the concessions, increasing the number of "mixed" cases involving Chinese and
foreigners. In 1869, there was a major change in legal systems governing the concessions:
The British and French established their own Mixed Courts to handle the full array of legal
disputes, including mixed cases. The British Mixed Court used the common law, and the
French Mixed Court applied the French civil law. There was another regime change in the
legal systems governing the concessions in 1926. The Provisional Rendition Agreement,
signed in 1926, triggered a switch from the British common law and the French civil law to
the Chinese civil law in the respective concessions, returning legal jurisdiction to Chinese-run
courts. British and French influence over the concessions started to wane with the Second
Sino-Japanese War, so we ended our analyses in 1936. These regime changes in the legal
systems governing the concessions over the 1845 to 1936 period define the key breakpoints
in the difference-in-differences methodology that we describe below.
        We manually collect data on bank and stock market development. Our primary
measure of financial development is the number of banks (per square kilometer) in each
concession and year. This bank density measure includes data on foreign banks, Chinese
modern (joint-stock) banks, and Chinese traditional banks (qianzhuang). We aggregate the

1
 Brown et al. (2017) examine the implications of imposing federal or state courts on different Native
American reservations. We study the impact on comparative financial development from imposing
different legal systems on different areas of the same city.

                                                   3
number of headquarters and branches. We have the exact location of each bank using the
historical definition of streets and then mapping those addresses to GIS coordinates. We also
compile annual information on the identity and location of all stock companies and their
market capitalization and monthly data on stock returns. We have information on stock
company density (companies per square kilometer) for the full sample period but could
obtain data on stock prices only after 1894. Using these data, we assess how bank and stock
market development change following changes in legal jurisdiction over the Shanghai
concessions.
       To assess the impact of the British common law and the French civil law on
comparative financial development, we use a series of difference-in-differences strategies. In
our core analyses, the first difference compares the British and French concessions. The
second difference compares (1) the time period from the founding of the Shanghai
concessions until Britain and France create the Mixed Courts in 1869 to (2) the time period
from 1869 through the period before the rendition of those courts to Chinese control in 1926.
As noted above, creating the Mixed Courts in 1869 was a regime change, as the British and
French formally implemented their legal systems in their respective concessions. Thus, the
legal origins view predicts that financial development in the British concession should be
comparatively stronger than that in the French concession after 1869 relative to differences in
financial development in the two concessions before establishing the Mixed Courts in 1869.
All of the difference-in-differences analyses include concession and year effects.
       Consistent with the legal origins view of comparative financial development, financial
development--bank density or stock company density--in the British concessions is
materially greater than that in the French concession after 1869. Furthermore, when
examining the parallel trends, there is no sign of a change in comparative financial
development before 1869. Rather, there is a sharp change following the application of the
different legal traditions in the concessions. Since Britain and France may differ in financial
development for reasons that have nothing to do with legal origins and those differences
could be reflected in the establishment of their banks in Shanghai, we also conducted the
analyses focusing only on Chinese banks. We find that substantially more Chinese banks
establish affiliates in the British concession than in the French concession. Furthermore, we
divide the concessions into 200-by-200 meter grid cells and conduct the analyses while
including grid-cell fixed effects to account for within concession variation. The results hold.
       We extend these analyses to address a key challenge to drawing inferences about the
impact of the British common law and the French civil law on comparative financial

                                                 4
development from these analyses: omitted variables. First, non-legal system differences
between Britain and France could have shaped comparative economic development in the
concessions with concomitant ramifications on comparative financial development. Thus, we
control both for population density in the respective concessions and Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) in each respective homeland (i.e., the GDP of Britain for the British concession and
the GDP of France for the French concession). All of the results hold. Second, we were
concerned that differences in British and French governance systems within the concessions
could account for the differences in financial development. Although we include concession
fixed effects, we extend these analyses by explicitly controlling for when the British and
French formally established different governance systems in their respective concessions. In
particular, the British established their Municipal Council in 1854, and the French creating
their own Municipal Council in 1862. However, controlling for these breaks in governance
does not alter the findings that there was a sharp change in financial development in the two
concessions following the establishment of the British and French Mixed Courts in 1869.
Third, we were also concerned that the formation of the concessions in the 1840s could have
set in motion different financial system dynamics that are not fully captured by the
concession and year fixed effects or the additional controls just discussed. Besides these
controls, we also include the interaction between a British concession dummy variable and
both linear and quadratic trends. Consistent with the view that the British common law
fostered comparatively strong financial development in the British concession relative to that
in the French concession, the results hold when conditioning on all of these potentially
confounding influences.
       The history of legal jurisdiction over the Shanghai concessions offers an additional
and unique way to identify the impact of legal origins on comparative financial development:
the rendition of the Mixed Courts in 1926. Without changing the administration of the
concessions, the rendition returned legal jurisdiction of the concessions to Chinese-run
courts. The legal origins view predicts that since the British common law provides a
comparative advantage over the French civil law in supporting financial development,
the rendition of the Mixed Courts will negatively affect financial development more in
the British concession. To test this prediction, we again employ a difference-in-
differences approach. In these rendition analyses, the first difference again compares the
British and French concessions. The second difference now compares the years before the
rendition of the Mixed Courts to Chinese control in 1926 to the years after the rendition.



                                                5
       The results from the rendition analyses are consistent with the legal origins view of
comparative financial development. The British concession experienced a much sharper
decline in both bank density and stock company density following 1926. Evidence from
changes in stock returns further supports the legal origins view. We examine a 24-month
window around the August 1926 Provisional Rendition Agreement. We discover that stock
returns in the concessions fall materially following the rendition of the Mixed Courts, and the
fall is disproportionately large among firms in the British concession.
       Our joint findings that (a) the financial development advantage of the British over the
French concession emerges with the application of the British common law and French civil
law in the respective concession in 1869 and (b) the financial development gap shrinks with
the rendition of the British common law and French civil law to Chinese-run courts after
1926 suggest that the different legal systems help shape comparative financial development.
Evidence on stock returns further supports this view.
       As a final extension, we examine concessions in three cities outside of Shanghai:
Guangzhou, Hankou, and Tianjin. In particular, we study 16 concessions granted to countries
with either a common law (Britain and the United States) or civil law tradition (Austro-
Hungarian Empire, Belgium, France, German, Italy, Japan, and Russia). We analyze these
three cities because each contains within its borders at least one common and one civil law
concession. Thus, we compare financial development across concessions with different legal
systems in the same city. There are limitations to examining these 16 concessions, however.
These concessions did not experience the sharp intertemporal breakpoints in legal jurisdiction
that characterize the Shanghai concessions. This limitation reduces the ability to distinguish
the effects of legal tradition on comparative financial development from other features of the
concessions that might shape financial development. Nevertheless, we provide these analyses
to augment the examination of the Shanghai concessions. Consistent with the Shanghai
results, we discover that financial development is materially greater in the common law
concessions than in their civil law counterparts. Furthermore, when limiting the analyses to
British and French concessions, we find that the British common law concessions are
comparatively more financially developed than the French civil law.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a more
detailed history of the Shanghai concessions. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents
the results analyzing changes in comparative financial development after Britain and France
created the Mixed Courts. Section 5 details the analyses and findings on changes in
comparative financial development associated with the rendition of the courts to Chinese

                                                6
rule. In Section 6, we investigate the relationship between different legal systems and
comparative financial development in cities outside of Shanghai. Section 7 concludes.


2. Shanghai Concessions
       In 1845, the British concession in Shanghai was formally established after Britain
defeated China in the First Opium War (1839-1842) and forced the Qing Dynasty to cede 830
acres of land in Shanghai to Britain. In later years, China agreed to Britain's request to
expand the concession as the number of foreign and Chinese settlers increased. The United
States also received a concession in Shanghai that bordered the British concession. The
British and American concessions merged in 1863, which was later named the Shanghai
International Settlement. It reached a maximum size of 33,503 acres in 1899. 2 Britain
dominated the administration of the International Settlement. For example, British citizens
accounted for about 90% of the executive members of the concession's Municipal Council
(Wang 1998). For this reason, we follow the literature and use the term "British concession"
in referring to the International Settlement. In 1849, the French also established a concession
in Shanghai that bordered the British concession. The French concession also experienced
several expansion waves, from the original 164 acres to over 15,000 acres in 1914. Figure I
illustrates the geographic expansion of the Shanghai concessions.
       After 1936, British and French influence over the concessions waned appreciably with
the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945). As a result, we end our analyses of the Shanghai
concessions in 1936. Both the British and French concessions were formally returned to the
Chinese government in 1943.


2.1. The British and French legal systems in the concessions
       Britain and France transplanted their common law and civil law legal systems into
their respective Shanghai concessions. During the initial decades, the British and French
consulates handled disputes involving their own citizens. As more Chinese moved into the
concessions and economic activity boomed, the British and French consulates struggled to
address the burgeoning array of "mixed" cases that involved financial and commercial
disputes between Chinese and foreign individuals, firms, and banks. In 1863, officials began
negotiating an arrangement to replace these consular courts with legal institutions that could
better serve the community's needs (Hudson 1927).
2
 More than ten countries had consulates within the International Settlement, but they did not play a
material role in administering the Settlement (Wang 1998).

                                                  7
        In 1869, a new charter was finalized, and both the British and French concessions
established their own Mixed Courts (Huishen Gongxie) to handle cases involving Chinese
and foreign plaintiffs and defendants. 3 During the initial decades of the Mixed Courts,
Chinese and foreign judges jointly heard cases involving Chinese citizens and foreign
residents (see an illustration in Appendix Figure A1), but foreign judges dominated the courts.
As noted by the U.S. State Department (1880, p. 158), Chinese officials mainly assisted in
executing decisions. Research by Hudson (1927), Yang (2006), and Cai (2013) notes that the
Chinese officials participating in the Mixed Courts (a) tended to have a very low rank within
the Chinese hierarchy, (b) were chosen by foreign officials to serve in the Mixed Courts, and
(c) had little to no influence over decisions. By 1911, the Mixed Courts had jurisdiction over
civil cases, including cases involving only Chinese citizens within the concessions, as well as
the appointment, supervision, and payment of Chinese judges, control over prisons, the
execution of arrests, etc. (Hudson 1927; Shanghai Shehui Kexueyuan 1981).
        Around 1926, there was another "regime change" in the legal system governing the
concessions. Due to rising nationalism after the First World War, China began negotiating a
plan of rendition, whereby the Mixed Courts would surrender legal jurisdiction to the Chinese
authorities (Hudson 1927). These negotiations started in 1916 but failed to reach an
agreement. In 1925, there were violent demonstrations in the concessions over foreign
"imperialism" that reenergized negotiations about rendition. An agreement, the "Provisional
Rendition Agreement," was signed on August 31, 1926, and the formal rendition of the
British Mixed Courts to Chinese-run courts occurred on January 1, 1927. This was a major
change as it involved a switch from British common law to Chinese civil law. The French
Mixed Court was also materially altered in 1927, as Chinese cases were assigned to Chinese
judges and lawyers. Then, in 1931, Chinese courts assumed legal jurisdiction over the French
concession.


        2.1.1. Common law in the British concession
        The historical record of lawsuits demonstrates that the British concession followed a
British common law tradition. The courts decided cases based on statutory law, precedent,



3
  There were clear, formal jurisdictional boundaries between the Mixed Court of the International
Settlement (British Mixed Court) and the Mixed Court of the French Settlement that specified which of the
Mixed Courts would adjudicate cases. The Statutes of the Mixed Courts in Shanghai, which was issued on
April 20, 1869, determined these jurisdictional boundaries. Jernigan (1905, pp. 203-4) details the rules
governing jurisdiction.

                                                     8
and the application of those laws and precedents to emerging cases within the concession.4 In
the concession, the British common laws applied to both foreign residents and local Chinese.
With the accumulation of court cases in the concession, the Court gradually invoked local
cases as precedents in deciding new cases (e.g., Levine 2005). For example, in a 1911 case,
an American publishing house, Messrs, Ginn & Co., sued the Commercial Press of China for
copyright infringement. The lawyer cited two verdicts from earlier cases in 1896 and 1907
within the British concession in which Chinese businesspeople were convicted of pirating
foreign books. The American publishing house won the case, and Commercial Press had to
recompense Messrs, Ginn & Co. This case is discussed in a series of newspaper reports in the
North China Herald, April 8, April 10, and October 7, 1911, and Hou (2017).
        Another noteworthy feature of the common law is its ability to adapt and consider
local circumstances and customs in addressing specific cases. Evidence of this feature exists
in the British concession, as legal practitioners regularly referred to Chinese customs when
addressing disputes. Thus, without violating common law principles, the law could
sometimes evolve efficiently in the British concession to resolve disputes while respecting
local customs. For example, in 1876, Sassoon & Co., Ld., E.D. sued Wang, the owner of a
Chinese company, in the mixed court for overdue payment of a promissory note. Wang
argued that the promissory note with 500 tael principal was transferred to the Chinese
merchant Guo to purchase opium. However, the opium business of Guo went bankrupt,
which led to the suspension of the repayment of the note. The verdict was that since there is a
stamp of the Chinese company on the promissory note, Wang must repay the note to Sassoon
& Co. The judgment was based on the Chinese convention that the validity of notes depends
on an official Chinese seal. If there is a default on the payment, the issuer with a seal on the
promissory note is financially responsible.5


        2.1.2. Civil law in the French concession
        Consistent with the French civil law tradition, the French Mixed Court decided cases
based on the statutes passed in France, not based on precedent or local custom. The Court's
archives show that judges resolved commercial cases based on strict applications of French

4
  We confirmed the operation of the British common law in the Shanghai concession by reviewing
commercial and financial lawsuits regarding property rights, financial instrument transactions, bankruptcy,
creditors' residual rights after the liquidation of a company, and shareholders' rights and shares in joint
ventures. It is worth noting that well-developed law libraries emerged in the Municipal Council of the
British concession, which facilitated the law practitioners of the day and our research.
5
  Cai (2013) cites this case, which is discussed in the article "Case on opium business promissory note
(Zhipiao Fayin)" from the Chinese daily newspaper, Shun Pao, on January 22, 1876.

                                                      9
commercial codes.6 For example, in 1910, a French merchant sued a Chinese broker who
traded gold futures for him, charging that the speculative behavior of the Chinese broker
resulted in the French merchant losing more than 10,000 silver taels. Citing Section 1965 of
the French Civil Code on the recovery of debts, the French court rejected the French
merchant's argument, reasoning that the contract did not specify precise limits on trading by
the Chinese broker. So, there was no basis for classifying the broker's trade as illegal (Hou
(2017) cites this case "Séance du 27 November 1907 S. Somekh contre Hi Kai Song" [no.
635PO/C/371] from the Nantes branch of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives.)
        Also consistent with the French civil law tradition, judges in the French concession
exerted power over investigating cases, calling and questioning witnesses, etc. Accordingly,
lawyers in the French concession--as in France--mainly dealt with drafting and submitting
documents to the court and replying to judges' queries (Hou 2017).


2.2. Financial development
        The concessions were established on relatively undeveloped land, with few prior
inhabitants and no pre-existing financial institutions or markets. For example, Montalto de
Jesus's (1919, pp. 27-29) history of Shanghai describes the land ceded for the British
concession as uncultivated, with several creeks and a few small hamlets. Likewise, French
settlers described the initial condition of their concession as "primitive, covered with houses
in poor condition, graves, and rubbish dumps." (Fauvel, 1899. p.17)
        By the late 19th century, however, Shanghai had become the largest financial hub in
Asia, and the British concession was the financial center of Shanghai. For example, two years
after the foundation of the British concession, the English Oriental Bank opened its first
branch in China within the British concession. Foreign banks steadily entered the British
concession, reaching 30 by 1925. In contrast, the total number of foreign banks in the French
concession reached only four in the same period. These foreign banks dominated the foreign
exchange market and the financing of foreign trade.
        Over time foreign banks collaborated with Chinese traditional banks called
qianzhuang ("money house") to provide a wider range of financial services to local
businesses. The qianzhuang were generally small sole proprietorships or partnerships in
which the founders were from wealthy merchant families. The qianzhuang blossomed in
Shanghai after the mid-19th century. Their activities included providing local currency

6
 The cases are reserved in the Archives du Ministère de la France des Affaires Etrangère (Archives of the
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs).

                                                     10
exchanges for the varieties of metallic currencies circulating in China, note-issuing, and
giving credit to firms and households. While foreign banks had abundant capital, qianzhuang
had local expertise. The two financial intermediaries formed fruitful business relations in the
Shanghai concessions. Indeed, many qianzhuang moved their headquarters into the
concessions, and the qianzhuang even relocated their Association (Shanghai qianye gonghui)
from the Shanghai old city to the British concession in 1917.
       In 1897, the Imperial Bank of China--the first "modern" Chinese bank--opened in
the Shanghai British concession. Unlike the qianzhuang, the Imperial Bank of China was a
limited liability, joint-stock company, with regular shareholder meetings, a separate board of
directors, and financial and accounting disclosure statements based on international standards.
Many such modern Chinese banks soon emerged. By 1925, the number of Chinese banks in
the British concession reached 194, more than five times the number of foreign banks (30).
However, the number of Chinese banks in the French concession grew much less rapidly,
reaching 29 banks in 1925.
       Besides modern banks, nonfinancial Chinese stock companies with limited liability
and traded shares also flourished in the Shanghai concessions (Wang 1965). Investors could
purchase stocks directly from the company or through qualified brokers (Liu 2004). An active
secondary market emerged in the 1860s. The most influential newspaper in Shanghai, The
North-China Herald, published daily stock prices in the section "Shares and Stocks" (see
Appendix Figure A2). During the early years, the trading of stocks was conducted mainly
through foreign banks and foreign stock trading companies. The Shanghai Share Broker's
Association was founded in 1891, giving rise to The Shanghai Stock Exchange in 1903. As
shown in Figure II, most of the publicly traded stock companies were located in the British
concession. For example, by 1925, there were 74 publicly-traded companies in the British
concession and four in the French concession.


3. Data
3.1. Unit of geographic analysis
       We compare the development of finance in the British and French concessions from
the establishment of the British concession in 1845 until the eve of the Second Sino-Japanese
War in 1936, which reduced Western dominance over the concessions. We define the
geographic boundaries of the concessions as those lands that were part of the concessions
before 1861, which we call the "old concessions." The results, however, are robust to using


                                                11
the post-1861 geographic boundaries of the concessions. Figure I provides a map of the
British and French concessions in Shanghai. As noted above, the British and French
established their concessions on similar and fairly barren lands. Nevertheless, we account for
potential variation in land quality, infrastructure, and other location-specific effects by
dividing the concessions into 100 200m × 200m grid cells and including grid cell fixed
effects in the analyses below.7 Appendix Table A1 provides descriptive statistics of the main
variables that we now describe.


3.2. Banks
        Our primary measure of financial development is the number of banks in a concession
in a year, as banks were the primary financial intermediaries in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. Banks in Shanghai included foreign banks, Chinese modern banks, and Chinese
traditional banks (i.e., the qianzhuang described above). We aggregate the number of
headquarters and branches of these banks to measure financial development. 8 When
examining grid cells, we compute the number of headquarters and branches within each grid
cell.
        To obtain these data, we manually collected information on each bank's address
(using the historical definition of streets and addresses in Shanghai) and years of operation
from the Shanghai Financial Gazetteer and other archives and newspapers (Appendix B lists
the data sources). We then map the addresses to the coordinates in the geographic
information system (GIS) and identify the banks within concessions and grid cells. There
were 67 foreign banks, 335 Chinese modern banks, and 264 qianzhuang in the two Shanghai
concessions from 1846 through 1936.9


3.3. Stock market
        We measure stock market development in Shanghai using either the number of stock
companies or the total market capitalization of listed firms within a concession (or grid cell).
We obtain stock market information from the North-China Herald, the main source of stock
market information during the operation of the concessions. The Herald was founded in 1850.
It began to publish stock prices in 1864 and the number of shares in 1894.

7
  Specifically, we exclude grid cells that are less than 0.001 km2, which leaves 100 grid cells.
8
  Only foreign and Chinese modern banks had branches. Chinese qianzhuang had only one office
(headquarters).
9
  These numbers omit the 43 Chinese modern bank branches and 86 qianzhuang for which we could not
identify precise location data.

                                                 12
           For our analyses of stock market development, we were able to obtain the exact
address of 205 companies located in Shanghai. 10 We manually identified each stock
company's location (coordinates) based on The Desk Hong List, a bi-annual survey of all
Shanghai firms edited by the North-China Herald between 1872 and 1941. The survey
provides detailed information on each company's name, location, business scope, and other
characteristics. Then we mapped the companies to the grid cells of the two concessions.
Consistent with the distribution of banks, Figure II shows that the British concession also had
a much higher density of stock companies than the French concession.
           Figure III depicts the distribution of banks and stock companies across the grid cells
in the two concessions, using the geographic boundaries of the "old concessions." The figure
provides the distributions of banks and stock companies in both 1868, which is just before the
creation of the Mixed Courts more firmly established the British common law and French
civil law in the respective concessions, and in 1925, which is just before the rendition of the
Mixed Courts to the Chinese civil law courts. As shown, there is much more rapid financial
development in the British concession relative to that in the French concession.


4. Financial Divergence between the British and French Concessions
4.1. Methodological overview
           The key challenge to assessing the impact of the British common law and the French
civil law on comparative financial development in their respective Shanghai concessions is
isolating the influences of legal system differences from other potential factors. As noted
above, the British and French concessions were on neighboring lands of similar quality that
had similar pre-concession levels of economic development. Britain and France, however,
were different in other potentially important respects besides their legal systems. As a result,
commerce and finance might have evolved differently in the British and French concessions
for reasons having little to do with legal systems.
           To identify the independent role of legal system differences in shaping financial
development in the two Shanghai concessions, we use a series of difference-in-differences
strategies to control for many potential confounding factors. In this section, we (1) begin with
a simple framework in which we explore differences in financial development between the
two concessions following the formation of the concessions in 1845 to assess the "concession
effect;" (2) then also assess the "legal effect" by examining differences in financial

10
     We omit from our analyses 75 firms for which we could find no information about their location.

                                                       13
development in the two concessions following the formation of the Mixed Courts in 1869;
and (3) including many controls to reduce the possibility that other factors, besides the legal
effect associated with the establishment of the Mixed Courts, account the findings. In the next
section, we turn to an additional break in the legal systems governing contracting in the
concessions: the rendition of the Mixed Courts to the Chinese authorities.


4.2. Preliminary benchmark: The concession effect
        As a preliminary benchmark, we begin with the following difference-in-differences
equation to assess the impact of the two concessions on comparative financial development,

                            Yit = 1 × Britishi × Post1845 + i + t + it,                                     (1)

where Yit denotes the number of banks (per km2) in a concession (or grid cell) i, in year t.
Britishi is a dummy variable that equals one for the British concession (including all grid
cells within the British concession when conducting the analyses at the grid-cell level)
and zero for the French concession. Post1845 is a dummy variable that equals one after
1845 and zero before then. The interaction term, Britishi × Post1845, captures the
concession effect, i.e., whether more banks started operating in the British concession
relative to the French concession after 1845. Since there were no banks in the concessions
before 1845, the estimated coefficient on Britishi × Post1845 provides an estimate of the
average annual difference in bank density between the British and French concessions
following the creation of the concessions. i is a concession (or grid-cell) fixed effect, which
captures all time-invariant characteristics of the geographic location. t is a year fixed effect and
captures the common annual shock shaping financial development in both the British and
French concessions.11 We conduct the estimation using data from 1840 through 1926, where
the 1840-1845 period is the pre-concession period.
        The estimates in Table  indicate that bank density grew much faster in the British
concession after 1845. The interaction term, Britishi × Post1845, enters with a positive,
statistically significant, and economically large coefficient. The estimated coefficient in
column (1) indicates that the British concession had 18 more banks per km2 than the French



11
  Since there are only two concessions and we include concession fixed effects, we do not adjust standard
errors for clustering at the concession level when running concession level regressions, consistent with
Abadie et al. (2017). However, the concession-level results are robust to clustering. When running grid-
cell level regressions, we adjust the standard errors for clustering at the grid-cell level. The grid-cell level
results are robust to not clustering.

                                                        14
concession during the average year from 1846 through 1925. As a reference point, there were
four banks per km2 in the French concession on average during the same period.
       To shed additional empirical light on the comparative advantages offered by the
British concession for bank development, we extend these results in two ways. First, as
shown in column (2), many more Chinese banks chose to establish affiliates in the
British concession. We estimate that the average annual gap in the number of Chinese
banks per km2 is about 14 greater in the British concession than in the French concession.
This estimate for Chinese banks is close to the estimate in column (1) for all banks,
suggesting that the concession effect on banking is primarily composed of the growth of
Chinese banks. Second, we were concerned that the British concession might have some
especially appealing areas for financial development, perhaps due to land quality,
location, or infrastructure. It might be these within concession factors that account for
comparative financial development in the British concession and not legal system
differences. Thus, we conduct the analyses at the grid-cell level. As shown in columns (3)
and (4) of Table , the results hold. These results are consistent with the view that the
establishment of the Shanghai concessions led to much faster financial development in
the British concession than in the French concession.


4.3. Results: The Mixed Courts and bank density
       We next extend the econometric strategy to examine the relationship between the
formation of the Mixed Courts and comparative financial development while controlling for
the pure concession effect. In this extended difference-in-differences strategy, the first
difference involves comparing the British to the French concession. The second difference
involves comparing (1) the time period from the founding of the Shanghai concession in 1846
through the creation of the Mixed Courts in 1869 to (2) the time period from 1870 to the
rendition of those courts in 1926. The establishment of the Mixed Courts represents a distinct
break in the concessions. The creation of these courts deepened and broadened the
jurisdiction of the British and French legal systems in their respective concessions. Thus, the
"legal origins" view of LLSV (1998) suggests that financial development in the British
concession should be comparatively stronger than that in the French concession after 1869
relative to differences in financial development in the two concessions before the
establishment of the Mixed Courts. We empirically evaluate this view.
       More specifically, we use the following regression specification:



                                                15
              Yit = 1 × Britishi × Post1845 + 2 × Britishi × Post1869 + i + t + it,               (2)

where Yit, Britishi, and Post1845 are defined above. The second interaction term, Britishi ×
Post1869, captures the legal effect, i.e., whether more banks were opened in the British
concession relative to the French concession after their respective legal systems became more
prominent in the concessions following the creation of the Mixed Courts in 1869. By
controlling for the concession effect, Britishi × Post1845, the estimated coefficient on the
legal effect, Britishi × Post1869, provides information on whether bank density rose
comparatively faster in the British concession after the establishment of the Mixed Courts in
1869 beyond any differences in the evolution of bank density triggered by the establishment
of the two concessions in 1845. Thus, 2 > 0 would suggest that bank density rose in the
British concession relative to the French concession after establishing the different legal
systems in the concessions.
        As shown in Table , the results indicate that bank density in the British concession
was markedly greater than that in the French concession after establishing the Mixed Courts
in 1869. Based on the coefficient estimates from column (1), the British concession had
about 2.5 more banks per km2 on average than the French concession before establishing
the Mixed Courts in 1869, and this gap increased by about 22 banks per km2 after 1869.
In column (2), we re-do these analyses for the subsample of Chinese banks. The
estimates indicate a comparatively sharp increase in the density of Chinese banks in the
British concession, with the gap increasing by about 20 banks per km2 after the
establishment of the Mixed Courts. By comparing columns (1) and (2), the estimates
suggest that the legal effect is primarily composed of a large increase in Chinese banks
in the British concession following the stronger application of the British common and
French civil laws triggered by the establishment of the Mixed Courts. Furthermore, as
shown in columns (3) and (4), these results hold for the full sample of banks and the
subsample of Chinese banks when conducting the analyses at the grid-cell level.12




12
  Moreover, to reduce the possible heterogeneous effects of legal system differences in the
concessions across different political regimes in China, we restrict the sample period to the Qing
dynasty only, i.e., 1840 to 1910. The results remain robust (see Supplementary Appendix Table A2).
We also replicated Table  using five-year intervals of the data to mitigate annual fluctuations in the
number of banks. Again, the results hold (see Supplementary Appendix Table A2).

                                                   16
4.4. Mixed Courts and bank development: Extensions
        In this section, we conduct several additional analyses to identify better the
relationship between changes in the operation of the legal systems in the concessions and
comparative financial development. In particular, although the findings in Table  that
bank density in the British concession rose appreciably relative to that in the French
concession after 1869 while controlling for the pure concession effect, Britishi ×
Post1845, concession fixed effects, and year fixed effects is consistent with the view that
stronger financial development in the British concession is related to legal system
differences per se, the analyses do not eliminate all potential confounding effects. Thus,
we now engage in a series of analyses to reduce such concerns and better identify the
impact of legal system differences on comparative financial development. Since we
control for time-varying features of each concession in many of these analyses and these
data on each concession do not exist before the formation of the concessions, we start
these investigations in 1846.
        First, despite starting from similar economic conditions, many factors besides legal
system differences may have shaped economic development in the British and the French
concessions. It might be these other factors and their effects on economic development that
drove the divergence in bank development. To address this concern, we control for the
evolution of economic development in the concessions. In particular, we control for
Population density (lag), as there are no data on production in the concessions. We use
lagged population density at the concession-year level to assess the robustness of our
results while recognizing that these population data are subject to several challenges
(Zou, 1980; Henriot et al, 2018).13 As shown in column (1) of Table , all of the results
hold when controlling for Population density (lag), suggesting that the legal effect is not
driven by economic development in the two concessions.
        Second, stronger financial development in Britain's Shanghai concession could
reflect comparative economic development in Britain during the late 19th and early 20th
centuries (La Porta et al. 2008) rather than the comparative advantage of the British

13
  From 1865, both concessions conducted population census surveys every five or ten years. Annual
population data start in 1900 in the British concession and the late 1920s in the French concession.
Assuming a linear growth rate of population, we interpolated the annual population for the missing years
and coded the population as zero in 1845. Another challenge to working with population data is that we do
not have separate time series data on the geographic areas defined as the old concessions (our sample
areas). Instead, we use the whole population of the British and French concessions, as the districts of the
old concessions were the most populous. We make this assertion based on the data illustrated in
Supplementary Appendix Figure A3 for the population distribution at the district level within the
concessions in 1935, which is the only year with district-level population data across concessions.

                                                      17
common law over the French civil law. To test this, we control for the GDP of Britain
when assessing financial development in the British concession and the GDP of France
when assessing bank density in the French concession. Maddison (2010) provides data
on GDP. In particular, we create a variable Homeland's GDP that equals (a) the GDP of
Britain in year t when examining bank density in the British concession in year t and (b)
the GDP of France in year t when examining bank density in the French concession in
year t. We find that Homeland's GDP is positively associated with financial
development. More critically, we find that the legal effect is robust to controlling for
Homeland's GDP. As shown in column (2) of Table , British*Post1869 continues to
enter positively, significantly, albeit with a smaller estimated coefficient than when we
do not control time-varying concession traits. The estimated level of bank density is
comparatively greater in the British after controlling for economic development in
Britain and France.
       Third, Britain and France also established different governance institutions in
Shanghai, and it could be these governance systems and not comparative legal institutions
that shaped financial development. Although we control for concession fixed effects and
show that the legal effect holds when controlling for British*Post1845, we extend these
analyses by controlling for the dates when the British and French formally established
different governance systems in their respective concessions. In particular, historians
highlight two substantial changes in the governance of the concessions: the British
establishing their Municipal Council in 1854 and the French creating their own Municipal
Council in 1862. Based on these changes, we test whether differences in governance systems
account for the divergence in bank density in the concessions. To do this, we create the
variable Municipal Councils, which equals one after 1854 for British concession
observations, equals one after 1862 for French concession observations, and equals zero
otherwise. As reported in column (3) of Table , Municipal Councils does not enter
significantly, but the legal effect, British*Post1869, continues to enter positively,
statistically significantly, and with almost the identical estimated coefficient. Moreover,
we simultaneously control for Population density, Homeland's GDP, and Municipal Council.
As shown in column (4), the findings on British*Post1869 hold when controlling for these
other features.
       Fourth, we were concerned that the formation of the concessions in 1845 might
have triggered different dynamics in the evolution of bank density in the two
concessions. We control for linear and quadratic trends that are interacted with the

                                              18
British dummy variable to address this concern. We conduct this examination while
continuing to condition on Population density, Homeland's GDP, Municipal Council, and
concession and year fixed effects. As shown in column (5) of Table , British*Post1869
continues to enter positively, significantly, and with almost the same estimated
coefficient.
       We replicate all of the above tests on a subsample of only Chinese banks. As
shown in columns (6) - (10) of Table , the results hold. We find that the estimated
coefficient on the legal effect changes little across the different specifications, again
suggesting that the legal effect on banking is primarily composed of the growth of
Chinese banks.
       Fifth, to provide additional evidence on whether there is a break in the
comparative evolution of bank density in the British and French concessions after
forming the Mixed Courts in 1869, we estimate a dynamic version of equation (1).
Specifically, we run the following regression at the grid cell level with 1869 as the
reference point:


                        Yit =         × Britishi × t + i + t + it,                    (3)


where  t equals one in year t and zero otherwise, and the other variables are defined
above. To limit the effects of heterogeneity over longer periods and focus on a narrower
time period around the 1869 establishment of the Mixed Courts, we conduct this
examination over the window from 1864 through 1879, i.e., five years before the Mixed
Courts were established and 10 years thereafter. Note, however, that if we conduct the
analyses over a longer period, the same results emerge. We then plot the estimated
values and confidence intervals around  in Figure IV. If the establishment of the Mixed
Courts is associated with a positive change in the comparative evolution of financial
development in the British concession, we should see an increase in  after 1869.
       As shown in Figure IV, the gap in British-French bank density is close to zero
and does not exhibit a significant trend before the formation of the Mixed Courts, and
then there is a distinct break. After 1869, bank density rises faster in the British
concession than in the French concession. These findings suggest that the financial gap
between the British and French concessions began in 1869 and then widened.




                                             19
4.5. Stock market
       Following the same empirical strategy, we examine comparative stock market
development in the British and French concessions. We continue to assess whether there
was a break in financial development following the establishment of the Mixed Courts in
1869, which involved the full application of the British common and French civil legal
systems in their respective concessions. To measure stock market development, we use
the density of stock companies at the concession and grid-cell levels. The sample period
begins in 1866, as there were no stock companies in Shanghai before then. We report the
results in Table .
       Consistent with the findings on bank density, we find that there are, on average,
10 more stock companies per km2 in the British concession than in the French
concession following the establishment of the Mixed Courts. These results are robust to
including concession and year fixed effects. Furthermore, we confirm these findings
when examining the number of stock companies within each grid cell.


5. Rendition of the Courts
       Another legal system break occurs around 1926 with the rendition of the Mixed
Courts. Following violent protests in 1925 against Western influence, including against
British and French control over the courts in the concessions, there was an intensification of
negotiations about the rendition of the Mixed Courts. The Chinese and the United Kingdom
signed agreement in August of 1926, and the formal rendition of the British Mixed Court to
the Chinese authorities occurred on January 1, 1927. Legal jurisdiction in the French
concession was also reformed. Chinese courts took over cases involving Chinese citizens in
1927, and by 1931, the Chinese courts assumed full legal jurisdiction over the French
concession.
       This section tests whether financial development deteriorated comparatively
rapidly in the British concession following the rendition. If the British common law
provides a comparative advantage over other legal systems in supporting financial
development, then eliminating this advantage should have an especially large adverse
effect on finance in the British concession. We examine a ten-year period around the
rendition year so that our sample covers from 1917 through 1936.
       To illustrate the relationship between the rendition of the Mixed Courts and
comparative financial development, consider Figure V. Here, we graph the difference


                                               20
between bank density in the British and French concessions from 1917 through 1936. As
shown, there is a discrete change in the bank density gap associated with the rendition.
This figure helps motivate our statistical assessment.
       We again employ a difference-in-differences strategy. The first difference involves
compares the two concessions. The second difference involves comparing (1) the time period
from 1917 to the rendition of those courts in 1926 to (2) the time period from the 1926
rendition until 1936 when the Second Sino-Japanese War effectively ended British and
French influence in the Shanghai concessions. The legal origin view predicts a stronger
decline in financial development in the British concession relative to that in the French
following the rendition of the Mixed Courts because removing the British common law will
have had a larger adverse impact on financial development than removing the French civil
law. As explained above, we use 1926 as the rendition date for the difference-in-differences
estimation even though official rendition occurred on January 1, 1927, because the agreement
was negotiated during 1926 and finalized in August of 1926. In robustness tests, using 1927
instead of 1926 as the breakpoint date in the regressions yields almost identical results.
       As reported in Table , the British concession experienced a much sharper
decline in financial development than the French concession after 1926. Column (1)
indicates that bank density fell significantly. Comparing the average year in the pre- and
post-rendition periods, the estimated coefficient on British*Post1926 indicates that bank
density (banks per km2) fell by 8 more in the British concession than in the French
concession. This is large, as the bank density in the British concession at the start of the
sample period (1917) was 46 per km2, while it was 5.5 per km2 in the French concession.
As shown in columns (2) and (3), we find similar results when examining the density of
stock companies in the concessions or the market capitalization of those firms. For
example, the estimates indicate that the British concession lost about 11.6 more
companies per km2 than the French concession after 1926. To gauge the size of this
estimated drop, note that the density of stock companies in the British concession at the
start of the estimation period (1917) was 34.3 per km2. As a robustness test, we re-do
these analyses while using a narrower window (five-year window) around the rendition.
As shown in columns (4) ­ (6), all results hold when using only a sample period of five
years before and after 1926.
       Another way to shed empirical light on the impact of the rendition of the Mixed
Courts is to examine the comparative change in the stock returns of firms in the British
and French concessions following 1926, which we offer in Table . To do this, we

                                                 21
examine the 24 months before and after August in 1926 (time of court rendition). The
dependent variable is the monthly stock return of each company, defined as the log
difference of month-end stock prices, i.e., log(pricet) ­ log(pricet-1). The stock return
regressions control for time-varying firm characteristics--the logarithm of the firm's
market capitalization and the number of months since the firm went public (i.e.,
duration)--and several specifications also condition on company fixed-effects to control
for time-invariant traits. To provide a benchmark, we examine the overall `event effect'
on stock returns without distinguishing between the British and French concessions
(columns 1 and 2). Column (1) excludes firm fixed effects, while column (2) includes
them. As shown, there is a significant drop in stock returns following the rendition of the
Mixed Courts, with returns falling by about 5.5% when including the full set of
conditioning variables. We then examine the differential stock return response by
including the interaction term, British*Post-Rendition, and report the results in columns
(3) and (4). In column (3), we exclude the firm fixed effects and include British as a
separate linear term. In column (4), we include firm fixed effects, so British drops from
the estimation. The results indicate that stock returns fall by more in the British
concession than in the French concession following the rendition of the Mixed Courts.
Indeed, the average British firm falls more almost 6%. The Table  results provide
further evidence that is consistent with the view that shifting from the British common
law to the Chinese civil law had a more adverse effect on firms than the concomitant
legal systems changes occurring in the French concession.


6. Beyond Shanghai
       In the section, we expand our analyses to concessions outside of Shanghai. Although
Shanghai was the financial center of China in the late 19th and early 20 centuries and there are
much better data on the Shanghai concessions than those in other cities, examining the non-
Shanghai concessions enhances our assessment of how different legal system operating
within one country shape financial development.
       Specifically, we examine 16 Western concessions in three cities--Tianjin, Hankou,
and Guangzhou--that operated in China between circa 1860 and 1943. We choose these three
cities because they hosted both concessions with a British common law tradition and




                                                22
                                                       14
concessions with civil law legal traditions.                Therefore, we can compare financial
development in common law and the civil law jurisdictions within the same city as we did in
the context of Shanghai. To conduct these comparisons, we implement two strategies. First,
we divide these concessions into two groups: those with a common law legal tradition
(Britain and the United States) and those with a civil law tradition (Austro-Hungarian
Empire, Belgium, France, German, Italy, Japan, and Russia). 15 We then test whether
financial development is comparatively stronger in the common law concessions. Second, we
focus only on differences between British common law concessions and French civil law
concessions in these three cities. This second strategy directly extends our earlier analyses to
these three non-Shanghai cities and avoids combining different civil and common law
concessions. This second strategy comes at the expense of excluding the other (non-British
and non-French) concessions. As we will show, both strategies yield the same conclusions.
        Given these data, we estimate the following equation over the period between 1850
(ten years before the establishment of the first concession) and 1936 (the eve of the Second
Sino-Japanese War):

              Yit = 1 × Common Lawi × Post + 2 × Population densityi-1 + i + t + it,                  (4)

where Yit denotes the number of banks (per km2) in concession i, in year t. Common Lawi is a
dummy variable that equals one if the concession was granted to a common law country
and zero if granted to a civil law country. Post is a dummy variable that equals one after
the concession was established and zero otherwise. The estimated coefficient on Common
Lawi × Post provides an estimate of the average annual difference in bank density between
common law and civil law concessions. As in the earlier analyses, we control for lagged
population density at the concession level (Population density (lag)) and concession and year
fixed effect. As noted above, we estimate equation (4) for the full sample of concessions
(strategy 1) and for the subsample of concessions that includes only British and French
concessions (strategy 2).


14
   Ten other cities in China had concessions between circa 1845 and 1945. These other cities, however, had
only one concession. For these cities, we cannot compare the common law to civil law within the same
city. Therefore, we exclude them from our analysis. Moreover, the Qing dynasty also ceded Kulangsu of
Xiamen to ten Western powers (and Japan) as an international settlement. However, there were no clear
concession boundaries within Kulangsu, so we exclude Kulangsu.
15
   Supplementary Appendix Table A3 lists each concession, its city, the foreign country (home country)
overseeing the concession, and the year the concession was established. Supplementary Appendix B lists
data sources.


                                                     23
       As reported in Table , bank density is materially larger in the common law
concessions than in their civil law counterparts. When considering all concessions, we find
that, on average, the number of banks per km2 in the common law concessions is 4.4 greater
than that in the civil law concessions (column 2). And this gap is mainly driven by
differences in the number of Chinese banks, not differences in the number of foreign banks
(column 4). While subject to greater data limitations than the analyses focused on the
Shanghai concessions, these findings on 16 concessions outside of Shanghai are fully
consistent with those comparing the British and French concessions within Shanghai. When
considering only British and French concessions in these cities, the results are very similar, as
shown in columns (3) and (5). These results provide additional evidence that the common law
legal tradition fostered comparatively strong financial development across different
concessions within China.


7. Conclusion
       In this paper, we construct a new database on Western concessions in China from
1845 through 1936 and exploit changes in the degree to which the British common and
French civil law traditions held jurisdiction over the respective concessions. We use these
data and regime changes to assess the legal origins view of comparative financial
development, which stresses that economies with a common law tradition more effectively
foster financial development than economies with a civil law tradition. When applied to the
Shanghai concessions, the legal origins view predicts that (1) financial development in the
British concession should grow comparatively more than that in the French concession after
Britain and France establish the Mixed Courts in 1869 and implement British common and
French civil law in their respective concessions and (2) financial development in the British
concession should shrink comparatively more after the rendition of the Mixed Courts to
Chinese rule in 1926.
       The evidence is strongly consistent with the legal origins view of comparative
financial development. The financial development advantage of the British over the French
concession emerges with the application of the British common law and French civil law in
the respective concession in 1869. This financial development gap then shrinks after the 1926
rendition of the Mixed Courts that essentially eliminated the application of these Western
legal traditions in the concessions. Furthermore, when we extend these analyses across 16




                                                 24
concessions in three cities outside of Shanghai, we confirm that financial development is
materially greater in the common law concessions than in their civil law counterparts.




                                               25
References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G.W. and Wooldridge, J. 2017. When should you adjust
       standard errors for clustering? NBER Working Paper 24003.
Barth, J. R., Caprio Jr., G., and Levine, R. 2004. Bank regulation and supervision: what
       works best? Journal of Financial intermediation, 13(2), 205­248.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and Levine, R. 2003a. Law, endowments, and finance. Journal
       of Financial Economics, 70(2), 137­181.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and Levine, R. 2003b. Law and finance: why does legal origin
       matter? Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(4), 653­675.
Beck, T., Levine, R., and Loayza, N. 2000. Finance and the sources of growth. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 58(1­2), 261­300.
Berkowitz, D. and Clay, K., 2011. The Evolution of a Nation: How Geography and Law
       Shaped the American States. Princeton University Press, 2011.
Brown, J. R., Cookson, J. A., and Heimer, R. Z. 2017. Law and finance matter: Lessons from
       externally imposed courts. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(3), 1019­1051.
Brown, J. R., Martinsson, G., and Petersen, B. C. 2013. Law, stock markets, and
       innovation. The Journal of Finance, 68(4), 1517­1549.
Cai, X. 2013. Wanqing Huayang Shangshi Jiufen Yanjiu (On Sino-foreign Commercial
       Disputes of the Late Qing Dynasty). Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju.
D'Acunto, F. 2019. From Financial History to History & Finance. Boston College Working
       Paper.
D'Acunto, F., Prokopczuk, M., and Weber, M. 2019. Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic
       Specialization, and Financial Development. Review of Economic Studies 86, 1170-
       1206.
Djankov, S., Hart, O., McLiesh, C., and Shleifer, A. 2008. Debt enforcement around the
       world. Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), 1105-1149.
Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. 2003. Courts. The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 118(2), 453­517.
Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., and Shleifer, A. 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. Journal of
       financial Economics, 84(2), 299­329.
Durnev, A., and Kim, E. H. 2005. To steal or not to steal: Firm attributes, legal environment,
       and valuation. The Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1461­1493.




                                               26
Fauvel, A. A. 1899. Histoire de la Concession française de Chang-hai. Paris: E. de Soye et
       Fils, Imprimeur.
Fisman, R., and Love, I. 2004. Financial development and intersectoral allocation: A new
       approach. The Journal of Finance, 59(6), 2785­2807.
Glaeser, E. L., and Shleifer, A. 2002. Legal origins. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 117(4), 1193­1229.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. 2004. The role of social capital in financial
       development. American Economic Review, 94(3), 526­556.
Henriot, C., Lu, S., and Aubrun, C. 2018. The Population of Shanghai (1865-1953): A
       Sourcebook. Leiden; Boston: Brill.
Hou, Q. 2017. Wanqing zhongwai huishen zhidu zhong huayang faguan de falv suyang yu
       shenpan fengge: Yi Shanghai fazujie huishen gongxie weili (Chinese and foreign
       judges' trial style and legal literacy in the joint-trial system of late Qing: Evidence
       from the Mixed-Court of the French concession in Shanghai). Xueshu Yuekan, 49(1),
       165­176.
Hudson, M. O. 1927. The rendition of the International Mixed Court at Shanghai. The
       American Journal of International Law, 21(3), 451­471.
Jappelli, T., Pagano, M., and Bianco, M. 2005. Courts and banks: Effects of judicial
       Enforcement on Credit Markets. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37(2), 223­
       244.
Jernigan, T. R. 1905. China in law and commerce. New York, NY: Macmillan.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. 2006. What works in securities laws? The
       Journal of Finance, 61(1), 1­32.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. 2008. The economic consequences of
       legal origins. Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2), 285­332.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. 1997. Legal determinants
       of external finance. The Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131­1150.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. 1998. Law and
       finance. Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113­1155.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. 2002. Investor protection
       and corporate valuation. The Journal of Finance, 57(3), 1147­1170.
Levine, R. 2005. Law, endowments, and property rights. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       19(3), 61­88.



                                               27
Levine, R., Loayza, N., and Beck, T. 2000. Financial intermediation and growth: Causality
       and causes. Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(1), 31­77.
Licht, A.N., Goldschmidt, C. and Schwartz, S.H., 2005. Culture, law, and corporate
       governance. International review of law and economics, 25(2), pp.229-255.
Liu, Z. 2004. Jindai Shanghai Huashang Zhengquan Shichang Yanjiu (Studies on Chinese
       Securities Market in Modern Shanghai). Shanghai: Xuelin Chubanshe.
Maddison, A., 2010. Statistics on world population, GDP, and per capital GDP, 1-2008 AD
       (Horizontal file), Maddison Historical Statistics. Groningen, the Netherlands:
       Groningen Growth and Development Centre, University of Groningen.
Montalto de Jesus, C. A. 1919. Historic Shanghai. Shanghai: Shanghai Mercury.
Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D., and Yeung, B. 2005. Corporate governance, economic
       entrenchment and growth, Journal of Economic Literature 43, 655­720.
Musacchio, A., and Turner, J. D. 2013. Does the law and finance hypothesis pass the test of
       history? Business History, 55(4), 524­542.
Pagano,   M.,   and    Volpin,   P.   F.   2005.     The   political   economy   of   corporate
       governance. American Economic Review, 95(4), 1005­1030.
Perotti, E. C., and Von Thadden, E. L. 2006. The political economy of corporate control and
       labor rents. Journal of Political Economy, 114(1), 145­175.
Pistor, K. 2009. Rethinking the "law and finance" paradigm. BYU Law Review, 2009(6),
       1647-1670
Rajan, R. G., and Zingales, L. 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development
       in the twentieth century. Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1), 5­50.
Roe, M. J. 2006. Legal origins, politics, and modern stock markets. Harvard Law Reiew, 120,
       460­527.
Safavian, M., and Sharma, S. 2007. When do creditor rights work. Journal of Comparative
       Economics, 35(3), 484­508.
Shanghai Shehui Kexueyuan (Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences). 1981. Xinghai Geming
       Zai Shanghai Shiliao Xuanji (Selected Works on the History of Xinhai Revolution in
       Shanghai). Shanghai: Renmin Chubanshe.
Stulz, R. M., and Williamson, R. 2003. Culture, openness, and finance. Journal of Financial
       Economics, 70(3), 313­349.
U.S. State Department. 1880. Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States,
       Transmitted to Congress, With the Annual Message of the President, December 6,



                                                28
       1880.     US      Government      Printing     Office,        1880.   Available   at
       https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1880/d133
Wang, L. 1998. Shanghai Fazhishi (Legal History of Shanghai). Shanghai: Renmin
       Chubanshe
Zou, Y. 1980. Jiu Shanghai Renkou Bianqian de Yanjiu (Studies on the Population Change of
       Old Shanghai). Shanghai: Renmin Chubanshe.




                                              29
                                              Figure I
                               Evolution of the Shanghai Concessions

Notes: The figure shows the expansion of the British and French Concessions between 1845 and 1914. The
areas in different shades of red depict the British concession at different dates, and those areas highlighted in
shades of blue are the French concession. The grey area denotes the Old City of Shanghai County under Chinese
administration. The two areas with boundaries outlined with bold, black perimeters, i.e., the dark red and dark
blue locations, denote the concessions in 1860, which we call the "old concessions." The old British concession
covers 512 acres (2.07km2), and the old French concession covers 180 acres (0.73km2).




                                                         30
                                           Figure II
                      Distribution of Banks and Stock Companies in 1925

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of banks and stock companies in the British and French Concessions in
Shanghai in 1925. The two areas with boundaries outlined with bold, black perimeters represent our main
sample. These are the areas of the concessions in 1860, which we call the "old concessions."




                                                       31
                                                                       Figure III
                                               The Grid-cell Distribution of Banks and Stock Companies
Notes: These figures show the distributions of banks and stock companies at the grid-cell level (200m*200m) within the old concessions. Banks and stock companies are
respectively compared before and after the establishment of the Mixed Courts (1868 and 1925). The British Concession is north of the border depicted with a bold, black
perimeter.
                          1
          Coefficient of British*Year Dummy
                   0      -.5      .5




                                              1864       1869                  1874                 1879
                                                                   Year

                                                     coefficient          90% confidence interval


                                                           Figure IV
                                  Bank Development and the Creation of the Mixed Courts in 1869
Notes: This figure depicts the estimated annual gap in bank density between the British and French concessions
before and after the establishment of the Mixed Courts in 1869. Specifically, we estimate the following
regression at the grid-cell level with 1869 as the reference point:
Yit =                     × Britishi × t + i + t + it,
where Yit is the number of banks within gird-cell i, in year t, and t equals one in year t and zero otherwise,
British is dummy variable that equals one for grid cells in the British concession and zero otherwise, i and t
are grid-cell and year fixed effects respectively. The figure plots the estimated values of and confidence intervals
around  .




                                                                   33
                                 70
            Difference in bank density (British-French)
                   40           50
                                 30           60




                                                          1916   1921          1926          1931             1936
                                                                               Year



                                                                            Figure V
                                                   The Impact of the Court Rendition on Banking Development
Notes: This figure shows the evolving gap in bank density between the British and the French concessions from
ten years before until ten years after the 1926 rendition of the Mixed Courts.




                                                                               34
                                        Table I
      Bank Density and the Formation of British and French Concessions, 1840-1925
This table presents regression results relating bank density to the formation of the Shanghai Concessions. In
column 1, the dependent variable is the total number of banks per square kilometer in the respective concession
in a year. In column 2, the dependent variable is the total number of Chinese-owned banks per square kilometer
in the respective concession in a year. In column 3, the dependent variable is the total number of banks per grid
cell in a year. In column 4, the dependent variable is the total number of Chinese-owned banks per grid cell in a
year. British is a dummy variable that equals one for the British Concession and zero for the French Concession.
Post1845 is a dummy variable that equals one after 1845 and equals zero for the years from 1840 through 1845.
For the grid-cell analyses, we divide the concessions into 100 200m by 200m grid cells. The regressions control
year fixed effects (Year FE) and either Concession fixed effects (Concession FE) or Grid-cell fixed effects
(Grid-cell FE) as indicated. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the grid-cell level in
columns 3 and 4. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                   Bank density at the concession level       Number of banks at the grid-cell level
                                      All banks          Chinese banks           All banks         Chinese banks
                                          1                     2                    3                    4
 British * Post1845                   18.090**             14.289**               0.669***             0.533**
                                      (6.927)               (5.931)              (0.216)              (0.208)
 Year FE                                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Concession FE                           Yes                   Yes
 Grid-cell FE                                                                        Yes                 Yes
 R-Squared                               0.799               0.793                  0.482               0.473
 Observations                             172                 172                   8,600               8,600




                                                          35
                                         Table II
     Bank Density and the Formation of the Mixed Courts in the Concessions, 1840-1925
This table presents regression results relating bank density to the formation of the Shanghai Concessions and the
formation of the Mixed Courts in the British and French Concessions. Post1845 indicates the formation of the
concessions, so it equals one after 1845 and equals zero for the years from 1840 through 1845. Post1869
indicates the formation of the Mixed Courts, so it equals one after 1869 and equals zero for the years from 1840
through 1869. The note to Table  provides the definition of Chinese banks and grid cells. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses and are clustered at the grid-cell level in columns 3 and 4. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                    Bank density at the concession level    Number of banks at the grid-cell level
                                       All banks         Chinese banks          All banks         Chinese banks
                                           1                   2                    3                   4
 British * Post1845                      2.456                0.584               0.082***            0.019**
                                        (5.953)              (5.023)             (0.030)             (0.009)
 British * Post1869                     22.334***            19.579***            0.839***            0.733**
                                        (3.182)              (2.685)             (0.297)             (0.289)
 Year FE                                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Concession FE                            Yes                  Yes
 Grid-cell FE                                                                      Yes                 Yes
 R-Squared                               0.874                 0.874              0.490               0.480
 Observations                             172                   172               8,600               8,600




                                                          36
                                                                    Table III
                       Bank Density and the Formation of the Mixed Courts in the Concessions: Additional Controls, 1846-1925
This table presents regression results relating bank density to the formation of the Mixed Courts in the British and French Concessions while controlling for time-varying
characteristics of the concessions. In columns 1-5, the dependent variable is the total number of banks per square kilometer in the respective concession in a year. In columns
6-10, the dependent variable is the total number of Chinese-owned banks per square kilometer in the respective concession in a year. Population density is defined as the
number (in thousands) of total people per square kilometer at the concession level in the previous year. Homeland's GDP denotes the logarithm of British GDP for the
British concession and the logarithm of French GDP for the French concession in the previous year. Municipal Council is a dummy that equals one if a municipal
council was established in a concession. The British municipal council was established in 1854, and the French one was established in 1862. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                                                                  All banks                                                            Chinese banks
                                             1           2            3            4            5                 6           7              8               9            10
 British * Post1869                      20.663***   10.343**     22.223***    10.532**     11.004***        18.168***      9.078**      19.347***        9.073**     10.809***
                                         (3.059)     (4.843)      (3.838)      (4.961)      (4.080)           (2.581)      (4.065)        (3.238)        (4.163)       (3.142)
 Population density (lag)                 0.296***                              0.256***     0.096*            0.250***                                   0.215***      0.066*
                                         (0.077)                               (0.077)      (0.050)           (0.065)                                    (0.064)       (0.038)
 Homeland's GDP (log lag)                             42.074***                33.585***   -16.398*                        36.842***                    29.775***    -11.872*
                                                     (13.054)                 (12.617)      (8.605)                       (10.957)                     (10.587)        (6.627)
 Municipal Council                                                -0.332       -2.349        0.650                                        -0.694         -2.419         0.388
                                                                  (5.863)      (5.218)      (2.886)                                       (4.946)        (4.379)       (2.223)
 Year FE                                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Concession FE                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 British * quadratic trend since 1845                                                          Yes                                                                       Yes
 R-Squared                                0.890        0.885       0.869        0.900         0.971            0.890        0.886          0.870         0.901          0.976
 Observations                              160          160         160          160           160              160          160            160           160            160
                                    Table IV
Stock Companies and the Formation of the Mixed Courts in the Concessions, 1866-1925
This table presents regression results relating stock company density to the formation of the Mixed Courts in
1869. In column 1, the dependent variable is the number of stock companies per square kilometer in the
respective concession in a year. In column 2, the dependent variable is the number of stock companies per grid
cell in a year. British is a dummy variable that equals one for the British Concession and zero for the French
Concession. Post1869 equals one after the formation of the Mixed Courts, so it equals one after 1869 and equals
zero for the years from 1866 through 1869. The regressions control year fixed effects (Year FE) and either
Concession fixed effects (Concession FE) or Grid-cell fixed effects (Grid-cell FE) as indicated. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the grid-cell level in column 2. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Stock company density at the      Number of stock companies at the
                                                  concession level                    grid-cell level 
                                                        1                                    2
 British * Post1869                                   10.085**                              0.362**
                                                      (4.904)                              (0.157)
 Year FE                                               Yes                                  Yes
 Concession FE                                         Yes
 Grid-cell FE                                                                               Yes
 R-Squared                                             0.801                               0.554
 Observations                                           120                                6,000




                                                        38
                                              Table V
                               Rendition of the Mixed Courts in 1926

This table examines the comparative changes in bank density, stock company density, and market capitalization
between the British and French Concessions after the agreement regarding the rendition of the Mixed Courts in
1926. Bank density and stock company density equal, respectively, the annual number of banks and stock
companies per square kilometer in the respective concession. Market capitalization equals the annual total
market capitalization of stock companies in a concession per square kilometer. In columns 1-3, the sample
period is from 1917 to 1936, i.e., the 10-year window around the court rendition. In columns 4-6, the sample
period is from 1922 to 1931, i.e., the 5-year window around the rendition. The regressions control year fixed
effects (Year FE) and Concession fixed effects (Concession FE). Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *,
**, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                            Period of analysis is 1917-1936                 Period of analysis is 1922-1931
                                        Stock                                           Stock
                        Bank         company           Market-          Bank          company           Market-
                       density         density      capitalization     density         density       capitalization
                          1               2                3              4                5                6
 British * Post 1926   -8.246*      -11.594***         -1.272***     -13.099***        -6.010***        -0.713**
                       (3.988)         (1.967)         (0.205)        (2.779)          (1.702)          (0.251)
 Year FE                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Concession FE           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 R-Square               0.980           0.973           0.986           0.996           0.992            0.990
 Observations            40              40               40             20               20               20




                                                            39
                                            Table VI
                       Stock Returns and the Rendition of the Mixed Courts
This table provides regression results relating stock returns to the rendition of the Mixed Courts to Chinese
jurisdiction. The dependent variable is a firm's monthly stock return, defined as the log difference of month-end
prices, i.e., log(pricet) ­ log(pricet-1). The sample period is from September 1925 through August of 1927, i.e., a
24-month window around the month of the court rendition announcement. Post-Rendition is a dummy that
equals one for the months after the August 1926 rendition announcement. Firm controls include the log duration
(of months) since the firm went public (listed) and the log market capitalization. Firm FE refers to the firm fixed
effects that absorb all time-invariant firm characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                                                                       Stock return
                                           1                    2                       3              4
 Post-Rendition                         -0.049***           -0.055***                 -0.001         0.003
                                        (0.007)             (0.009)                   (0.006)       (0.007)
 British * Post-Rendition                                                             -0.051***     -0.060***
                                                                                      (0.010)       (0.010)
 British                                                                               0.038***
                                                                                      (0.008)
 Firm controls                            Yes                  Yes                      Yes           Yes
 Firm FE                                  No                   Yes                      No            Yes
 R-squared                               0.017                 0.062                  0.017          0.063
 Observations                            2,909                 2,909                  2,909          2,909




                                                          40
                                       Table VII
         Legal Origins and Finance: Concessions in other Chinese Cities, 1850-1936
This table provides regression results relating bank density to the legal origin of the foreign entity with legal
jurisdiction over 16 concessions in three cities (Tianjin, Hankou, and Guangzhou). Appendix Table A4 provides
details on the countries and legal traditions with jurisdiction over these concessions. In columns 1-3, the
dependent variable is the total number of banks per square kilometer in the respective concession in a year. In
columns 4 and 5, the dependent variable is the total number of Chinese-owned banks per square kilometer in the
respective concession in a year. Common Law is a dummy variable that equals one for the concessions ruled by
common law countries and zero for the concessions ruled by civil law countries. Post is a dummy variable that
equals one after the concession was established. Population density is the number (in thousands) of total people
per square kilometer at the concession-year level. In columns 3 and 5, we restrict the analysis to only the
concessions of Britain and France to compare the British common law to French civil law. The regressions
control for year fixed effects (Year FE) and Concession fixed effects (Concession FE) as indicated. Standard
errors clustered at the concession and year levels are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                  All banks                                Chinese banks
                                                                  British vs.                       British vs.
                                     All             All            French              All           French
                                 concessions     concessions     concessions        concessions    concessions
                                      1               2                3                 4               5
 Common Law * Post                 5.320***         4.393***       3.793**             3.807***       3.076**
                                  (0.996)          (1.139)        (1.764)             (1.053)        (1.210)
 Population density (lag)                           0.134***       0.227***            0.133***       0.229***
                                                   (0.028)        (0.020)             (0.028)        (0.030)
 Year FE                             Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
 Concession FE                       Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
 R-Squared                          0.347           0.435           0.629              0.429          0.622
 Observations                       1,392           1,392            522               1,392           522




                                                         41
                      Supplementary Appendix

A. Figures and Tables




   Figure A1. The Mixed Court at the British Concession of Shanghai (1869 to 1927)

Source: Wikipedia,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:International_Mixed_Court_at_Shanghai7.jpg




                                            42
                                         Figure A2. Record of Stock Quotation in Shanghai Exchange in 1866
Source: The North-China Herald, section "Shares and Stocks" on June 9th, 1866.
                               Figure A3. Population Density in 1935
Notes: This figure depicts the population density by census district in Shanghai concessions in 1935, based on
Henriot et al. (2018).




                                                       44
Table A1. Summary Statistics

                   Variable                      Obs.           Mean         S.D.         Min          Max
Concession-year level
Bank density                                      194         17.821          25.074        0            95.652
Chinese bank density                              194         14.788          21.517        0            82.609
Stock company density                             142         12.231          11.291        0            36.715
Market capitalization (in 1,000 Taels per km2)     86     50,605.35       65,551.21       404.11    241,102.3
Population density (1,000 habitants per km2)      194         38.156          21.503        3.248       112.779
Homeland's GDP (in Int. GK$)                      194     125,674.9       59,782.19    49,828       284,141.8
Grid-year level
Number of banks                                  9,700            0.629        2.573       0             47
Number of Chinese banks                          9,700            0.515        2.432       0             47
Number of stock companies                        7,100            0.445        1.636       0             21
Market capitalization (in 1,000 Taels)           6,492        1,341.825   10,087.21        0        213,904.1
Firm-month level
Stock return (September 1925-August 1927)        3,356           -0.005       0.232        -4.520         3.401




                                                         45
Table A2. Bank Density and the Formation of the Mixed Courts in the Concessions:
Alternative Samples

This table replicates Table  except for restricting the period to the Qing dynasty (1840-1910) (Panel A) and
using the 5-year data (Panel B). Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the grid-cell
level in columns 3 and 4. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                                               Concession level                               Grid-cell level 
                                           1                       2                     3                       4
                                                                   Qing dynasty, 1840-1910 
 British * Post1845                      11.553***            2.456                     0.414***              0.082***
                                         (3.436)             (2.015)                   (0.140)               (0.030)
 British * Post1869                                          14.422***                                        0.526**
                                                             (1.135)                                         (0.206)
 Year FE                                  Yes                 Yes                       Yes                   Yes
 Concession FE                            Yes                 Yes
 Grid-cell FE                                                                           Yes                   Yes
 R-Squared                               0.813                0.944                    0.512                 0.522
 Observations                             142                  142                     7,100                 7,100
 Panel B                                                         Five-year data, 1840-1925
 British * Post1845                      19.637                2.415                    0.729***             0.081**
                                        (13.654)             (13.640)                  (0.232)              (0.031)
 British * Post1869                                           22.962**                                       0.865***
                                                              (9.093)                                       (0.303)
 Year FE                                  Yes                  Yes                      Yes                  Yes
 Concession FE                            Yes                  Yes
 Grid-cell FE                                                                           Yes                   Yes
 R-Squared                               0.803                0.862                    0.468                 0.475
 Observations                             36                    36                     1,800                 1,800




                                                        46
Table A3. Other Concessions in China between 1860 and 1936
                                                                                                Year of
  City                         Concession                    Home Country     Legal origin   establishment
 Tianjin    British concession in Tientsin                     Britain         Common            1860
            American concession in Tientsin                  United States     Common            1860
            French concession in Tianjin (Concession            France           Civil           1861
            française de Tientsin)
            German concession in Tianjin                        Germany          Civil           1895
            Japanese concession in Tianjin                       Japan           Civil           1898
            Russian concession in Tianjin                        Russia          Civil           1900
            Italian concession in Tianjin (La Concessione         Italy          Civil           1902
            italiana di Tientsin)
            Austro-Hungarian concession in Tianjin           Austro-Hungary     Civil            1902
            Belgian concession in Tianjin                       Belgium         Civil            1902
 Hankou     British Concession in Hankou                         Britain       Common            1861
            French Concession in Hankou                          France         Civil            1896
            Japanese concession in Hankou                         Japan         Civil            1898
            Russian concession in Hankou                         Russia         Civil            1896
            German concession in Hankou                         Germany         Civil            1895
Guangzhou   British concession in Shamian Island                 Britain       Common            1861
            French Concession in Shamian Island                  France         Civil            1861




                                                        47
Appendix B. Data Sources

1. Data sources for banks

Bank of Communications. 1995. Zhongguo Jiaotong Yinhang Shiliao, Diyijuan: 1907­1949
        (Historical Materials on the Chinese Bank of Communications, Volume One: 1907­
        1949). Beijing: Zhongguo Jinrong Chubanshe.
Bu, M. 1995. Zhongguo Yinhang Hangshi, 1912­1949 (The History of the Bank of China,
        1912­1949). Beijing: Zhongguo Jinrong Chubanshe.
Chen, X., Gu, T., and Wang, W. 2000. Zhongguo Tongshang Yinhang (The Imperial Bank of
        China). Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin Chubanshe.
Ge, Y. 2009. Huyou Zaji (Shanghai Travel Miscellanea). Shanghai: Shanghai Shudian
        Chubanshe.
Jiang, H. 1990. Zhongguo Difang Yinhangshi (A History of Local Banks in China).
        Changsha: Hunan Chubanshe.
Jiang, J. 2014. Jindai Zhongguo Yinhangye Jigou Renming Dacidian (Dictionary of Modern
        Chinese Banking Institutions and Personages). Shanghai: Shanghai Guji Chubanshe.
Li, Q., and Zhao, W. 1978. Shanghai Zhi Qianzhuang (The Money Houses in Shanghai).
        Taipei: Huashi Chubanshe.
Lin, Z. 1928. Shanghai Shangye Minglu (Shanghai Business Directory). Shanghai: The
        Commercial Press.
North China Daily News. 1872-1941. The North-China Desk Hong List (1872-1941).
        Shanghai: North China Daily News.
Quanguo Tushuguan Wenxian Suowei Fuzhi Zhongxin. 2010. Minguo Shiqi Shanghai
        Shiliao Wenxian Congbian, Diyice (Historical Materials of Shanghai in the
        Republican Period, First Volume). Beijing: Quanguo Tushuguan Wenxian Suowei
        Fuzhi Zhongxin.
Shanghai Tongshe. 1984. Shanghai Yanjiu Ziliao Xubian (Continuation of Shanghai Study
        Materials). Shanghai: Shanghai Shudian Chubanshe.
Shangwu Yinshuguan Bianyisuo. 1922, 1925, 1930, and 1936. Shanghai Zhinan (Shanghai
        Directory). Shanghai: The Commercial Press.
The People's Bank of China Shanghai Branch. 1960. Shanghai Qianzhuang Shiliao
        (Historical Materials on Money Houses in Shanghai). Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin
        Chubanshe.
Wang, Z. 1934. Zhongguo zhi Chuxu Yinhang Shi (A History of Savings Banks in China).
        Beijing: Zhishi Chanquan Chubanshe.
Xu, K. 1920. Shanghai Shangye Minglu (Shanghai Business Directory). Shanghai: The
        Commercial Press.
Zhongguo Yinhang Jingji Yanjiushi. 1934-1937. Quanguo Yinhang Nianjian (National
        Banking Yearbook). Beijing: Zhongguo Yinhang Jingji Yanjiushi.

2. Data source for population in other concessions of China

Chen, W., and Lai, X. 2004. Tianjin de Renkou Bianqian (Population Change in Tianjin).
       Tianjin: Tianjin Guji Chubanshe.
Fei, C. 1991. Zhongguo Zujie Shi (Concessions in Historical China). Shanghai: Shanghai
       Shehui Kexueyuan Chubanshe.
Guangzhou Difangzhi Bianzuan Weiyuanhui Bangongshi. 1995. Jindai Guangzhou Kou-an
       Jingji Shehui Gaikuang (Social-Economic Overview of Modern Guangzhou Port).
       Jinan: Jinan Daxye Chubanshe.

                                           48
Huang, X. 1990. Zhenjiang Wenshi Ziliao (Literature and History Materials of Zhenjiang).
         Beijing: Zhongguo Wenshi Chubanshe.
Jin, P., and He, Y. 1989. Hangzhou Gongchenqiao Rizujie de Jige Wenti (Issues on the
         Japanese Concession in Hangzhou Gongchenqiao), Hangzhou Daxue Xuebao, Zhexue
         Shehui Kexue Ban, 4, 144­153.
Jin, P., and He, Y. 1992. Hangzhou Gongchenqiao Rizujie dui Hangzhou de Yingxiang (The
         Impact of Gongchenqiao Japanese Concession on Hangzhou). Hangzhou Daxue
         Xuebao, Zhexue Shehui Kexue Ban, 1, 110­117.
Li, G., and Lin, W. 2006. Qingdai Guangzhou Shisanhang Jilue (A Brief Account of the
         Thirteen Hongs of Guangzhou in the Qing Dynasty). Guangzhou: Guangdong Renmin
         Chubanshe.
Li, J. 1990. Tianjin Renkou Shi (Population History of Tianjin). Tianjin: Nankai Daxue
         Chubanshe.
Osato, H., and Son, A. 2011. Zujie Yanjiu Xin Dongtai (Perspective of the Concession
         Studies). Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin Chubanshe.
Tianjin Dang-an Guan. 1992. Tianjin Zujie Dang-an Xuanbian (Selected Archives of Tianjin
         Concession). Tianjin: Tianjin Renmin Chubanshe.
Tianjinshi Difangzhi Bianxiu Weiyuanhui. 2001. Tianjin Tongzhi (Gazetteer of Tianjin).
         Tianjin: Tianjin Renmin Chubanshe.
Yuan, J. 2003. Hankou Zujie Zhi (History of Hankou Concession). Wuhan: Wuhan
         Chubanshe.
Zhang, H. 1993. Tianjin de Renkou Bianqian (Population Changes in Tianjin). Tianjin:
         Tianjin Renmin Chubanshe.
Zhengxie Wuhu Xian Wenshi Weiyuanhui. 1994. Wuhu Xian Wenshi Ziliao, Di Si Ji
         (Literature and History Materials of Wuhu Xian, Volume 4). Beijing: Zhongguo
         Wenshi Chubanshe.
Zhongguo Renmin Zhengzhi Xieshang Huiyi Guangzhoushi Weiyuanhui Wenshi Ziliao
         Yanjiu Weiyuanhui. 1991. Guangzhou Wenshi Ziliao (Literature and History
         Materials of Guangzhou). Guangzhou: Guangdong Renmin Chubanshe.
Zhou, D. 2009. Hankou de Zujie: Yixiang Lishi Shehuixue de Kaocha (The Concession of
         Hankou: A Survey Based on Historical Sociology). Tianjin: Tianjin Jiaoyu
         Chubanshe.




                                           49
