                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IS PUBLIC EQUITY DEADLY? EVIDENCE FROM WORKPLACE SAFETY AND
              PRODUCTIVITY TRADEOFFS IN THE COAL INDUSTRY

                                         Erik P. Gilje
                                       Michael D. Wittry

                                      Working Paper 28798
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28798


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




For their helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Elsa Allman, Zahi Ben-David, Rebecca De
Simone, Dave Denis, Scott Guensey, Jon Karpoff, Ed Rice, Philip Strahan, Ren Stulz, and
Michael Weisbach, as well as brownbag, seminar, and conferences participants at Ohio State
University, University of Washington, University of Tennessee, the Young Scholars Finance
Consortium, and the Financial Markets and Corporate Governance Conference. We are also very
grateful to Reza Noorani and Victor Yu at the Mine Safety and Health Administration for
gracefully answering our many data requests and questions. Hoa Briscoe-Tran provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Erik P. Gilje and Michael D. Wittry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Public Equity Deadly? Evidence from Workplace Safety and Productivity Tradeoffs in
the Coal Industry
Erik P. Gilje and Michael D. Wittry
NBER Working Paper No. 28798
May 2021
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,J24,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

We study how ownership structure, in particular public listing status, affects workplace safety and
productivity tradeoffs. Theory offers competing hypotheses on how listing related frictions affect
these tradeoffs. We exploit detailed asset-level data in the U.S. coal industry and find that
workplace safety deteriorates dramatically under public firm ownership, primarily in mines that
experience the largest productivity increases. We find evidence consistent with information
asymmetry between managers and shareholders of public firms, and ties of private firm
ownership with local communities being first-order drivers of workplace safety and productivity
tradeoffs.


Erik P. Gilje
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gilje@wharton.upenn.edu

Michael D. Wittry
The Ohio State Univeristy
854 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Ave
854 Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
United States
wittry.2@osu.edu
How does ownership structure affect workplace safety and firm productivity? Privately held
and publicly traded firms are responsible for roughly equal portions of U.S. economic output,
but are subject to extremely large differences in agency and financial frictions, which can
lead to significant variation in corporate policies and real outcomes (Gilje and Taillard, 2016).
While extant literature has explored economic mechanisms that affect workplace safety (Cohn
and Wardlaw, 2016; Cohn et al., 2021b) and firm productivity (Bai et al., 2018), evidence
on how ownership structure affects these outcomes and potential tradeoffs is limited. In
this paper, we focus on one dimension of distinct variation in ownership structure, public
listing status, and study how listing related frictions affect potential tradeoffs that firms face
between workplace safety and firm productivity.
   Theory offers competing predictions on how listing status might relate to workplace safety.
The cost of adverse workplace incidents could be higher for public companies, which have
greater disclosure requirements (Christensen et al., 2017), and are subject to greater stock-
holder and political pressure. Moreover, public firms could have higher reputational risk than
private firms due to greater media exposure and awareness (Chen et al., 2004). Finally, public
firms have greater access to external capital markets (Brav, 2009), potentially alleviating cuts
to safety investments when internally constrained (Cohn and Wardlaw, 2016). These factors
each point towards public firms having safer workplaces than their private counterparts.
   Alternatively, there are reasons to believe that privately held companies could have fewer
workplace injuries and accidents. For example, due to information asymmetry arising from
diffuse ownership, public firm managers may face additional pressure to cut costs on work-
place safety to increase profits. Relatedly, private firms may have non-diversified owners with
strong social ties to a local community, and may derive personal utility from a safe workplace
and good relationships with employees. Lastly, the greater dispersion of ownership in public
firms leads to greater risk-sharing opportunities among shareholders (Pagano, 1993; Pagano
et al., 1998), which may manifest in additional safety risk. These factors would suggest
that public firms engage in activities that result in a higher workplace injury and accident
propensity. Ultimately, it is an empirical question as to how workplace safety changes with
listing status, as well as what tradeoffs a firm makes as it relates to safety and productivity.

                                                1
   We focus on coal mining in the U.S. Due to the inherent safety concerns, this industry
receives significant scrutiny from Federal authorities over workplace safety practices. Safety
violation, injury and accident, and fatality data is collected and reported in a standardized
way across all public and private firms for almost four decades. The data also offer detailed
granularity on the number of hours worked, number of employees, and amount of coal pro-
duced at the asset/facility level. Moreover, the data also provide information on the type of
workplace risk the regulators attach to a specific violation; that is, whether the behavior in
question was related to a low-, medium-, or high-probability activity. Lastly, while we do not
have an instrument for listing status, we are able to trace individual asset ownership that
moves across listing status, and thus structure empirical tests to mitigate the most salient
endogeneity concerns.
   We find that workplace safety is strongly related to listing status. Specifically, mines
that are purchased by public firms or are part of an IPO experience a large increase in
safety violations. However, this increase is concentrated in what appears to be tail risk,
or violations for potential accidents stemming from low-probability events. Such violations
increase by nearly 57%. Furthermore, upon a listing status change, workplace fatalities
increase four-fold relative to the unconditional sample mean. These results are directionally
consistent with the hypotheses that link public listing status with workplaces that are less
safe and engaged in higher risk taking. Importantly, these results allow us to characterize not
only the direction, but also the type of safety risk that public firms undertake. In particular,
we find no evidence that public firms are reckless or participate in the highest probability
activities. Rather, public firms tend to increase risk by augmenting their distribution to
include significantly more low-probability events, which at times results in fatal accidents.
   We also find that mine productivity is tightly linked with listing status. That is, mines
that become publicly held experience a significant increase in the productivity of their labor.
Specifically, coal production per hour spent on mining activities increases by 13.2% and coal
production per mine employee goes up 15.8%. Assuming fixed wages and hours across a
listing status change, this would translate into nearly a $3.19 million annual profit increase
for the average mine in our sample. How do these changes in productivity relate to changes in

                                               2
workplace risk and safety? We assess this directly by splitting our sample by the relative size
of productivity increases over the life of the asset. We find that increases in safety violations
upon a listing status change are concentrated in the group of mines that have experienced
the largest productivity increases. This evidence suggests that public firms increase labor
productivity at the expense of workplace safety within individual mines, and more specifically,
that firms are increasing safety risks in parts of the distribution that are expected to be lower
probability, and therefore likely to be realized less frequently.
   Why might managers of public firms be more willing to trade off worker safety for in-
creased productivity? We assess several non-mutually exclusive economic mechanisms that
may be driving the change in behavior among publicly listed firms. Specifically, we con-
struct empirical tests to assess support for whether information asymmetry between public
shareholders and public firm managers could be associated with our results. We also exam-
ine empirical evidence on how private firm ownership and local presence and ties with the
community amongst private firms may be related to our results. We are careful to note that
this list of mechanisms is not exhaustive, but rather, these are the set of mechanisms most
conducive to being tested in our setting.
   Extant literature has argued that information asymmetry between shareholders and man-
agers creates difficulty for shareholders in observing managerial effort relative to potential
confounding factors (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001; Grenadier and Malenko, 2011). To
assess to what extent this channel might be driving our results, we exploit changes in coal
prices that are likely to differentially alter the importance of information asymmetry for pub-
lic firms relative to private firms. Coal price shocks have several attractive features. First,
they are plausibly exogenous to any single mine or firm. Secondly, just as in the oil and
gas industry, coal price declines have a disproportionately large impact on firm profitability,
which in turn strongly impacts managerial turnover (Jenter and Lewellen, 2020).
   At privately held firms, where there is a tight link between ownership and control, owners
are likely to know to what extent poor firm performance can be attributed to "bad luck" with
prices. Alternatively, at public firms, the separation of ownership and control likely makes
it difficult for owners to know what portion of poor performance can be attributed to price

                                                3
changes, and what portion is due to poor managerial skill or decision-making (Bertrand
and Mullainathan, 2001). Further, problematic CEOs at public firms are unlikely to be
successful when attempting to signal these portions to diffuse shareholders (Grenadier and
Malenko, 2011). Thus, during periods of coal price declines, managers of public firms may
feel intense pressure to increase productivity, and thus take on risks that they think are
unlikely to materialize in order to do so. In re-estimating our tests on workplace safety and
productivity, we find that the entirety of the effects are concentrated during years in which
coal prices are declining, precisely when the separation of ownership and control is likely to
exert its greatest pressure on managerial decision-making.
   We also construct two sets of tests to assess how private firm preferences and community
ties may relate to our results. First, firm managers and owners may feel a stronger respon-
sibility to the local community surrounding the mine if they reside nearby (e.g., if the firm's
offices are headquartered in close proximity to the mine). Public firms, on the other hand,
have diffuse ownership and thus may have less consumption value related to stewardship of
jobs located close to a firm's headquarters. We find that public listing status is only related
to workplace safety and productivity for mines that are located near the firm's headquarters.
This result is consistent with privately held mines being safer in communities close to where
a firm's owners and managers live, and then transitioning to being more dangerous, but more
productive workplaces, once owned by a dispersed set of public owners.
   Secondly, to assess further support for this channel, we also examine the role of regulatory
oversight of mines. If private firm managers do indeed derive significant consumption value
from being good stewards of safety for their employees, the intensity of regulatory oversight
and the probability of violation detection may ultimately play a small role in the safety-
productivity tradeoff optimization. To test this hypothesis, we exploit a small number of
MSHA inspection office closures, moves, and district realignments that change the proximity
of the regulator to assigned mines, and thus the intensity of oversight and probability of
detection. Because MSHA inspection office locations are chosen to optimize inspector travel
times to all of the operating mines in the district, these changes are plausibly exogenous
to any given mine or firm. We find that mines do re-optimize the mix between workplace

                                              4
safety and productivity following inspection office changes, but only among those held by
publicly-listed firms. In particular, publicly owned mines significantly increase both low-
and medium-probability safety violations, as well as productivity, following large decreases
in the proximity to the regulator, which is consistent with the argument that regulatory
oversight is potentially less important for closely-held firms that may have stronger ties to
their employee's well-being.
   A potential concern with our empirical design is that listing status is not randomly as-
signed, and that private and public firms differ across a range of both observable and un-
observable characteristics. Fortunately, our data allow us to observe behavior at the mine
level, and our primary results focus on within mine ownership changes across public and
private firms. This allows us to control for many of the most salient endogeneity concerns.
For example, focusing on the asset level holds constant the type of coal being mined (mine
cash flow and investment opportunities), the specific technology employed to mine the coal
(surface versus underground), the organic safety features of the mine (natural ventilation
systems), and the mine size and resources/reserves available, among other things. We also
verify directly in placebo tests that mine safety and productivity are not trending prior to the
ownership change. Additionally, each mine makes up only a portion of the entire portfolio of
company assets, and on its own, is unlikely to drive a listing status change or acquisition de-
cision. Finally, the subsample comparisons we make when evaluating economic mechanisms
would require a confounding, non-listing status related effect, to reconcile why the observed
differences across subsamples would be present.
   This study contributes to a large literature on listing status, and more broadly, on the
ownership structure of the firm. Existing papers have studied how listing related frictions
affect dividends (Michaely and Roberts, 2012), capital structure (Brav, 2009), investment
(Gilje and Taillard, 2016; Asker et al., 2011), research and development (Bernstein, 2015),
and pollution (Shive and Foster, 2020). These papers highlight various economic mechanisms
related to listing status that affect differences in firm behavior, including frictions in accessing
external capital, as well as information asymmetry between mangers and shareholders. Our
paper also more broadly highlights the role that information asymmetry plays across own-

                                                 5
ership structures, and relates to theories on myopia (Stein, 1989), and signaling to investors
(Grenadier and Malenko, 2011).
   We also contribute to the literature that relates the economic frictions firms face to
employee well-being. For example, Hanka (1998) draws a link between firm debt levels and
reductions in employment, while Benmelech et al. (2015) show that firms with higher leverage
have employment levels that are more sensitive to cash flow changes. Whiles these studies
highlight an indirect link to employee well-being through their employment status, Cohn and
Wardlaw (2016) point out a more direct link. In particular, Americans experience 3.5 million
workplace injuries a year, with estimated costs to the economy of $250 billion annually. Both
Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) and Filer and Golbe (2003) find that the financial condition of
the firm significantly impacts workplace safety environments.
   Two prior studies are closely related to our work in this area. The first is Cohn et al.
(2021b), who find that workplace safety improves upon the private equity buyout of a publicly
traded firm. This result is directionally consistent with ours, but the authors are unable to
observe the potential tradeoffs between safety and productivity in their sample. The second
is Christensen et al. (2017), who find that workplace safety improves and labor productivity
decreases for mines owned by SEC-registered issuers following Dodd Frank's requirement that
mine safety records be included in financial reports. Our work complements and extends these
results by showing public firms appear to bear more safety risk, even with higher costs of
disclosure.
   Lastly, we contribute to a greater understanding of factors that drive productivity. Extant
literature has studied an abundance of economic mechanisms which might drive productivity
(see Foster et al. (2001) for a review). Recent finance literature has tied aggregate pro-
ductivity to financing frictions (Bai et al., 2018). Overall, our paper extends each of these
branches of the literature by linking ownership structure, and in particular, listing related-
frictions to tradeoffs between workplace safety and employee well-being, firm risk-taking, and
productivity.




                                              6
1         Data, Empirical Measures of Workplace Safety, and

          Summary Statistics

1.1         Data

The vast majority of our data are collected by the Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA). Part 50 of Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulation (30 CFR Part 50) requires
operators to file reports with MSHA pertaining to accidents, occupational injuries and ill-
nesses, safety violations and civil penalties, coal dust samples, as well as employment and
coal production data, all at the mine level. Further, MSHA keeps detailed historical records
of mine addresses and geographic coordinates, MSHA inspection offices assignments, mine
production status, unionization status, mine operators and contractors, and ultimate mine
ownership (what MSHA calls controllers).
        MSHA provides most of the 30 CFR Part 50 data in text delimited data sets as part of
an Open Government Initiative. This data is often recompiled and reproduced by various
other federal entities. For example, for ease of access, the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) posts annual address/employment and accident/injury/illness
files in SPSS format through the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website.1
The remaining data are accessible through MSHA's Mine Data Retrieval System (MDRS).
The MDRS includes additional text delimited data on dust and noise samples, civil penalties
and safety violations, and conferences on contested citations.
        Though much of the data MSHA collects covers both coal and metal/nonmetal mining,
we focus exclusively on coal mining for a few reasons. First, and foremost, 30 CFR Part
50 requires coal operators to file reports to MSHA on production quantities, while the same
is not required of metal/nonmetal operators. Secondly, on average, coal mining is more
    1
        See https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/data/default.html.




                                                     7
dangerous than metal/nonmetal mining, creating a more suitable laboratory for studying
the safety tradeoffs public and private firms make.2
       We combine the mine-level data from MSHA with hand-collected data on listing status for
a mine's ultimate owner. We collect this data from a number of sources, including firm SEC
filings accessed via EDGAR, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's
website. Because of complex corporate trees with multiple levels of subsidiaries, this is a
non-trivial collection task. However, when possible, we cross-validate listing statuses using
multiple data sources. Finally, average annual coal sale price data by state and by mine type
(underground or surface) are from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). The
EIA makes this data publicly available through the Annual Coal Report Archive dating back
to 1993.3
       We impose several data filters on our main sample. First, we winsorize all ratio variables
at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Definitions for all variables used in our main analysis appear
in Appendix Table A.1. Second, for a mine-year observation to be included in our sample,
it must satisfy the following criteria: (1) the mine is actively producing coal and employs
at least 5 workers, (2) the mine produces bituminous (not anthracite) coal, and (3) the
ultimate owner of the mine is not foreign, not part of a joint venture, not structured as a sole
proprietorship or a partnership, and owns at least one other mine (two mines total). These
filters leave a final sample of 4,257 coal mines owned by 1,411 ultimate parents (68 that are
public at some point) for a total of 21,538 mine-firm-year observations. Figure 1 displays
the geographic location of the mines in our final sample. Though they are overwhelmingly
located in the Mid-Atlantic, there is little evidence of clustering by listing status.


1.2       Empirical Measures of Workplace Safety

Investigating the relationship between ownership structure, particularly private versus public
firms, and workplace safety is inherently difficult. The data needed to address this relation-
   2
     Though increased regulations have made them safer over time, both coal mining and metal/nonmetal
mining remain among the most dangerous industries in the world. However, according to MSHA, since 1983,
the average fatality rate per 100,000 miners in coal mining is nearly double that of metal/nonmetal mining.
   3
     See https://www.eia.gov/coal/annual/archive/.


                                                    8
ship are often unavailable, particularly for private firms. Further, even when the data are
accessible by researchers, for example through OSHA, studies can suffer from small samples,
infrequent sampling, and significant heterogeneity in types and severity of workplace inci-
dents, e.g. across different industries. Also complicating empirical studies of workplace safety
is the fact that most empirical measures are from an ex post perspective. While realized ac-
cidents are almost certainly positively correlated with ex ante workplace safety investments
and risk-taking, accidents and workplace incidents have a large random component and us-
ing only realized measures could lead to mistaken inferences. Finally, it is difficult to find
measures that reflect tangible safety costs to the firm. That is, the costs associated with
missed time, medical bills, and workers compensation, etc., for small injuries such as sprains
and contusions are likely negligible to the firm.
       To make progress on each of these data challenges, we proxy for a firm's workplace
safety with two empirical measures. The first is from an ex-ante perspective ­ the number
of safety violations MSHA cites a firm for potential accidents. This measure is similar to
that of Filer and Golbe (2003) and Cohn et al. (2021b), who use OSHA safety violations,
and is distinct from many studies on workplace safety such as Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) in
that the firm may or may not actually experience an accident or injuries stemming from a
specific violation. However, unlike OSHA violations which stem from infrequent and irregular
inspections, safety violations in coal mining arise from regular inspections by MSHA, which
is mandated by Section 103(a) of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 to inspect
underground mines a minimum of four times per year and surface mines a minimum of
twice per year.4 Further highlighting the unique nature and richness of the data, MSHA
classifies the violations into categories based on the likelihood or probability an accident
will ultimately occur.5 We use this variation to further homogenize the type and severity
   4
      MSHA also notes that mines with high levels of explosives or toxic gases will be inspected even more
frequently, and that inspections are also conducted following complaints of unsafe working conditions.
    5
      MSHA deems these categories "unlikely," "reasonably likely," and "highly likely," while we refer to these
categories as "low probability," "medium probability," and "high probability." While investigators aren't
directed to classify the violations by specific percentages, MSHA notes that "the occurrence of an injury or
illness does not have to be more probable than not in order for the likelihood to be designated as reasonably
likely." Furthermore, MSHA classifies each violation into four categories based on the severity of the potential



                                                       9
of workplace incidents, and to more precisely examine the types and amount of safety risk
public and private firms are willing or able to bear.
   Figure 2 displays the annual time series of total coal mining safety violations issued by
MSHA from 1993-2018. Through the Act of 1977 and the MINER Act of 2006, mining in
general, and coal mining specifically, has undoubted become safer though time (e.g., see
Nieto and Duerksen (2008) and Amoako et al. (2020)). However, the trend in aggregate
safety violations suggests a procyclical enforcement of these regulations. That is, both in
our sample and in all of MSHA's data, safety violations peek in the run-up to the dot-com
bubble and the financial crisis in 2000 and 2008, respectively, before declining through the
recessions. The share of violations between public and private firms in our sample remains
relatively stable through time. Notwithstanding, our sample accounts for approximately 25%
of the total safety violations in the coal mining industry each year.
   Second, to supplement our main results using ex ante safety violations, we also exploit an
ex-post measure of realized workplace safety ­ the number of mining fatalities a firm reports
to MSHA each year. Even with a significant random component in workplace fatalities, this
measure offers a significant benefit in measuring the quality of a firm's workplace safety.
Principally, fatalities are likely to represent the single largest cost to mining firms stemming
from underinvestment in workplace safety, or for bearing additional safety risk. Thus, while
simple injury propensities may also correlated with the firm's safety environment, fatalities
seem to be a more appropriate measure in disentangling the costs and benefits of safety risk.
   Figure 3 displays the annual trend in coal mining fatalities in the U.S. Unlike safety
violations, aggregate fatalities have been nearly monotonically decreasing since the early 80s,
save for large accidents such as the Upper Big Branch Mining disaster that tragically killed 29
miners in 2010.6 However, the decline in fatalities is concentrated in private firms, whether
through actual safety improvements or a reduction in private firms through conglomeration.
The annual number of fatalities in public firms, on the other hand, has remained relatively
accident, "no lost work days," "lost work days," "permanently disabling," and "fatal." For more information
on these classifications, see Watkins (2020).
   6
     The Upper Big Branch Disaster does not appear in our sample as MSHA listed the mine as a joint
venture between Massey Energy and Hanson PLC.



                                                    10
stable over our sample period. In total, our sample represents upwards of 50% of the total
coal mining fatalities in the U.S. each year.


1.3       Summary Statistics

Table 1 displays the summary statistics for the main sample. Panel A reports the distributions
for mine-year observations. The observations for safety violations reflect a sample period of
1993-2018, while those of fatalities, production and employment reflect a sample period of
1985-2018.7 There is significant dispersion in the distribution for each variable. For example,
while a number of mine-year observations have no safety violations, the maximum suggests a
single mine received nearly 1,400 violations in one year. The average (medium) mine in our
sample is cited for just over 42 (10) safety violations each year, with nearly all being classified
as having a low or medium probability of the accident ultimately occurring. Furthermore,
even with the imminent dangers in coal mining, fatalities are still quite rare, occurring at a
rate of only 0.022 deaths per year. Other safety characteristics such as injuries, work days
missed due to injuries, and fines each suggest relatively safe median mines, with violations
and accidents concentrated in the most dangerous mines. For example, while the median
mine pays safety violation fines of only $2,300 each year, the most ardent violators pay fines
in excess of $3 million.
       Panel A also reports that the average (median) mine produces just over 700,000 (150,000)
tons of clean coal each year. With the range of average coal sale prices reported by the U.S.
EIA over our sample period, the average (median) mine likely grosses in the range of $10
to $50 million ($4.5 to $10 million) in revenue each year, depending on the time period. 60
mine workers account for over 125,000 employee hours at the average mine, producing coal
at an average rate of 7,500 tons per employee, or almost 4 tons per employee hour. Finally,
   7
     Strictly speaking, accident and production data is reported starting in 1983, and safety violations data
also extends back to the early-to-mid 1980s. However, there appear to be anomalies in the early parts of the
data. For example, the number of safety violations issued through 1992 is nearly negligible. In speaking with
MSHA representatives, we focus on sample periods starting in 1985 for fatalities and production, and 1993
for safety violations to to ensure the highest quality of data in our empirical tests. However, we ensure our
results are qualitatively similar if we utilize the full sample of data.




                                                     11
22% of the mine-year observations in our main sample represent mines that are ultimately
owed by a public firm.
        Panel B displays mine-year observations aggregated to the firm-year level. By and large,
the firm-year distributions mimic the mine-year distributions. The average firm in our sam-
ple is cited for just under 100 safety violations each year, with the firm's workplace safety
environment leading to an average fatality rate of 0.045, as well as 9 injuries, nearly two
years of lost work days due to those injuries, and fines of nearly $120,000 each year. The
average firm employs 124 mine workers and produces almost 1.5 million tons of coal each
year across 10 different mines.8 Finally, reflecting the fact that public firms own more mines
than private firms on average, the percentage of firm-year observations representing public
ownership is far less than mine-year observations at only 7%.



2         Main Results
In this section, we analyze whether a firm's listing status affects its workplace safety environ-
ment. We begin by exploring the univariate differences between privately- and publicly-held
mines. Table 2 reports these results. From simple two-sample mean comparison t-tests, it is
clear that mines owned by public firms are much different than those owned by private firms.
Publicly-owned mines have more safety safety violations, fatalities, injuries, days missed, and
fines. However, publicly-owned mines are also much bigger in scale, producing more coal and
employing more workers. Thus, from the simple mean comparisons, it is difficult to draw
strong conclusions about the relationship between listing status and workplace safety.
        Table 2 also reports univariate differences after including the full set of fixed effects
employed in our multivariate analysi\maketitles below. That is, Diff after FE reports the
differences between publicly and privately held mines after including year, mine, county of
mine location, and ultimate parent fixed effects. Further, the differences in safety violations
    8
   Relative to previous studies focusing on the mining industry, the firms in our sample oversee more, but
smaller, mines. For example, both Moel and Tufano (2002) and Wittry (2021) report that the average firm
owns around three mines. These differences likely reflect heterogeneity in scale and scope across different
commodities.



                                                    12
also include MSHA inspection office (district) fixed effects. Finally, for these differences, we
cluster our standard errors at the ultimate parent level. The univariate differences in this
setting point to a much clearer economic relationship. The difference in total safety violations
and low-probability safety violations become even bigger with the fixed effects and remain
significant at the 5% level, even with clustered standard errors. However, medium- and high-
probability safety violations, injuries, and fines paid all become insignificantly different in
the publicly and privately held samples. This gives us confidence that our fixed effects are
soaking up relevant variation in our dependent variables of interest that is not attributable
to listing status.
       Further, the scale of operations differences between publicly and privately held mines
become nearly statistically indistinguishable after adding fixed effects. The difference in pro-
duction quantities remains marginally significant at the 10% level, however, the differences
in the number of employees and the total employee hours are insignificant. Finally, the dif-
ferences in productivity, as measured by tons of coal produced per employee or per employee
hour, remain significant. Overall, Table 2 suggests publicly and privately held mines have
significantly different levels of safety violations, fatalities, and productivity.


2.1       Safety Violations

Our first set of multivariate results focus on a firm's ex ante workplace safety environment.
Specifically, our dependent variable for these tests is the natural log of one plus the number
of safety violations that a firm is cited for in a given year.9 Further, we use MSHA's clas-
sification of accident likelihood to separate the dependent variable into low-, medium-, and
high-probability safety violations. Our sample period is 1993 through 2018. We include an
exhaustive series of fixed effects to control for unobservable heterogeneity that may impact
   9
     In a recent working paper, Cohn et al. (2021a) point out potential issues with the "LOG1PLUS" spec-
ification. In the Internet Appendix, Table IA.1, we report several additional specifications, including ones
that normalize violations by the number of inspections, the number of employee-hours, and the number of
employees. Each of these specifications produce results that are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to
the main results reported below, suggesting our setting is largely free of the problems discussed in their paper.
Similarly, in the Internet Appendix, we ensure the results for labor productivity in Table 5 are not sensitive
to the log (LOLS) specification. Where possible, we continue to report specifications with logged dependent
variables to facilitate simple interpretation of the coefficients.

                                                       13
listing status and workplace safety simultaneously. In particular, each of our specifications
includes year, mine, county of mine location, inspection office, and ultimate parent fixed
effects. The combination of specifying our empirical tests at the mine-year level and em-
ploying this set of fixed effects should rule out the most salient endogeneity concerns. For
example, mine fixed effects holds constant the type of coal being mined (mine cash flow and
investment opportunities), the specific technology employed to mine the coal (surface versus
underground), the organic safety features of the mine (natural ventilation systems), and the
mine size and resources/reserves available. Further, with ultimate parent fixed effects, our
identification arises from firm IPOs or going-private transactions, and from the acquisition
of privately-held mines or private mining firms, rather than from cross-sectional differences
between public and private firms.
   Figure 4 displays the prevalence of each of these listing status changes throughout the
sample period. While many listing status changes cluster in a handful of years with large
IPOs (e.g., CONSOL Energy and ICG) and acquisitions of large private firms (e.g., ICG's
acquisition of Horizon Natural Resources), there is significant variation in listing statuses
in other years as well, with nearly two-thirds of the sample years showing changes in listing
status for at least 25 mines. Finally, we cluster standard errors at the ultimate parent level to
account for serial autocorrelation across different mines owned by the same firm. Formally,
our regressions take the following form:

  log (1 + Saf etyV iolationsist ) = + 1 P ublicOwnerist +

                                    2 Xist + Y earF Et + M ineF Ei + CountyF Ei +            (1)

                                    InspectionOf f iceF Ei + U ltimateP arentF Es + ist

The unit of observation is mine i owned by firm s at time t.
   Table 3 reports the results. Column (1) displays the results without additional control
variables (Xist ). The coefficient on Public owner is 0.346 and is marginally significant at the
10% level. This suggests that mines that are purchased by public firms or are part of an IPO




                                               14
experience a 41% increase in safety violations.10 This result is directionally consistent with
the hypotheses that link public listing status with workplaces that are less safe.
       Columns (2) adds the following additional control variables: log of total production of
clean coal, log of the average number of mine employees, log of the total employee hours
worked in the mine, log of total mines owned by the ultimate parent, the age the mine's
operator ultimate parent, and an indicator variable equal to one if the mine is unionized.
All variables are defined in Appendix Table A.1. Unlike the fixed effects, these covariates
account for time-variant observable characteristics at the mine or firm level. For example,
total production, the number of employees, total employee hours worked account for the
scale of operations at the mine level. Further, the number of mines owned by the ultimate
parent is a measure of overall firm size. Each of these control variables is meant to soak
up variation in the annual number of safety violations attributed to a change in listing
status, when a change in safety violations may be due to changes in operational scale at
the mine or firm level. Reflecting this possibility, the coefficient on Public owner becomes
smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant in Column (2), while the coefficients on
log(Production) and log(Hours) are positive and significant at the 1% level.
       The results in Columns (1) and (2) suggest an economic relationship between a firm's
public listing status and its workplace safety environment. However, these results do not
reflect a consistent statistically significant effect. One potential explanation for the lack of
robustness across different specifications is heterogeneity within safety violations. That is,
the level of safety risk is not homogeneous and varies across listing status in such a way
that the fixed effects do not capture the relationship. To address this potential measurement
issue, in Columns (3) through (8), we split the LHS variable into three categories based
on the MSHA-assigned likelihood of an accident occurring from a specific safety violation.
While the classification of violations into the low-, medium-, and high-probability categories
  10
    Though log-level linear regression coefficients are often interpreted as the exact percentage change in
the dependent variable, the coefficients actually represent an approximation of this change. Unfortunately,
this approximation get worse as the effect size increases. For example, in Column (1), the coefficient on
Public owner is 0.346 and rough interpretation is that a listing status change leads to a 35% increase in
safety violations. However, the exact percentage change can be calculated as (exp(0.346) - 1) × 100 = 41.3%.
Throughout the paper, we use the exact percentage change when discussing to economic magnitudes.


                                                    15
is subjective (the MSHA investigator has final discretion), the inspection office fixed effects
should capture variation from differences in level of enforcement and discrepancies in the way
each investigator classifies a violation. Further, our results are robust to including inspection
office by year fixed effects.
   Columns (3) and (4) report models in which the dependent variables are the number of
annual safety violations stemming from activities that MSHA classifies as low-probability.
Columns (5) and (6) and Columns (7) and (8) report models in which the dependent vari-
ables are the number of medium-probability and high-probability safety violations, respec-
tively. The magnitude of a public listing status's impact on safety violations is monotonically
decreasing in the probability the violations lead to an accident. For example, the coefficients
on Public owner in Columns (3) and (4), in which the dependent variable is low-probability
safety violations, are both large, and significantly different than zero at least at the 5% level.
Furthermore, the results are economically significant, as the coefficient in Column (4) suggests
at 57% increase in low-probability violations upon a listing status change. The coefficients
on Public owner in Columns (5) through (8), on the other hand, are significantly smaller.
In fact, public listing status appears to be negatively correlated with high-probability safety
violations, though the coefficients are not significant.
   These results suggest public firms are significantly more likely to take on additional safety
risk, however, only risks that are least likely to ultimately manifest as accidents. In partic-
ular, there is no evidence to suggest that public firms are negligent relative to their private
counterparts, but rather, the results point to a level of safety risk among publicly-listed firms
that is calculated. Nevertheless, Internet Appendix Table IA.2 shows the additional tail risk
significantly endangers employees, as the largest differences between public and private firms
concentrate in the violations with the most severe likely outcomes as deemed by MSHA. In
sum, it appears public firms increase their safety risk by augmenting their distribution to
include more low-probability activities.
   The trends for each classification of safety violations (all, low-, medium-, and high-
probability) surrounding a listing status change appear in Figure 5. We estimate the annual
coefficients of Public owner in each subfigure using the related full specification in Table 3.

                                               16
Each subfigure shows the slightest increase in safety violations during year t = -2 for soon-
to-be-public mines relative to private mines. However, in each, this increase is not significant.
Furthermore, in Panels (a) through (c), the level of safety violations actually decreases from
year t = -2 to year t = -1. Figure 5 reinforces the results of Table 3 in that only low-
probability safety violations jump upon the acquisition of a private mine by a public acquirer
or through a change in listing status due to an IPO. Moreover, the effect is quite persistent
and even increasing through time. Finally, Figure 5 eases concerns of simultaneity or reverse
causality bias as the upward movement in safety violations occurs only after a listing status
change.


2.2    Fatalities

Next, we investigate whether listing status is related to the realization of the workplace safety
risks public firms appear to take from the previous section. That is, our next set of results
focuses on our ex post measure of workplace safety - the number of fatalities a mine reports
each year. Because public firms appear to only bear additional safety risk in the category of
violations that stem from low-probability activities, it is not immediately obvious that this
would manifest as realized workplace safety costs through fatal accidents. We use nearly
the same set of fixed effects as in Section 2.1; however, because MSHA has no avenue to be
subjective with fatalities, we omit the inspection office fixed effects. Finally, we continue to
cluster our standard errors at the ultimate parent level. Formally, our regression is:


               T otalF atalitiesist = + 1 P ublicOwnerist

                                     2 Xist + Y earF Et + M ineF Ei +                        (2)

                                     CountyF Ei + U ltimateP arentF Es + ist

   Table 4 reports the results. Columns (1) through (2) present results from specifications
that focus on all fatalities, including those that stem from large mining accidents. To ensure
such mining disasters are not driving the main result for public firms, Columns (3) and
(4) focus only on fatalities that stem from single-miner accidents. The results across all


                                               17
specifications for fatalities are consistent ­ public listing status is positively and significantly
correlated with the level of fatal accidents. For example, the coefficient on Public owner in
Column (2), which includes the full set of control variables, is 0.097 and is significant at the
5% level. This suggests that mines that are acquired by a public owner or experience an
IPO realize a 440% increase in fatalities relative to the unconditional sample mean. The
results when using only fatalities from single-miner accidents remain largely unchanged. The
coefficient on Public owner in Column (4) is 0.059 and is statistically significant at the 1%
level, reflecting a 330% increase from the unconditional sample mean.11
       The control variables in Columns (2) and (4) are the same as those used in Table 3 and
are, for the most part, insignificant. Unlike safety violations, which were most impacted by
the production level and the number of employee hours, fatalities are most strongly linked
to the total number of employees working in the mine. This result differs from findings from
the early 1980s that show smaller (by number of employees) mines have higher fatality rates
(The President's Commission on Coal, 1980; National Research Council, 1982; Neumann
and Nelson, 1982). However, these studies predate our sample and the discrepancy likely
suggests that safety standards have improved differentially at smaller mines, whether through
technological advances or increased regulation (e.g., through the 1977 Act). The coefficient
on ultimate parent age is negative, suggesting workplace safety improves (or safety risk
decreases) as a mine's ultimate parent ages. This could be consistent with decreasing levels
of information asymmetry between ownership and control as firms age, and thus, less myopia
on the part of managers. Finally, the coefficient on the indicator variable for union status
is negative and statistically significant in Column (2). Thus, unions appear to create mines
with safer working conditions than non-unionized mines.
       Figure 6 displays the trend in fatalities surrounding a listing status change. We estimate
the annual coefficients of Public owner using the same specification as Column (2) in Table
4. The difference in the number of deaths at about-to-be publicly-held mines relative to
continued privately-held mines is near zero and insignificant in the years leading up to the
  11
    Internet Appendix Table IA.3 verifies that the results are robust to alternative specifications, such as
fatalities normalized by employee-hours of the number of employees.



                                                    18
listing status change, and immediately increases at time 0. Furthermore, the effect appears
to increase through time. The coefficient on the indicator for year t  3 is over 0.11 and
significant at the 1% level. The lack of pre-trend is inconsistent with public firms acquiring
relatively more risky mines or owners of riskier mines having a higher probability of going
public. Overall the results of this section suggest that, while public firms only take additional
safety risk that is unlikely to be realized, these actions do indeed lead to significant costs
through the increased likelihood of fatal accidents.


2.3    Tradeoff Between Safety and Productivity

Why would public firms take on additional safety risk? On the one hand, there is some evi-
dence that firms, particularly mining firms, make tradeoffs between productivity and work-
place safety. For example, Neumann and Nelson (1982) find the Coal Mine Health and Safety
Act of 1969 led to marginally lower aggregate fatality rates in the 1970s. The authors also
find, however, that this period was marked by significantly lower production per man hour.
Christensen et al. (2017) show workplace safety improves and labor productivity decreases for
mines owned by SEC-registered issuers following Dodd Frank's requirement that mine safety
records be included in financial reports. Each of these studies presents evidence consistent
with a tradeoff between safety and productivity, and each is consistent with the argument
that the optimal number of workplace injuries and fatalities is not zero for many firms (e.g.,
see Kamiya et al. (2020)).
   On the other hand, the negative relationship between productivity and workplace safety
is not conclusive in the extant literature. For example, Sider (1983) finds that many factors,
not just heightened safety, led to decreased productivity following the 1969 Act. Further,
National Research Council (1982), Grayson (2001), and Asfaw et al. (2013) each find that
"a productive mine is a safe mine," that is, productivity is negatively correlated with the
incidence of occupational injuries. However, each of these studies measures productivity
differently, and even Asfaw et al. (2013) note that this relationship is highly sensitive to the




                                               19
addition of control variables. Furthermore, none of these studies examine the tradeoff within
a mine or even within firm.
   We begin our analysis of this potential tradeoff for public firms by simply examining the
relationship between listing status and labor productivity. We follow the same identification
strategy as in Section 2, specifying our regressions at the mine-year level, and include the
same series of fixed effects and clustered standard errors as in Table 4. We measure labor
productivity in two ways, tons of clean coal produced per employee hour spent on mining
activities, and tons of clean coal produced per mine employee. We take the log of each of
these ratios to mitigate the influence of outliers, however as Internet Appendix Table IA.4
shows, our results are robust to simply using the winsorized ratios. Our sample period is
1985 through 2018.
   Table 5 reports the results using both measures of productivity. The coefficients on
Public owner across all four specifications are positive and statistically significant at the 5%
level. That is, regardless of how we define productivity (tons per employee-hour or tons per
employee) and how we specify our model (e.g., the inclusion of control variables), publicly-
held mines produce more coal per hour or employee than privately-held mines. The economic
magnitude of the increase is also highly significant. Upon being acquired by a public firm or
upon its ultimate owner's IPO, a mine increases its clean coal production per employee-hour
by 13.2% and its clean coal production per employee by nearly 16%.
   Figure 7 displays the relative trend in productivity surrounding a listing status change.
Productivity in soon-to-be publicly-held mines appears flat relative to continued privately-
held mines in the year prior to a listing status change and remains near zero in the year of the
change. However, this differential jumps sharply the year after the mine becomes publicly-
held and remains significantly higher through time. Figure 7 suggests that the increase in
labor productivity happens with a delay relative to the deterioration in workplace safety.
   The results in Table 5 and Figure 7, on their own, do not show a direct tradeoff public
firms may make regarding safety and productivity. For example, public firms may be more
advanced in allocating resources and safety investment to mines with better technology ­ both
production and safety. Thus, upon an acquisition of new mines or through an IPO, public

                                              20
firms exacerbate a division between the mines they own ­ those that have low productivity
and are dangerous, and those that have high productivity and are safe.
       To better distinguish between a productivity-safety tradeoff and alternative mechanisms,
we re-estimate our models after splitting our sample into mines that enjoy large productivity
gains over their life, and those that experience small or negative productivity gains over their
life. We define the productivity gain as tons of coal produced per employee hour averaged over
the last five years of a mine's productive life, minus tons of coal produced per employee hour
averaged over the first five years a mine's productive life. Then, we construct an indicator
variable for large productivity gains that is equal to one if the mine's productivity gain is in
the upper tertile, and zero if it is in the lower two tertiles.12
       Table 6 reports the results from this subsample analysis. The results provide clear ev-
idence for the direct tradeoff mechanism. Publicly-held mines are cited for more safety
violations than privately-held mines, but only in mines that enjoy large productivity gains
over their life. The economic magnitude of this differential between publicly- and privately-
held mines is extremely large, with mines increasing all safety violations and low-probability
violations by 70% and 136%, respectively, upon acquisition or IPO in the large productiv-
ity gain sample. Furthermore, the difference in the coefficients on Public owner in the two
samples are significantly different from each other at the 1% level for all and low-probability
safety violations, and at the 5% level for medium-probability safety violations. We find no
significant effects for high-probability safety violations in Columns (7) and (8). These re-
sults suggest that public firms tend to increase safety risk by augmenting their distribution
to include lower-probability events, which at times results in fatal accidents, while realizing
higher levels of coal production per employee hour.13
  12
     Our results are robust to alternative ways of defining productive mines and large productivity gains.
  13
     For the subsample splits in this table, and those in Section 3, we focus on safety violations rather than
on fatalities. The main reason for this is that fatalities are a very low probability event with a large random
component, and splitting the data may exacerbate issues with making inferences from such events. Nonethe-
less, in Internet Appendix Table IA.5, we report subsample splits for fatalities and several other measures
of workplace safety, including explosions, fines, and coal dust concentration. The results are similar to those
that we report in the main tables. Specifically, significant results for variables are generally concentrated in
the subgroup of interest, and at times, are significantly different from the other subgroup.




                                                      21
       To get a rough idea of the dollar amount of this tradeoff for publicly held mines, we
perform a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. Assuming hourly wages across private
and public firms are largely equivalent, a 13.2% increase in hourly productivity corresponds
to a $3.19 million gross profit increase for the average mine in our sample.14 Of course, even
if wages are constant across listing status, this increase in productivity is not costless for
public firms. Indeed, we have already shown public firms bear significantly more safety risk
to realize higher productivity. One crude way to summarize the expected increase in costs of
this safety risk is through the financial market reaction to news of a fatal accident. To the
extent that such accidents reveal information not only about the specific incident, but also
about the latent safety environment at the mine, one can view the stock price reaction as a
measure of the total costs to the firm for bearing safety risk.
       Focusing on the public firms in our sample, we are able to match the news of 215 fatal
accidents to securities price data and calculate cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) upon
their announcement (which in each case coincides with the day of the accident). The mean
(0,10) day CAR using a market-model is -1.41%, and is significant at the 1% level (see
Internet Appendix Table IA.7). Multiplying the (0,10) day abnormal returns for each firm-
accident pair by the market capitalization from time t-1 suggests an average dollar loss of
$31.57 million per fatal accident. The coefficient in Column (2) from Table 4 indicates public
firms experience 0.097 additional fatalities per year, thus carrying an expected additional
annual cost of $31.57 × 0.097 = $3.06 million. In sum, it appears that public firms, on
average, increase safety risk right up to the point in which the marginal costs swamp the
marginal benefits.
  14
    We arrive at $3.19 million by taking the average total production across our sample (710,268 tons of
clean coal) and multiplying by the 13.2% increase in productivity. If the number of employee-hours remain
constant surrounding a listing status change (Internet Appendix Table IA.6 suggests they do), this gives us
the total increase in coal production due to the change in listing status ­ 93,755 tons of coal. Then to get
the dollar amount of the increase, we take this number multiplied by the average sales price per ton in our
sample ($34.00). E.g., 710, 268 × 0.132 × 34.00 = 3, 187, 683.




                                                    22
3      Economic Channel
In this section, we examine two, non-mutually exclusive, economic channels for our main
results: the role of information asymmetry, and that of private firm preferences and owners'
and managers' ties to the local community. There are, of course, more possibilities than the
ones we test. For example, a substitution of inputs from labor to more productive, but more
dangerous, capital among less financially-constrained public firms could contribute to higher
production per unit of labor but also more dangerous workplace environments.15 However,
our data are most conducive to testing these two particular channels regarding information
asymmetry and local ties. The rest of this section discusses each of these channels in turn.


3.1     The Role of Information Asymmetry

Several prominent papers have argued that the separation of ownership and control can create
information-related agency costs because diffuse owners have trouble observing managerial
effort relative to potential confounding factors such as negative price shocks (Bertrand and
Mullainathan, 2001), and because managers have difficulty signaling the true reasons for per-
formance declines to shareholders (Grenadier and Malenko, 2011). Because of this, managers
of public firms may face stronger pressure to prop up profitability at high costs, particularly
during market-induced industry shocks, as there is a strong relationship between firm per-
formance and forced CEO turnover (Huson et al., 2001; Peters and Wagner, 2014; Jenter
and Lewellen, 2020) that is exacerbated by the separation of ownership and control (Denis
et al., 1997). CEO succession dynamics in the coal industry further magnifies this pressure
on managers. For example, because coal firms tend to be rather homogeneous, executive re-
placement costs are likely low, and thus forced turnover events will tend to be more frequent
(Parrino, 1997). Moreover, in niche industries such as coal, CEO's outside options are likely
to be limited (Liu, 2014).
  15
    Inconsistent with this mechanism, Internet Appendix Table IA.6 shows no change in labor utilization
surrounding a listing status change.




                                                  23
       To assess the role of information asymmetry in our setting, we follow in the spirit of
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) and focus on periods of declining coal prices. Specifically,
we hypothesize that managers face more pressure to increase productivity at the expense of
safety when (1) there is a larger separation between ownership and control (e.g. at public
firms), and (2) when ownership has more difficulty discerning whether a drop in profitability
is due to bad managerial performance or simply due to bad luck (e.g. a drop in coal prices).
The use of year-over-year (YOY) changes in coal prices offers several advantages. First, as
(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001) note, commodity price changes are plausibly exogenous
to any one manager or firm.16 Second, though aggregate U.S. coal prices are relatively smooth
year-to-year (e.g., see Figure 8, Panel A), there is significant time-series and cross-sectional
variation in coal prices by both state and mine-type (surface vs. underground). Figure 8,
Panel B highlights this heterogeneity. In each year of our sample period, there are both price
increases and decreases in the U.S. coal market. Further, the cross-sectional dispersion in
YOY changes can be quite large. For example, in 2001, the spread between the largest price
increase (Texas surface mining at 44.4%) and the largest price decrease (Ohio underground
mining at -57.7%) was 102%. Finally, just as with crude oil, coal price fluctuations tend to
have large effects on firm performance.
       We use the average coal sale price changes from the EIA to split the main sample into
mine-year observations that experience a price increase and those that experience a price
decrease relative to the year prior. Due to the EIA sale price data availability back to 1993,
our sample periods for safety violation and productivity are each 1993-2018. Table 7 displays
the results from our models re-estimated over each subsample.
       Panel A of Table 7 reports results for safety violations, while Panel B reports the results
for both measures of labor productivity. Columns (1) and (2) in Panel A show the impact
of public listing status on the overall amount of safety violations cited to a mine during
  16
     Consistent with this, we find no support that coal prices are related to acquisition or IPO decisions.
Further, Internet Appendix Table IA.8 shows the results of a placebo price shock design that is akin to
testing for parallel trends in the coal price analysis. In particular, we construct empirical tests that use
price shocks from two years prior (rather than the contemporaneous year), and find no significant differences
among results on public firm ownership for workplace safety or productivity.




                                                     24
years of price increases and price decreases. While a change in listing status did not have
a significant affect on overall safety violations in our main results, it does appear to impact
overall safety violations in years and locations that experience a decline in coal prices. The
coefficient Public owner in Column (2) is large (0.470) and significant at the 5% level,.
Further, the coefficient is significantly different from that in Column (1) at the 1% level.
These results indicate varying levels of workplace safety risk between public and private
firms across different market conditions.
   Consistent with earlier results, the increase in safety violations among publicly-listed firms
is concentrated in violations attached to lower probability events. The coefficient on Public
owner in Column (4) is significant at the 1% and is nearly five times as large as the coefficient
in Column (3), a difference that is also significant at the 1% level. We further document
that there are no statistically significant results among the medium- and high-probability
safety violations in either subsample in Columns (5) through (8), thought the coefficients
for medium-probability safety violations are significantly different from each other at the 5%
level
   Panel B of Table 7 focuses on the other half of the tradeoff: productivity. The results are
strongly supportive of managers focusing on productivity and profitability over workplace
safety during periods in which agency concerns are heightened. That is, both measures of
productivity suggest large and significant increases upon a listing status change, but only
during years of price declines. Both subsample splits reflect a difference in coefficients on
Public owner that is significant at the 5% level. Overall, the results in Table 7 reflect a larger
willingness for public managers to engage in a productivity for workplace safety tradeoff
during periods exacerbating information asymmetry.


3.2     The Role of Private Firm Preferences and Local Community
        Ties

Next, we design two sets of empirical tests to assess the importance of private firm preferences
and potential social and local community ties on the part of owners and managers. Both


                                               25
focus on the mine's geographic location relative to important stakeholders of the firm: the
local community in which private firm managers and owners are likely to reside, and the
regulators tasked with overseeing a mine's workplace safety environment.


3.2.1   Mine Proximity to Firm Headquarters

How does the local community surrounding firm operations impact tradeoffs between safety
and productivity? Private firm owners and managers may feel a stronger responsibility to
employee safety if a mine is located in close proximity to where they reside. Public firms,
on the other hand, have diffuse ownership and thus may have less consumption value related
to stewardship of jobs in the community. We use the location of the ultimate parent's
headquarters as a proxy for the location in which firm managers and owners are likely to
have social ties and capital.
   MSHA provides the geographic coordinates of each mine in our sample, as well as the city
of headquarters for roughtly 80% of our main sample. We use the longitude and latitude of
the mine, and those of the center of each headquarter city to calculate the distance in miles
between the mine and headquarters. Next, we split our sample into two subgroups based on
this distance. To be specific, we define a mine to be located far from its ultimate parent's
headquarters if it is in the top tertile of the distance distribution, and near if it is in the
bottom two tertiles. The top tertile corresponds to a distance of 105 miles as the crow flies.
While 105 miles may not seem like an incredibly tight proximity, it is significantly lower than
the average distance between plants and headquarters reported in Giroud (2013). However,
we verify that our results are not sensitive to this exact mileage split.
   Table 8 reports the results from this subsample analysis. Panel A focuses on safety
violations and Panel B on productivity. Panel A continues to show a significant relationship
between public listing status and safety violations. However, the relationship is concentrated
only in mines that are located near the firm headquarters. This is true even of medium- and
high-probability safety violations, to an extent. Further, consistent with our earlier results
for highly productive mines and years during coal price declines, the magnitude of the effect



                                               26
of public listing status on low-probability safety violations is significantly different in the two
subgroups.
   Panel B shows similar results for productivity. In both measures, public listing status is
significantly related to an increase in coal production per employee-hour or employee, but
only in the subset of mines that are located in close proximity to the firm's headquarters.
Yet again, both F-stats indicate that the effects across subsamples are significantly different.
While the proximity of a mine to its headquarter and public listing status are endogenously
determined, these results are strongly suggestive of differences in preferences regarding the
safety and well-being among private and public firms, particularly as it relates to managers'
and owners' standing in the local community.


3.2.2   Regulator Oversight and Probability of Detection

As a second test of private firm preferences and local community ties, we focus on the
monitoring intensity of the regulator (MSHA) and the probability of being caught violating
safety protocols. In particular, if private firm managers and owners value the safety of
their employees and maintaining reputational capital in their local communities, regulatory
oversight may play a smaller role in optimizing the workplace safety and productivity tradeoff
than it does for publicly held firms, which have more diffuse ownership. Once again, we use
the geographic coordinates of the mines in our sample, as well as the cities of the inspection
offices assigned to each mine, to calculate the distance in miles between the mine and the
regulator. We focus on this distance as a proxy for the level of regulatory oversight and the
probability of violation detection. Specifically, we assume that monitoring intensity, and thus
the probability of detection, is increasing in the mine's proximity to the inspection office.
   In order to identify changes in a mine's monitoring intensity, we take advantage of a
small number of mines that are reassigned to different inspection office locations due to office
closures, moves, or entire district realignments. In speaking with MSHA representatives,
these changes stem from the objective to optimize inspector travel times to and from all the
producing mines in the inspection district. In our sample, the median inspection office covers



                                                27
26 mines each year.17 Thus, we argue that these changes are plausibly exogenous to any one
given mine in each district. We further analyze this assumption in Section 4.2.
       Figure 9 displays examples of two such inspection office changes. Panel A displays the
creation of a new inspection office in Longview, Texas in 2013, while Panel B reflects the
phasing out of an inspection office in Jasper, Alabama in the late 1990s and early 2000s, before
closing permanently in 2003. In both cases, several of the mines in our sample experienced
large changes in their proximity to the assigned inspection office. However, in both cases,
there is significant heterogeneity in the size and direction of the treatment effect. For example,
while most of the mines in Panel A experienced a decrease in proximity to the inspector, one
mine (represented by the green dot) experienced a significant increase in proximity following
the new office in Longview. Further, though all of the proximities in Panel B decreased,
only three experienced a distance increase of greater than 60 miles (the rough equivalent of
a two-hour round-trip commute to inspect a mine).
       We exploit this variation in the treatment for MSHA office changes to identify plausibly
exogenous changes in the intensity of regulatory oversight and the probability of violation
detection. In particular, we define a variable, MSHA proximity change, that is equal to 1
if an inspection office change induces an increase in the distance between the mine and the
inspector of at least 60 miles, -1 if the change decreases the distance by at least 60 miles,
and 0 if the change is under 60 miles or if there is no change at all. Sixty miles is admittedly
ad hoc, but represents a change in total travel time for the inspector of roughly two hours,
and as such, is likely to create meaningful change in the regulatory oversight of the mine.
Internet Appendix Table IA.9 analyzes different classifications for the size of the change and
shows similar results.
       We use this change variable as part of a difference-in-differences framework. Specifically,
we interact the MSHA proximity change variable with post, which is equal to 1 the year of, and
  17
    Due to the data filters we impose, tis is almost certainly a minimum bound on the number of mines in
each inspection district.




                                                  28
all the years following a change, and 0 otherwise.18 Further, to capture any differential effects
for public and private firms, we also include the triple interaction term MSHA proximity
change × post × public owner. Table 10 reports the results. Consistent with regulatory
oversight impacting incentives, mines that experience a proximity change of at least 60 miles
do seem to re-optimize the safety-productivity tradeoff. However, the effect is completely
concentrated in mines owned by public firms. To be specific, publicly held mines significantly
increase both safety violations (low- and medium-probability) and productivity following a
decrease in the mine's proximity to the inspection office. These results are consistent with
those in Section 3.2.1 and suggest private firms have different underlying preferences regarding
employee's well-being.



4      Robustness, Endogeneity and Extensions
The results in Sections 2 and 3 support the hypothesis that public firms place a larger
focus on productivity and profitability than private firms, but do so at the cost of providing
their employees a safe workplace. This section explores the robustness of these findings
to prominent endogeneity concerns. We also briefly discuss an extension of our results to
a different dimension of variation in ownership structure. Finally, the Internet Appendix
considers a number of other potential concerns. For example, Section I of the IA considers
whether our findings are simply an IPO effect by restricting the analysis to a sample of
matched private-to-public and private-to-private acquisitions.


4.1     Placebo Test for the Main Results

Through our identification strategy (models specified at the asset level with high dimensional
fixed effects), we rule out many of the most salient endogeneity concerns. Further, the
nature of our cross-sectional analysis, particularly coal price shocks and MSHA inspection
  18
    A few mines experience multiple changes, or the bouncing back and forth between inspection offices. In
these cases, we focus only on sustained changes (those of two years or more), and the first change for any
mine. That is we discard all observations after a second change for those mines.



                                                   29
office changes, significantly raise the bar in finding reasonable alternative interpretations.
Even still, the relationships we report in the paper are correlations. That is, we cannot
definitively conclude that public listing status causes increased safety violations, fatalities,
or productivity. Rather, our setting could be plagued with reverse causality issues and we
could be documenting the fact that riskier firms with more dangerous mines go-public, and
public firms tend to acquire more dangerous, yet more productive mines.
   To mitigate concerns of reverse causality, we re-estimate our regressions in the spirit of
Figures 5 through 7, but with more empirical structure placed on the pre-period. We define
a new indicator variable, Placeboist that takes a value of one if t = -2 or t = -1 in event-
time. That is, Placebo equals one in the two years prior to a firm's IPO or acquisition of a
privately-held mine in our main sample, or in the two years prior to an acquisition in our
matched-sample acquisition analysis. Table 11 reports the results. Each column soundly
rejects the argument that reverse causality is driving our results. In each model we re-
estimate, the coefficient on Placebo is statistically insignificant. Further, in most models,
the magnitude of the coefficient is very to close to zero, and is even negative in many of the
models.


4.2    Predictors of MSHA Inspection Office Changes

In Section 3.2.2, we argue that MSHA inspection office changes are plausibly exogenous to any
one given mine because MSHA attempts to optimize travel times across all operating mines
in the district. It could be the case, however, that these changes are systematically related
to public firm ownership or covered mine's safety environment and resulting productivity.
Such a systematic relationship has the potential to change the interpretation of our findings
regarding regulatory oversight and the probability of detection. For example, one salient
concern is that MSHA inspection offices change location in response to covered mines safety
records or public listing status.
   To investigate to what extent this may be a problem in our setting, we examine what
factors predict the timing of MSHA office moves for individual mines. In particular, we


                                              30
create an indicator variable equal to one if mine i experiences a change in its assigned MSHA
inspection office during year t. We discard all observations for mines that switch offices after
the year of the change and compare the switch year to all mine-year observations that have
no such change after the year 1993 over a range of model specifications.
   Table 12 displays the results. Consistent with MSHA's stated objective to optimize
inspector travel times over all the producing mines in a district, Columns (1) through (3)
show that the number of producing mines and the average distance between the inspection
office and these mines at time t are significant predictors of an inspection office change at
time t+1. However, even these variables become statistically significant as we add inspection
office and ultimate parents fixed effects. Further, and most importantly, we see almost no
mine or firm level characteristics predict changes in inspection offices. The only variable
that consistently predicts a change is the number of employees at a given mine. Even so,
employment appears to be equally related to both moves that decrease the mine's proximity
to the inspector and those that increase it, and thus creates little concern for our identification
in Section 3.2.2.


4.3    Extension to Sole Proprietorship and Partnerships

The empirical tests in our main results focus on the difference between publicly and privately
held corporations, and as such, are most informative about this specific variation in ownership
structure. It is, however, reasonable to wonder how our results extend to other dimensions of
variation in ownership structure. For example, there is likely to be a spectrum of willingness
or ability to trade off safety risk for productivity within private firms. On the one the end
of that spectrum, firms with a diverse group of private equity investors may behave similar
to publicly listed firms. On the other, family or founder firms may take on significantly less
risk than even the average closely-held private firm.
   Unfortunately, we do not have data on private equity holdings or the holdings of the
founder. We do, however, have information on company type for the firms in our sample
that are the current owners of the mines (as of the end of 2018). That is, MSHA provides time-


                                                31
invariant descriptions of the firms as "Corporations," "Partnerships," "Sole Proprietors," or
"Other." Internet Appendix Table IA.11 reports results from empirical specifications that
focus on only private firms, and focus on an indicator variable equal to 1 if a firm's company
type is defined as a sole proprietorship or a partnership. Because this indicator does not
vary through time, we are unable to include ultimate parent fixed effects. Rather, using
the remaining set of fixed effects, these tests focus on the variation in workplace safety and
productivity when a mine switches owners from a corporation to a sole prop./partnership or
vice versa. Consistent with the finding that the safety-productivity tradeoff is less pronounced
among private firms relative to public firms, sole proprietorship and partnerships appear to
bear significantly less safety risk, but also realize lower productivity.



5     Conclusion
Private firms comprise a large portion of the U.S. economy, and are subject to different eco-
nomic frictions than public firms. We show that differences in these economic frictions are
relevant for both workplace safety risk-taking and productivity. We go a step further and
document that it appears that firms trade off productivity and workplace safety in ways that
suggest such tradeoffs are driven by information asymmetry between managers and sharehold-
ers of public firms, and ties of private firm ownership to local communities.. Non-shareholder
stakeholders, such as employees, have become an important focus in the literature, this paper
highlights important tradeoffs between workplace safety and productivity that public firms
engage in relative to private firms.




                                               32
References
Amoako, R., Buaba, J., Brickey, A., 2020. Identifying risk factors from MSHA accidents and
 injury data using logistic regression. Mining, Metallurgy & Exploration .

Asfaw, A., Mark, C., Pana-Cryan, R., 2013. Profitability and occupational injuries in u.s.
  undergound coal mines. Accident Analysis and Prevention 50, 778­786.

Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2011. Comparing the investment behavior of
  public and private firms. NBER Working Paper No. 17394 .

Bai, J., Carvalho, D., Phillips, G.M., 2018. The impact of bank credit on labor reallocation
  and aggregate industry productivity. Journal of Finance 73, 2787­2836.

Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., Seru, A., 2015. Financing labor. Working Paper .

Bernstein, S., 2015. Does going public affect innovation? Journal of Finance 70, 1365­1403.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2001. Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without
  principals are. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 901­932.

Brav, O., 2009. Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm. Journal of
  Finance 64, 263­308.

Chen, H., Noronha, G., Singal, V., 2004. The price response to S&P 500 index additions
 and deletions: Evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. Journal of Finance 59,
 1901­1930.

Christensen, H.B., Floyd, E., Liu, L.Y., Maffet, M., 2017. The real effects of mandated
 information on social responsibility in financial reports: Evidence from mine-safety records.
 Journal of Accounting and Economics 64, 284­304.

Cohn, J., Liu, Z., Wardlaw, M., 2021a. Count data in finance , Woring paper.

Cohn, J., Nestoriak, N., Wardlaw, M., 2021b. Private equity buyouts and workplace safety.
  Review of Financial Studies , Forthcoming.

Cohn, J.B., Wardlaw, M.I., 2016. Financing constraints and workplace safety. Journal of
  Finance 71, 2017­2058.

Denis, D.J., Denis, D.K., Sarin, A., 1997. Ownership structure and top executive turnover.
  Journal of Financial Economics 45, 193­221.

Filer, R.K., Golbe, D.L., 2003. Debt, operating margin, and investment in workplace safety.
  Journal of Industrial Economics 51, 359­381.

Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J.C., Krizan, C.J., 2001. New development in productivity analysis.
  University of Chicago Press , 303­372.

                                             33
Gilje, E., Taillard, J., 2016. Do public firms invest differently than private firms? Taking
  cues from the natural gas industry. Journal of Finance 71, 1733­1778.

Giroud, X., 2013. Proximity and investment: Evidence from plant-level data. Quarterly
  Journal of Economcis 128, 861­915.

Grayson, R.L., 2001. Safety vs... productivity and other factors in US underground coal
  mines. Mining Engineering .

Grenadier, S.R., Malenko, A., 2011. Real options signaling games with applications to cor-
  porate finance. Review of Financial Studies 24, 3993­4036.

Hanka, G., 1998. Debt and the terms of employment. Journal of Financial Economics 48,
  245­282.

Huson, M.R., Parrino, R., Starks, L.T., 2001. Internal monitoring mechanisms and CEO
 turnover: A long-term perspective. Journal of Finance 56, 2265­2297.

Jenter, D., Lewellen, K., 2020. Performance-induced ceo turnover. Review of Financial
  Studies , Forthcoming.

Kamiya, S., Kang, J.K., Kim, J., Milidonis, A., Stulz, R.M., 2020. Risk management, firm
 reputation, and the impact of successful cyberattacks on target firms. Journal of Financial
 Economics , Forthcoming.

Liu, Y., 2014. Outside options and CEO turnover: The network effect. Journal of Corporate
  Finance 28, 201­217.

Michaely, R., Roberts, M., 2012. Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private firms.
 Review of Financ 25, 711­746.

Moel, A., Tufano, P., 2002. When are real options exercised? An empirical study of mine
 closings. Review of Financial Studies 15, 35­64.

National Research Council, 1982. Toward Safer Undground Coal Mines. National Academy
  Press, Washington, D.C.

Neumann, G.R., Nelson, J.P., 1982. Safety regulation and firm size: Effects of the coal mine
  health and safety act of 1969. Journal of Law & Economics 25, 183­199.

Nieto, A., Duerksen, A., 2008. The effects of mine safety legislation on mining technology in
  the USA. International Journal of Mining and Mineral Engineering 1, 95­103.

Pagano, M., 1993. The flotation of companies on the stock market: A coordination failure
  model. European Economic Review 37, 1101­1125.

Pagano, M., Panetta, F., Zingales, L., 1998. Why do companies go public? An empirical
  analysis. Journal of Finance 53, 27­64.

                                             34
Parrino, R., 1997. CEO turnover and outside succession: A cross-sectional analysis. Journal
  of Financial Economics 46, 165­197.

Peters, F.S., Wagner, A.F., 2014. The executive turnover risk premium. Journal of Finance
  69, 1529­1563.

Shive, S.A., Foster, M.M., 2020. Corporate governance and pollution externalities of public
  and private firms. Review of Financial Studies 3, 1296­1330.

Sider, H., 1983. Safety and production in underground coal mining. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 65, 225­233.

Stein, J.C., 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
  behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655­669.

The President's Commission on Coal, 1980. Recommendations and Summary Findings. U.S.
 Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Watkins, T.R., 2020. Citation and order writing handbook number PH20-I-3.

Wittry, M.D., 2021. (Debt) overhang: Evidence from resource extraction. Review of Financial
 Studies , Forthcoming.




                                            35
                                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics
     This table reports summary statistics for all publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1985 through 2018. A
     mine-year observation is included in our sample if it satisfies the following requirements: (1) the mine is actively producing coal and employs
     at least 5 workers, (2) the mine produces bituminous (not anthracite) coal, and (3) the owner of the mine is not foreign, not part of a joint
     venture, not structured as a sole proprietorship or a partnership, and owns at least one other mine. Panel A reports the summary statistics
     for mine-year observations, and Panel B reports the summary statistics for firm-year observations. All variable definitions appear in Appendix
     Table A.1. Data on mining accidents, fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining
     acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing
     status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.
                                                   Obs.       Mean           SD          P0        P25         P50          P75           P100
                                                            Panel A: Mine-year observations
     Safety and risk measures
     Total saftey violations                       12,173       42            96          0         2            10          34           1,395
       Low probability violations                  12,173       24            64          0         0             4          16            945
       Medium probability violations               12,173       17            38          0         1             5          16            511
       High probability violiations                12,173       0.4           1.5         0         0             0           0             50
     Total fatalities                              21,538     0.022         0.186         0         0             0           0             13
       Total fatalities (single miner accidents)   21,538     0.019         0.147         0         0             0           0              8
36




     Injuries                                      21,538       4.5          11.5         0         0             1           4            313
     Days missed due to injury                     21,538      379.4        1477.2        0         0            10         138          79,692
     Days missed per injury                        21,538      61.1         362.4         0         0             0          31           6,332
     Fines paid ($s)                                7,969     44,998       161,250        0        434         2,300       14,438       3,245,842
     Production, employment, and efficiency
     Tons of clean coal produced                   21,538     710,268     3,182,063       20      53,746      150,353     433,190      116,225,536
     Number of employees                           21,538       60           103           5        13           25         52             1,620
     Number of employee hours                      21,538     127,545      229,322        83      19,713       47,511     116,867       3,347,772
     Tons of clean coal per employee               21,538      7,430        6,020          2       3,462        5,931      9,524          33,235
     Tons of clean coal per employee hour          21,538      3.90          3.21        0.00      2.14         3.13       4.60           24.34
     Ownership
     Public owner (%)                              21,538      0.22
                                                               Table 1 --continued
                                                   Obs.      Mean          SD        P0      P25      P50       P75         P100
      Panel B: Firm-year observations
     Safety and risk measures
     Total saftey violations                        5,474     93.7        383.9       0       2         11       40         6,293
       Low probability violations                   5,474     53.7        243.9       0       0          4       17         3,889
       Low probability violations                   5,474     38.9        152.0       0       1          6       21         3,092
       High probability violiations                 5,474      0.8          3.7       0        0         0        0           81
     Total fatalities                              10,471    0.045        0.291       0       0          0        0           13
       Total fatalities (single miner accidents)   10,471    0.038        0.233       0       0          0        0            8
     Injuries                                      10,471     9.2          36.3       0        0         1        4          816
     Days missed due to injury                     10,471    780.4        3346.5      0        0         7      137        89,766
     Days missed per injury                         5,310    123.4        529.0       0       10        28       60         6,300
     Fines paid ($s)                                3,046   117,363      632,471      0      478      2,342    15,264    13,343,763
     Production, employment, and efficiency
     Tons of clean coal produced                   10,471   1,460,964   6,710,895     20    50,402   135,709   418,810   130,485,480
     Number of employees                           10,471      124         423         5      12       25        59         7,145
     Number of employee hours                      10,471    262,350     940,487      88    19,111   45,170    120,507   15,998,981
     Tons of clean coal per employee               10,471     6,840       5,403      294     3,393    5,524     8,684      32,817
     Tons of clean coal per employee hour          10,471      3.63        2.47      0.57    2.13     3.00      4.33        16.28
     Number of mines                               10,471      10.2        23.1        2       3        4         9          381
     Ownership
37




     Public owner (%)                              10,471     0.07
                                                Table 2: Univariate Differences: Public vs. Private
     This table reports univariate differences between publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1985 through 2018. Panel
     A reports the univariate differences for mine-year observations, first reporting simple two-sample t-test differences and p-values. Secondly, this
     panel reports differences after including year, mine, county of mine location, and ultimate parent fixed effects (the safety violations differences
     also include inspection office fixed effects). Th is is the same set of fixed effects included in our multivariate regressions below. Further matching
     our main analysis, standard errors for the differences are clustered at the ultimate parent level. All variable definitions appear in Appendix
     Table A.1. Data on mining accidents, fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining
     acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing
     status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. *, **, and *** denote significance
     at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                                                     Public owner             Private owner
                                                   Obs.       Mean           Obs.       Mean         Difference     p-Value       Diff after FE     p-Value
     Panel A: Mine-level differences
     Safety and risk measures
     Total saftey violations                       3,161        88.9         9,012       25.5            63.4         0.000           106.8          0.035
       Low probability violations                  3,161       54.5          9,012       13.5           41.0          0.000           83.9           0.020
       Medium probability violations               3,161       33.7          9,012       11.7           22.0          0.000           23.2           0.162
       High probability violiations                3,161        0.6          9,012        0.3            0.3          0.000            -0.5          0.676
     Total fatalities                              4,779       0.044        16,759      0.016          0.028          0.000          0.096           0.018
       Total fatalities (single miner accidents)   4,779       0.036        16,759      0.014          0.022          0.000          0.060           0.004
38




     Injuries                                      4,779        10.1        16,759        2.9            7.2          0.000            -5.3          0.179
     Days missed due to injury                     4,779       800.3        16,759       259.4          540.9         0.000          709.7           0.060
     Days missed per injury                        4,779        83.7        16,759       54.7            29.0         0.000            83.3          0.000
     Fines paid ($s)                               2,312      103,138        5,657      21,236         81,902         0.000          -7,083          0.695
     Production, employment, and efficiency
     Tons of clean coal produced                   4,779     1,995,576      16,759      343,749      1,651,827        0.000         727,030          0.072
     Number of employees                           4,779        137         16,759         38            99           0.000            27            0.438
     Number of employee hours                      4,779      297,967       16,759      78,948        219,019         0.000         79,240           0.249
     Tons of clean coal per employee               4,779       9,889        16,759       6,728         3,160          0.000          1,182           0.005
     Tons of clean coal per employee hour          4,779        5.0         16,759        3.6           1.4           0.000           0.6            0.004
                                                  Table 3: Listing Status and Mine-Level Safety Violations
     This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is the natural log of one plus the number of safety violations at mine i , owned
     by ultimate parent s, during year t . The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1993 through 2018. The independent
     variable of interest is Public owner ist . In Columns (5) through (10), the safety violations for constructing the dependent variables are split by the probability of an
     accident actually occurring, as deemed by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) at the time of the citation for the safety violation. All variable definitions
     appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the
     Mine Safety and Health Administration published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ,
     and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at
     the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                     Dependent variable =                                                    log(1 + safety violationsist )
                     MSHA Prob. of Accident =                       All                      Low                       Med.                      High
                                                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)
                     Public ownerist                      0.346*         0.235     0.529***      0.449**       0.278         0.182      -0.010        -0.019
                                                          (0.195)      (0.169)      (0.183)      (0.175)      (0.197)      (0.173)     (0.172)       (0.168)
                     log(Productionist )                              0.127***                  0.114***                  0.079***                 -0.024***
                                                                       (0.029)                   (0.029)                   (0.023)                   (0.009)
                     log(Employeesist )                                 -0.005                    0.007                    0.087**                 0.070***
                                                                       (0.042)                   (0.042)                   (0.041)                   (0.021)
                     log(Hoursist )                                   0.540***                  0.365***                  0.458***                  0.061***
                                                                       (0.051)                   (0.048)                   (0.042)                   (0.012)
39




                     log(Minesst )                                      -0.059                    -0.077                    -0.044                    -0.028
                                                                       (0.065)                   (0.080)                   (0.071)                   (0.019)
                     Ultimate parent agest                               0.003                    -0.010                    0.011                     0.011
                                                                       (0.009)                   (0.017)                   (0.009)                   (0.016)
                     Operator ageist                                    -0.002                    -0.003                    0.002                      0.001
                                                                       (0.003)                   (0.003)                   (0.004)                   (0.001)
                     Unionizedist                                       0.067                    0.168*                     0.058                     -0.046
                                                                       (0.110)                   (0.089)                   (0.118)                   (0.050)
                     Year FE                                Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                     Mine FE                                Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                     County FE                              Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                     Inspection office FE                   Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                     Ultimate Parent FE                     Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                     Number of firms                        749             749       749            749        749          749          749         749
                     Observations                         12,173          12,173    12,173         12,173     12,173       12,173       12,173       12,173
                     R2                                    0.772           0.843     0.798          0.838      0.732        0.802        0.417       0.428
                       Table 4: Listing Status and Mine-Level Fatalities
This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is the the
number of total fatalitiesat mine i , owned by ultimate parent s , during year t . Models (1) and (2)
analyze all fatalities, while Models (3) and (4) include all the fatalities that stem from single-miner
accidents. The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample
period of 1985 through 2018. The independent variable of interest is Public owner ist . All variable
definitions appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining fatalities, production, and employment,
as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status
are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's
website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate parent level, are reported in parentheses.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                                                                    Total fatalitiesist
           Dependent variable =         Total fatalitiesist     (single-miner accidents)
                                        (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)
           Public ownerist            0.097**      0.097**    0.062***        0.059***
                                      (0.040)      (0.041)     (0.022)         (0.020)
           log(Productionist )                       0.002                       0.003
                                                   (0.003)                     (0.002)
           log(Employeesist )                    0.012***                    0.013***
                                                   (0.004)                     (0.004)
           log(Hoursist )                           0.001                       -0.000
                                                   (0.004)                     (0.003)
           log(Minesist )                           -0.006                      -0.006
                                                   (0.009)                     (0.008)
           Ultimate parent agest                 -0.001***                   -0.001***
                                                   (0.000)                     (0.000)
           Operator ageist                           0.001                       0.000
                                                   (0.001)                     (0.001)
           Unionizedist                           -0.026**                      -0.012
                                                   (0.013)                     (0.009)

           Year FE                      Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
           Mine FE                      Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
           County FE                    Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
           Ultimate Parent FE           Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes
           Number of firms             1,411        1,411       1,411          1,411
           Observations                21,538      21,538       21,538         21,538
           R2 or Pseudo R2             0.161        0.164       0.202          0.206




                                                  40
                                       Table 5: Listing Status and Mine-Level Labor Productivity
     This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is the natural log of the total tons of clean
     coal produced divided by employee hours, or the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by the average number
     of employees at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s , during year t . The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal
     mines over a sample period of 1985 through 2018. The independent variable of interest is Public owner ist . All variable definitions
     appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining production and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining
     acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative.
     Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.
     Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate parent level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at
     the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                            Dependent variable =        log(Production/Hoursist )   log(Production/Employeesist )
                                                       (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)
                            Public ownerist          0.133**        0.124**         0.153**          0.147**
                                                     (0.061)         (0.060)        (0.060)          (0.061)
                            log(Minesst )                             -0.036                           0.014
                                                                     (0.035)                         (0.039)
                            Ultimate parent agest                   0.017***                           0.008
41




                                                                     (0.005)                         (0.012)
                            Operator ageist                           -0.003                          -0.002
                                                                     (0.002)                         (0.003)
                            Unionizedist                            0.096***                          0.076*
                                                                     (0.025)                         (0.039)

                            Year FE                    Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
                            Mine FE                    Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
                            County FE                  Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
                            Ultimate Parent FE         Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes

                            Number of firms            1,411          1,411          1,411             1,411
                            Observations              21,538         21,538          21,538           21,538
                            R2                        0.703           0.703          0.603            0.603
                          Table 6: Listing Status, Productivity Gains, and Mine-level Fatalities and Safety Violations
     This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is either the total number of fatalities, or the natural log of one plus the number
     of safety violations at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t . The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of
     1985 through 2018 for fatalities, and 1993 through 2018 for safety violations. We split the sample into two subsamples based on the change in productivity (total tons of
     clean coal produced divided by employee hours per mine-year observation) over the life of the mine (the average productivity in the mine's last five producing years minus
     the average productivity in the mine's first five producing years). The independent variable of interest is Public owner . In Columns (3) through (8), the safety violations
     for constructing the dependent variables are split by the probability of an accident actually occurring, as deemed by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA)
     at the time of the citation for the safety violation. All variable definitions appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining fatalities, safety violations, production, and
     employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration published through an Open Government
     Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors,
     clustered at the ultimate level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                         Dependent variable =                                                   log(1 + safety violationsist )
                         MSHA Prob. of Accident =                     All                       Low                     Medium                       High
                         Efficiency gain =                    Big             Small        Big       Small          Big       Small           Big        Small
                                                               (1)              (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
                         Public ownerist                    0.525**           -0.030   0.860***       0.089      0.389*       -0.000         0.074       -0.102
                                                            (0.219)          (0.139)    (0.129)     (0.247)      (0.212)     (0.168)       (0.228)      (0.110)
                         log(Productionist )                0.134*          0.123***    0.117*     0.108***      0.136**     0.062**        -0.024      -0.022*
                                                            (0.072)          (0.028)    (0.068)     (0.027)      (0.062)     (0.025)       (0.016)      (0.011)
                         log(Employeesist )                  0.094            -0.021     0.079       -0.001     0.179**        0.074       0.086**     0.065***
                                                            (0.092)          (0.051)    (0.115)     (0.047)      (0.078)     (0.049)       (0.040)      (0.024)
                         log(Hoursist )                    0.449***         0.561***   0.314*** 0.378***        0.290*** 0.500***          0.061**     0.061***
42




                                                            (0.099)          (0.054)    (0.092)     (0.050)      (0.086)     (0.049)       (0.028)      (0.014)
                         log(Minesst )                       -0.109           -0.017     -0.126      -0.021       -0.111      0.001         -0.064       -0.025
                                                            (0.131)          (0.071)    (0.145)     (0.099)      (0.104)     (0.087)       (0.048)      (0.033)
                         Ultimate parent agest                                 0.003                 -0.009                    0.011                      0.011
                                                                             (0.009)                (0.018)                  (0.010)                    (0.016)
                         Operator ageist                     -0.002           -0.004     -0.003      -0.004        0.003      -0.002         0.003       -0.001
                                                            (0.004)          (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.002)      (0.001)
                         Unionizedist                        -0.134            0.191      0.205       0.176       -0.170      0.198         -0.015       -0.060
                                                            (0.189)          (0.124)    (0.169)     (0.109)      (0.184)     (0.142)       (0.075)      (0.067)

                         F-stat (above--below)                              6.29                    7.42                         3.86                    1.00
                         (p-Value)                                          (0.012)                 (0.007)                      (0.050)                (0.318)

                         Year FE                              Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                         Mine FE                              Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                         County FE                            Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                         Inspection Office FE                 Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                         Ultimate Parent FE                   Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes

                         Number of firms                      231             670        231          670          231            670        231         670
                         Observations                        3,069           9,098      3,069        9,098        3,069          9,098      3,069       9,098
                         R2                                  0.868           0.832      0.869        0.825        0.835          0.788      0.472       0.414
                             Table 7: Listing Status, Coal Prices, and Workplace Safety and Productivity Tradeoffs
     This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is either the total number of fatalities or the natural log of one plus the number
     of safety violations at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t (Panel A), or the the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by employee
     hours or the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by the average number of employees at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t (Panel
     B). The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1993 through 2018. We split the sample into two subsamples based
     on whether the average annual coal price for each state and mine type increases or decreases from the previous year. To avoid conflating tradeoff effects from large
     price increases, we drop observations in which the year-over-year price increase is larger than 30%. This is equivalent to winsorizing (without replacement) at the 99%
     level. The independent variable of interest is Public owner ist . In Columns (3) through (8), the safety violations for constructing the dependent variables are split by the
     probability of an accident actually occurring, as deemed by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) at the time of the citation for the safety violation. All
     variable definitions appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on average annual coal sale prices is available from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) back to
     1993. Data on mining fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety
     and Health Administration published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data
     on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
     10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                          Panel A
                          Dependent variable =                                                  log(1 + safety violationsist )
                          MSHA Prob. of Accident =                    All                       Low                    Medium                       High
                          Coal price (YOY) =               Increase         Decrease   Increase    Decrease    Increase    Decrease      Increase      Decrease
                                                               (1)              (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)
                          Public ownerist                    -0.004          0.470**      0.159    0.763***      0.025        0.333        0.000         -0.098
                                                            (0.168)          (0.203)    (0.135)     (0.135)     (0.178)     (0.236)       (0.126)       (0.344)
                          log(Productionist )              0.140***          0.138**   0.092**     0.177***    0.116***       0.036        -0.019      -0.036**
43




                                                            (0.038)          (0.055)    (0.039)     (0.055)     (0.030)     (0.050)       (0.013)       (0.017)
                          log(Employeesist )                 -0.010           -0.008     -0.011      -0.027     0.121**       0.024      0.083***      0.078***
                                                            (0.067)          (0.087)    (0.063)     (0.071)     (0.060)     (0.084)       (0.025)       (0.029)
                          log(Hoursist )                   0.539***         0.498***   0.429*** 0.231***       0.413*** 0.538***         0.052***      0.061**
                                                            (0.069)          (0.094)    (0.064)     (0.080)     (0.056)     (0.088)       (0.018)       (0.025)
                          log(Minesst )                      -0.032           -0.098     -0.054     -0.237*      -0.056       0.021        -0.068        -0.011
                                                            (0.102)          (0.131)    (0.121)     (0.131)     (0.124)     (0.140)       (0.043)       (0.050)
                          Ultimate parent agest              -0.007         0.857***     -0.009    1.089***      -0.004     0.287**        0.005        0.092*
                                                            (0.006)          (0.123)    (0.015)     (0.134)     (0.019)     (0.116)       (0.013)       (0.051)
                          Operator ageist                    -0.001           -0.005     -0.002      -0.006      0.004       -0.001        0.001          0.001
                                                            (0.005)          (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.002)
                          Unionizedist                       0.061            0.039       0.027       0.193      0.119       -0.020        -0.121        -0.082
                                                            (0.250)          (0.161)    (0.213)     (0.127)     (0.266)     (0.169)       (0.162)       (0.086)

                          F-stat (decrease--increase)                       16.34                  16.18                     5.49                       0.19
                          (p-Value)                                          (0.000)                (0.000)                  (0.019)                   (0.666)
                          Year FE                            Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes
                          Mine FE                            Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes
                          County FE                          Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes
                          Inspection Office FE               Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes
                          Ultimate Parent FE                 Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes

                          Number of firms                    503              457        503         457          503             457      503           457
                          Observations                      5,942            3,818      5,942       3,818        5,942           3,818    5,942         3,818
                          R2                                0.860            0.874      0.851       0.879        0.826           0.841    0.469         0.512
                                   Table 7 --continued
Panel B
Dependent variable =           log(Production/Hoursist )    log(Production/Employeesist )
Coal price (YOY) =            Increase      Decrease       Increase        Decrease
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)
Public ownerist                 -0.048      0.128***         -0.018        0.214***
                               (0.086)       (0.040)        (0.088)         (0.054)
log(Minesst )                   -0.016       -0.133*         0.010           -0.090
                               (0.081)       (0.075)        (0.085)         (0.102)
Ultimate parent agest          0.025**      0.178***          0.033        0.257***
                               (0.013)       (0.065)        (0.032)         (0.078)
Operator ageist                 -0.001      -0.007**          0.001          -0.006
                               (0.005)       (0.003)        (0.006)         (0.005)
Unionizedist                  0.377***        0.040        0.792***           0.126
                               (0.107)       (0.067)        (0.219)         (0.116)

F-stat (decrease--increase)                   4.27                           5.32
(p-Value)                                    (0.039)                        (0.021)

Year FE                         Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Mine FE                         Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
County FE                       Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Ultimate Parent FE              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes

Number of firms                 503            457           503             457
Observations                   5,942          3,818         5,942           3,818
R2                             0.687          0.746         0.594           0.661




                                            44
                              Table 8: Proximity to Headquarters and Workplace Safety and Productivity Tradeoffs
     This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is either the total number of fatalities or the natural log of one plus the number
     of safety violationsat mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t (Panel A), or the the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by employee
     hours or the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by the average number of employees at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t n (Panel
     B). The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1993 through 2018. We split the sample into two subsamples based
     on the distance (in miles) the mine is located from the ultimate parent headquarters. We define a mine to be far from its headquarters if it is in the upper tertile of
     distances in our sample (greater than or equal to 105 miles), and near if it is in the lower two tertiles of distances in our sample (lower than 105 miles). The independent
     variable of interest is Public owner ist . In Columns (3) through (8), the safety violations for constructing the dependent variables are split by the probability of an
     accident actually occurring, as deemed by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) at the time of the citation for the safety violation. All variable definitions
     appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are
     from the Mine Safety and Health Administration published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP,
     CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                          Panel A
                          Dependent variable =                                                   log(1 + safety violationsist )
                          MSHA Prob. of Accident =                   All                       Low                      Medium                      High
                          Distance from HQ =                  Far             Near        Far         Near          Far        Near            Far        Near
                                                              (1)              (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)
                          Public ownerist                    0.061         0.425***    0.260*      0.831***       0.059      0.262***        -0.083     0.133*
                                                           (0.280)          (0.117)    (0.153)      (0.141)      (0.317)      (0.098)       (0.217)     (0.074)
                          log(Productionist )             0.117***         0.133***      0.076      0.083*       0.075*      0.112***     -0.056***      0.001
                                                           (0.042)          (0.048)    (0.049)      (0.048)      (0.040)      (0.035)       (0.020)     (0.010)
45




                          log(Employeesist )                0.077            -0.063    0.147**       -0.094       0.116        0.021          0.055    0.057***
                                                           (0.070)          (0.064)    (0.074)      (0.064)      (0.099)      (0.058)       (0.036)     (0.021)
                          log(Hoursist )                  0.584***         0.498***   0.458***     0.363***     0.514*** 0.389***          0.108***     0.030**
                                                           (0.071)          (0.070)    (0.073)      (0.068)      (0.064)      (0.057)       (0.027)     (0.014)
                          log(Minesst )                     -0.106           -0.002     -0.059       -0.067       -0.134       0.031       -0.054**      -0.007
                                                           (0.116)          (0.069)    (0.113)      (0.105)      (0.137)      (0.058)       (0.023)     (0.034)
                          Ultimate parent agest             -0.009                      -0.025                     0.007                      0.009
                                                           (0.006)                     (0.016)                   (0.015)                    (0.016)
                          Operator ageist                   -0.003          -0.004      -0.001        -0.005      0.000        0.000          0.001     0.002*
                                                           (0.006)         (0.003)     (0.005)       (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.001)
                          Unionizedist                       0.077          0.122       -0.066       0.255*       0.184        0.068         -0.047      -0.074
                                                           (0.169)         (0.199)     (0.179)       (0.141)     (0.214)      (0.213)       (0.085)     (0.080)

                          F-stat (near--far)                                1.28                     7.02                      0.35                     1.12
                          (p-Value)                                        (0.258)                   (0.008)                  (0.553)                  (0.290)

                          Year FE                            Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                          Mine FE                            Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                          County FE                          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                          Inspection Office FE               Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                          Ultimate Parent FE                 Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
                          Number of firms                    148             436        148           436          148             436       148         436
                          Observations                      3,164           6,332      3,164         6,332        3,164           6,332     3,164       6,332
                          R2                                0.873           0.828      0.872         0.818        0.825           0.796     0.462       0.438
                                  Table 8 --continued
Panel B
Dependent variable =     log(Production/Hoursist )       log(Production/Employeesist )
Distance from HQ =        Far             Near             Far            Near
                           (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
Public ownerist          -0.013         0.175***         -0.058         0.235**
                        (0.085)          (0.055)        (0.072)         (0.094)
log(Minesst )            -0.016          -0.067*          0.027          -0.021
                        (0.063)          (0.037)        (0.067)         (0.047)
Ultimate parent agest   0.012*                            0.005
                        (0.007)                         (0.013)
Operator ageist          -0.005           -0.002         -0.008          -0.001
                        (0.008)          (0.003)        (0.011)         (0.004)
Unionizedist            0.118**         0.109***        0.154**         0.134**
                        (0.058)          (0.039)        (0.073)         (0.058)

F-stat (near--far)                       2.95                            4.93
(p-Value)                               (0.086)                         (0.027)

Year FE                  Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
Mine FE                  Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
County FE                Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
Ultimate Parent FE       Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes

Number of firms           208              566            208             566
Observations             4,875           10,072          4,875          10,072
R2                       0.766            0.652          0.649           0.549




                                          46
                        Table 10: MSHA Inspection Office Changes and Workplace Safety and Productivity Tradeoffs
     This table reports the results of linear regression models surrounding changes in the inspection office assigned for overseeing mine safety. The dependent variable is either
     the natural log of one plus the number of safety violations,, or the the natural log of the total tons of clean coal produced divided by employee hours (Model (5)) or the
     average number of employees (Model (6)) at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t . The sample consists of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines
     over a sample period of 1993 through 2018 for safety violations, and 1985 through 2018 for productivity. Post is equal to 1 if a mine's inspection office has changed as
     of time t, and 0 otherwise. Change is equal to -1 for an inspection office change to an office at least 60 miles closer to the mine, 1 for an inspection office change to an
     office at least 60 miles further from the mine, and 0 otherwise. The independent variable of interest is MSHA proximity change i × post t × public owner ist . All variable
     definitions appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining
     acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm
     filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate level, are reported in parentheses. *, **,
     and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                            Dependent variable =                                              log(1+ Safety violationsist )             log(Productivityist )
                          MSHA Prob. of Accident =                                      All        Low         Med.         High                N/A
                                                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                          MSHA proximity changei × postt × public ownerist             0.287     0.431**      0.429*       -0.070      0.147*      0.283**
                                                                                     (0.224)     (0.203)     (0.231)      (0.144)     (0.077)      (0.133)
                          Public ownerist                                              0.224    0.465***       0.165       -0.009     0.075**      0.126**
                                                                                     (0.172)     (0.158)     (0.179)      (0.171)     (0.033)      (0.051)
                          log(Productionist )                                       0.120***    0.106***    0.078***    -0.025***
                                                                                     (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.023)      (0.009)
                          log(Employeesist )                                          0.003        0.015     0.090**     0.073***
                                                                                     (0.042)     (0.043)     (0.041)      (0.021)
                          log(Hoursist )                                            0.548***    0.373***    0.460***     0.061***
47




                                                                                     (0.050)     (0.048)     (0.043)      (0.012)
                          log(Minesst )                                               -0.062      -0.086      -0.042       -0.030      -0.033       0.003
                                                                                     (0.065)     (0.080)     (0.071)      (0.019)     (0.022)      (0.038)
                          Ultimate parent agest                                       -0.002      -0.016       0.006        0.010    0.012***       0.009
                                                                                     (0.007)     (0.017)     (0.011)      (0.016)     (0.004)      (0.013)
                          Operator ageist                                             -0.002      -0.003       0.002        0.001      -0.002       -0.002
                                                                                     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.003)
                          Unionizedist                                                 0.046      0.150*       0.049       -0.057    0.058***      0.072*
                                                                                     (0.115)     (0.090)     (0.125)      (0.049)     (0.015)      (0.039)
                          MSHA proximity changei × postt                              -0.252      -0.242     -0.271*       -0.140      -0.083       -0.236
                                                                                     (0.182)     (0.252)     (0.164)      (0.126)     (0.089)      (0.206)
                          MSHA proximity changei × public ownerist                    -0.103       0.191      -0.046     0.286**       -0.020       0.045
                                                                                     (0.348)     (0.295)     (0.298)      (0.139)     (0.079)      (0.102)
                          Postt × public ownerist                                     -0.131      -0.364       0.046     0.424**       -0.016       0.026
                                                                                     (0.294)     (0.259)     (0.330)      (0.175)     (0.099)      (0.151)
                          Postt                                                        0.175       0.023       0.151        0.102      -0.048       0.046
                                                                                     (0.128)     (0.150)     (0.174)      (0.134)     (0.090)      (0.153)
                          Year FE                                                     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                          Mine FE                                                     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                          County FE                                                   Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                          Inspection office FE                                        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                          Ultimate Parent FE                                          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
                          Number of firms                                              747         747        747           747       1,410         1,410
                          Observations                                               12,012      12,012      12,012       12,012      21,377       21,377
                          R2                                                          0.845       0.840      0.803         0.429       0.774       0.605
                                                Table 11: Placebo Results
This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is the natural log of one plus the number
of safety violations, the total number of fatalities, or the natural log of total tons of clean coal produced divided by employee
hours (Model (6)) or average employees (Model (7)) at mine i , owned by ultimate parent s, during year t . The sample consists
of publicly- and privately-owned U.S. coal mines over a sample period of 1985 through 2018 for productivity and fatalities, and
1993 through 2018 for safety violations. The dependent variable of interest is Placeboist . Placeboist is an indicator equal to
one if the observation is in the two-year period (t = -1 or t = -2) prior to a change in listing status for mine i . All variable
definitions appear in Appendix Table A.1. Data on mining fatalities, safety violations, production, and employment, as well as
ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration published through an
Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO
dates from Jay Ritter's website. Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate parent level, are reported in parentheses. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
 Dependent variable =                        log(1 + safety violationsist )            Total fatalitiesist    log(Productivityist )
 MSHA Prob. of Accident =            All          Low        Medium           High                           N/A
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)        (7)
 Placeboist                         -0.008        -0.024       -0.036        -0.002           -0.004           0.034      0.076
                                   (0.085)       (0.075)      (0.083)       (0.050)          (0.016)          (0.075)    (0.088)
 Public ownerist                     0.233       0.443**        0.173        -0.019          0.096**          0.131*     0.162**
                                   (0.176)       (0.179)      (0.176)       (0.160)          (0.042)          (0.069)    (0.065)
 log(Productionist )              0.127***      0.114***     0.079***     -0.024***            0.002
                                   (0.029)       (0.029)      (0.023)       (0.009)          (0.003)
 log(Employeesist )                 -0.005        0.007       0.087**      0.070***        0.012***
                                   (0.042)       (0.042)      (0.041)       (0.021)          (0.004)
 log(Hoursist )                   0.540***      0.364***     0.457***     0.061***             0.001
                                   (0.049)       (0.048)      (0.041)       (0.012)          (0.004)
 log(Minesst )                      -0.060        -0.079       -0.046        -0.028           -0.006           -0.035      0.015
                                   (0.065)       (0.079)      (0.072)       (0.019)          (0.009)          (0.035)     (0.039)
 Ultimate parent agest               0.003        -0.010       0.011          0.011        -0.001***         0.017***      0.009
                                   (0.009)       (0.017)      (0.009)       (0.016)          (0.000)          (0.005)     (0.011)
 Operator ageist                    -0.002        -0.003        0.002         0.001            0.001           -0.003      -0.002
                                   (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.002)     (0.003)
 Unionizedist                        0.067       0.167*         0.055        -0.046         -0.026**         0.096***     0.076*
                                   (0.110)       (0.090)      (0.117)       (0.051)          (0.013)          (0.025)     (0.039)

 Year FE                             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
 Mine FE                             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
 County FE                           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
 Inspection Office FE                Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            No               No           No
 Ultimate Parent FE                  Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
 Number of firms                      749          749          749             749           1,411            1,411       1,411
 Observations                       12,173       12,173       12,173          12,173         21,538           21,538      21,538
 R2                                  0.843        0.838        0.802           0.428          0.164            0.703       0.603




                                                                 48
                              Table 12: MSHA Inspection Office Change Predictors
This table reports the results of linear regression models in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one
if mine i experiences a MSHA inspection office move or reassignment from MSHA inspection office j to another location at
time t+1 . All dependent variables are measured at time t . Robust standard errors, clustered at the ultimate parent level, are
reported in parentheses. *,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
        Dependent variable =                                Indicator(MSHA inspection office change)t+1
        Proximity change =                                           Both                         Decrease    Increase
                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
        Public ownerist                          -0.008      -0.008        0.002       -0.011       -0.007      -0.003
                                                (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.009)
        log(Mines in inspection districtjt )   -0.012***   -0.009***       0.001        0.002        0.006      -0.003
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.005)
        log(Average distancejt )                 0.004*     0.005**      0.004**        0.002        0.000      0.002
                                                (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.002)
        Total fatalitiesist                      -0.002      -0.001       -0.003       -0.003       -0.002      -0.001
                                                (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.001)
        log(1+safety violationsist )             -0.000      -0.002       -0.000       0.000         0.001      -0.000
                                                (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
        log(Production/hoursist )                 0.002      -0.003       0.018*       0.017         0.001     0.015*
                                                (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.006)     (0.008)
        log(Productionist )                      0.002        0.005       -0.004       -0.002        0.004      -0.005
                                                (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.004)     (0.004)
        log(Employeesist )                     -0.011***   -0.010***    -0.011***    -0.013***    -0.006**    -0.006**
                                                (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.002)
        log(Hoursist )                           0.004        0.000       0.011*        0.008       -0.001     0.008*
                                                (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.004)
        log(Minesst )                           0.004**      0.003*        0.000       -0.003       -0.004       0.000
                                                (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.004)     (0.003)
        Ultimate parent agest                    -0.000      -0.000        0.000        0.000       -0.004       0.004
                                                (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)
        Operator ageist                           0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000*        0.000       0.000
                                                (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
        Unionizedist                              0.004       0.009       -0.000       -0.010       -0.005      -0.006
                                                (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.007)     (0.007)

        Year FE                                   No          Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
        County FE                                 No          No             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
        Inspection office FE                      No          No             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
        Ultimate Parent FE                        No          No             No         Yes          Yes         Yes

        Number of firms                           927         927             921       744          744         744
        Observations                            11,009      11,009          10,979    10,802       10,802      10,802
        R2                                       0.007       0.019           0.175     0.317        0.326       0.280




                                                              49
                                            Figure 1: Geographic Dispersion of Mines
     This figure displays the geographic locations of the mines in our sample by public listing status of the ultimate parent.
     Privately-held mines are depicted with red dots and publicly-held mines are depicted with blue dots. Data on coal mine
     locations are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative.
     Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's
     website.
50
            Figure 2: Listing Status and Annual Coal Mining Safety Violations
This figure displays annual coal mining safety violations over a sample period of 1993 through
2018. The gray line depicts annual mining safety violations in all coal mines operated in the
United States, while the blue and red bars depict annual mining safety violations in coal
mines in our main sample that are operated in the United States by public and private firms,
respectively. Data on coal mining safety violations are from the Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing
status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from
Jay Ritter's website.




                                             51
                Figure 3: Listing Status and Annual Coal Mining Fatalities
This figure displays annual coal mining fatalities over a sample period of 1985 through 2018.
The gray line depicts annual mining fatalities in all coal mines operated in the United States,
while the blue and red bars depict annual mining fatalities in coal mines in our main sample
that are operated in the United States by public and private firms, respectively. Data on
coal mining fatalities are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published
through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-collected from firm
filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.




                                              52
                Figure 4: Annual Number of Mines Changing Listing Status
This figure displays the annual number of mines changing listing status over a sample period
of 1985 through 2018. The blue bars depict mines that change listing status when the ultimate
parent either goes public through an IPO, or goes private through a going-private transaction.
The red bars depict mines that change status when a public firm acquires a privately-owned
mine (or in most cases, the entire private firm), or when a private firm acquires a publicly-
owned mine or an entire public firm through a reverse merger transaction. Data on ultimate
mine ownership and mining acquisitions are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on listing status are hand-
collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.




                                             53
          Figure 5: Listing Status Changes and Mine-level Safety Violations Trends
These figures display the trends of mine-level safety violations around changes in listing status for U.S. coal
mines over a sample period of 1993 through 2018. The figures plot annual coefficients for each time (year
t  -3 through year t  3) directly around a listing status change interacted with an indicator for
whether a firm is public at anytime in our sample. The models include the same controls and fixed effects
as Models (2), (4), (6), and (8) in Table 3. Data on mine-level fatalities and safety violations, as well
as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA) published through an Open Government Initiative. Data on firms' listing status are hand-collected
from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ, and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.

               (a) All safety violations                        (b) Low probability safety violations




        (c) High probability safety violations                  (d) High probability safety violations




                                                      54
             Figure 6: Listing Status Changes and Mine-level Fatalities Trends
This figure displays the trend of mine-level fatalities around changes in listing status for U.S.
coal mines over a sample period of 1985 through 2018. The figures plot annual coefficients for
each time (year t  -3 through year t  3) directly around a listing status change interacted
with an indicator for whether a firm is public at anytime in our sample. The model includes
the same controls and fixed effects as Model (4) in Table 4. Data on mine-level production
and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government
Initiative. Data on firms' listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ,
and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.




                                               55
           Figure 7: Listing Status Changes and Mine-level Productivity Trends
This figure displays the trend of mine-level productivity (measured by the natural log of tons
of clean coal produced per worker hour) around changes in listing status for U.S. coal mines
over a sample period of 1985 through 2018. The figures plot annual coefficients for each
time (year t  -3 through year t  3) directly around a listing status change interacted
with an indicator for whether a firm is public at anytime in our sample. The model includes
the same controls and fixed effects as Model (4) in Table 4. Data on mine-level production
and employment, as well as ultimate mine ownership and mining acquisitions, are from the
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) published through an Open Government
Initiative. Data on firms' listing status are hand-collected from firm filings, CRSP, CapitalIQ,
and data on IPO dates from Jay Ritter's website.




                                              56
                             Figure 8: Average Annual Coal Sale Prices
These figures display average annual coal sales prices reported by the U.S. Energy Information Administration
(EIA) from 1993 to 2018. Panel A displays the average annual price level across the entire U.S. for both
surface and underground coal, as well as surface coal for Ohio and underground coal for Colorado. These two
states serve as examples for the overall level of dispersion in prices by state and mine type. Panel B displays
the average annual sales price change (year-over-year) for each state separated by surface and underground
coal mining. The size of the bubbles reflects the level of the price prior to the change. Thus, larger bubbles
highlight larger year-over-year dollar changes in the average annual sale price. For aesthetic purposes, we
exclude price increases above 50%, and price decreases below -50%. There are only seven such observations.

                                        (a) Average Sale Price Level




                             (b) Average Sale Price Percentage Change (YOY)




                                                      57
                         Figure 9: MSHA Inspection Office Reassignments
These figures display two examples of mines that experience MSHA inspection office reassignments. Panel
A displays a MSHA inspection office move from McAlester, Oklahoma to Longview, Texas in 2013. This
move affects six mines in our sample, five in which the proximity to the MSHA office decreases (indicated by
red dots), and one mine in which the proximity to the MSHA office increases (indicated by the green dot).
Each of these six changes is greater than 60 miles and so each of these mines is treated. Panel B displays
MSHA inspection office reassignments from Jasper to Bessemer, Alabama in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
These reassignments affect ten mines in our sample. Three of these mines (indicated by red dots) experience
a mileage change of greater than 60 miles and so are treated, while the other seven mines (indicated by green
dots) experience a mileage change of less than 60 miles and so are part of the control group.

                                    (a) McAlester, OK to Longview, TX




                                                     58
(b) Jasper, AL to Bessemer, AL




             59
A       Appendix

                                            Table A.1: Data Appendix
Variable name                   Definition                                          Source
Public ownerist                 Indicator variable equal to one if a mine i's       Firm filings, CRSP, Capital IQ and data on IPO
                                ultimate parent owner, s, is publicly listed in     dates from Jay Ridder's website
                                year t

Safety violationsist            The number of citations issued by MSHA for          Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                safety violations at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s in year t

log(1+safety violationsist )    Natural log of one plus the number of citations     Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                issued by MSHA for safety violations at mine i,
                                owned by ultimate parent s in year t
Low probability safety          The number of citations issued by MSHA for          Mine Safety and Health Administration
violationsist                   safety violations that are deemed low probabil-
                                ity of the accident at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s in year t

log(1+low probability safety    Natural log of one plus the number of low prob-     Mine Safety and Health Administration
violationsist )                 ability safety violations at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s in year t

Medium probability safety       The number of citations issued by MSHA for          Mine Safety and Health Administration
violationsist                   safety violations that are deemed medium prob-
                                ability of the accident at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s in year t

log(1+medium probability        Natural log of one plus the number of medium        Mine Safety and Health Administration
safety violationsist )          probability safety violations at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s in year t
High probability safety         The number of citations issued by MSHA for          Mine Safety and Health Administration
violationsist                   safety violations that are deemed high probabil-
                                ity of the accident at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s in year t

log(1+high probability safety   Natural log of one plus the number of high          Mine Safety and Health Administration
violationsist )                 probability safety violations at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s in year t
Total fatalitiesist             The number of fatalities reported to MSHA at        Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t

Total fatalitiesist (single     The number of fatalities from accidents only        Mine Safety and Health Administration
miner accidents)                involving a single miner reported to MSHA at
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t
Injuriesist                     The number of injuries reported to MSHA at          Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t

log(1+injuriesist )             Natural log of one plus the number of injuries at   Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t

Days missed due to injuryist    The total number of days workers are estimated      Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                to miss for injuries at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s in year t

log(1+days missedist )          Natural log of one plus the number of days          Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                estimated to be missed at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s in year t
Days missed per injuryist       The total number of days estimated to be            Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                missed divided by the total number of injuries
                                at mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t
                                (winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels)

log(1+days                      Natural log of one plus the number of days          Mine Safety and Health Administration
missed/injuriesist )            estimated to be missed divided by the number
                                of injuries at mine i, owned by ultimate parent
                                s in year t
Fines paidist                   Total fines paid by the controller to MSHA for      Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                citations from safety violations or accidents at
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year t

log(1+finesist )                Natural log of one plus the total fines paid at     Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s in year tn



                                                               60
                                                   Table A.1--continued
Variable name                   Definition                                          Source
Tons of clean coal              Total tons of clean coal produced and reported      Mine Safety and Health Administration
producedist                     to MSHA at mine i, owned by ultimate parent
                                s, during year t

log(Productionist )             Natural log of the tons of clean coal produced      Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                at mine i, owned by ultimate parent s, during
                                year t
Number of employeesist          The average number of employees working in          Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mining related activities reported to MSHA at
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s, during year
                                t

log(Employeesist )              Natural log of the average number of employees      Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                at mine i, owned by ultimate parent s, during
                                year t
Number of employee hoursist     Total number of hours worked in mining-related      Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                activities and reported to MSHA at mine i,
                                owned by ultimate parent s, during year t

log(Hoursist )                  Natural log of employee hours worked in             Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mining-related activities at mine i, owned by
                                ultimate parent s, during year t
Tons of clean coal per          Total tons of clean coal produced divided by the    Mine Safety and Health Administration
employeeist                     average number employees working in mining-
                                related activities at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s, during year t (winsorized at the 1%
                                and 99% levels)

log(Production/employeesist )   Natural log of total tons of clean coal produced    Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                divided by the average number of employees at
                                mine i, owned by ultimate parent s, during year
                                t
Tons of clean coal per em-      Total tons of clean coal produced divided by the    Mine Safety and Health Administration
ployee hourist                  total number employee hours worked in mining-
                                related activities at mine i, owned by ultimate
                                parent s, during year t (winsorized at the 1%
                                and 99% levels)

log(Production/hoursist )       Natural log of total tons of clean coal produced    Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                divided by the total number of employee hours
                                at mine i, owned by ultimate parent s, during
                                year t

Number of minesist              Total number of mines owned (including those        Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                not in the main sample) by mine i's ultimate
                                parent, s, during year t

log(Minesist )                  Natural log of total number of mines owned by       Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mine i's ultimate parent, s, during year t

MSHA inspection office          Variable equal to 1 if mine i experiences a         Mine Safety and Health Administration
changei                         change in the MSHA inspection office location
                                that increases the distance between the mine
                                and inspection office by at least 60 miles, -1
                                if mine i experiences a change in the MSHA
                                inspection office location that decreases the
                                distance between the mine and inspection office
                                by at least 60, and 0 otherwise
Placeboist                      Indicator variable equal to one in the two years    Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                leading up to a (to public) listing status change
                                for mine i. That is Placeboist = 1 if t = -1 or
                                t = -2 and Public ownerist switches from zero
                                to one at time t = 0 for mine i

log(Mines in inspection         Natural log of total number of mines within         Mine Safety and Health Administration
district)jt                     MSHA inspection district j during year t

log(Average distance)jt         Natural log of the average distance between         Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                mines and the MSHA inspection office within
                                MSHA inspection district j during year t




                                                              61
