                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A CARBON TAX
                  TO MEET THE U.S. PARIS AGREEMENT TARGET:
            THE ROLE OF FIRM CREATION AND TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

                                     Alan Finkelstein Shapiro
                                        Gilbert E. Metcalf

                                       Working Paper 28795
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28795


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Garth Heutel for very useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alan Finkelstein Shapiro and Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomic Effects of a Carbon Tax to Meet the U.S. Paris Agreement Target: The
Role of Firm Creation and Technology Adoption
Alan Finkelstein Shapiro and Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 28795
May 2021
JEL No. E20,E24,E62,H23,O33,Q52,Q54,Q55,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the quantitative labor market and aggregate effects of a carbon tax in a framework
with pollution externalities and equilibrium unemployment. Our model incorporates endogenous
labor force participation and two margins of adjustment influenced by carbon taxes: (1) firm
creation and (2) green production-technology adoption. A carbon-tax policy that reduces carbon
emissions by 35 percent ­ roughly the emissions reductions that will be required under the Biden
Administration's new commitment under the Paris Agreement ­ and transfers the tax revenue to
households generates mild positive long-run effects on consumption and output; a marginal
increase in the unemployment and labor force participation rates; and an expansion in the number
and fraction of firms that use green technologies. In the short term, the adjustment to higher
carbon taxes is accompanied by gradual gains in output and consumption and a negligible
expansion in unemployment. Critically, abstracting from endogenous firm entry and green-
technology adoption implies that the same policy has substantial adverse short- and long-term
effects on labor income, consumption, and output. Our findings highlight the importance of these
margins for a comprehensive assessment of the labor market and aggregate effects of carbon
taxes.


Alan Finkelstein Shapiro
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
Alan.Finkelstein_Shapiro@tufts.edu

Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu
1         Introduction
The potential adverse effects of taxing carbon emissions on employment and aggregate eco-
nomic activity are a central theme in current discussions of environmental policy and regula-
tion (OECD, 2017; Hafstead and Williams III, 2019; Metcalf and Stock, 2020a,b). This topic
has taken on greater importance with the Biden Administration's April 2021 announcement
of targeting emission reductions of 50 to 52 percent from 2005 levels by 2030.1 The growing
interest in introducing and broadening the scope of carbon taxes in the U.S. raises three
important questions: What are the quantitative effects of these taxes on labor markets and
macroeconomic outcomes? How do changes in firm entry and production-technology adop-
tion due to carbon taxes shape these macroeconomic outcomes? Finally, do the short-term
effects differ from the long-term effects?
        We address these three questions in a general equilibrium model with labor search fric-
tions and pollution externalities. In contrast to existing studies, our framework incorporates
two additional and interrelated margins of adjustment to carbon taxes: (1) firm creation
(subject to sunk entry costs) and (2) the ability of firms to adopt green (non-polluting)
technologies (subject to fixed costs). The rationale for including these two margins is sim-
ple: the regulatory costs associated with environmental policy not only affect the labor and
capital decisions of existing firms and the decisions over emissions abatement--an intensive
margin of adjustment to carbon taxes--but also the incentive of potential firms to enter the
market in the first place as well as these firms' technology-adoption decisions--an extensive
margin of adjustment to these same taxes. At the same time, both firm entry and technology
adoption decisions can influence labor market and macroeconomic outcomes. Critically, the
inclusion of a technology adoption margin allows us to consider policy-induced endogenous
changes in the economy's underlying technological composition of production (captured by
the prevalence of polluting versus green production technologies). By explicitly considering
these important margins of adjustment, our framework allows for a more comprehensive
assessment of the labor-market and macroeconomic effects of carbon taxes.
    1
    White House Fact Sheet on Greenhouse Gas Pollution Reduction Target, April 22, 2021, available
at        https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-
biden-sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-
securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/.


                                                  2
   The Biden Administration's commitment to reducing greenhouse gas pollution by 50
to 52 percent from 2005 levels by 2030 is an ambitious target. Based on modeling in the
U.S. Energy Information Administration's 2021 Annual Energy Outlook, emissions in 2030
in EIA's reference (no new policy) case will have fallen by nearly one-quarter from 2005
levels (4.583 billion metric tons relative to 2005 emissions of 6 billion metric tons). Thus,
emissions will need to fall an additional 35 percent between now and 2030 to achieve the
Biden Administration's goal.
   Using our model under a baseline carbon-tax scheme designed to reduce long-run emis-
sions by 35 percent with carbon-tax revenue rebated lump-sum to households, we find that
this policy generates mild positive long-run effects on consumption, output, and labor force
participation; negligible long-run adverse effects on unemployment; and a long-run increase
in the number and share of firms that adopt green technologies. Moreover, the positive
long-term effects of carbon taxes extend to the transition path as well. Indeed, the gradual
increase in carbon taxes is accompanied by greater consumption and output, and a very lim-
ited increase in unemployment. Thus, higher carbon taxes have positive short- and long-term
macroeconomic effects and negligible detrimental effects on the labor market.
   To highlight the relevance of our findings and stress the importance of firm entry and
green-technology adoption decisions, we compare our results to those of a simpler model that
abstracts from these two extensive margins. In this simpler model, the same carbon-tax-
induced reduction in emissions has non-trivial negative short- and long-term effects on labor
income, consumption, and output, as well as stronger adverse effects on unemployment.
However, these detrimental effects are at odds with recent empirical evidence that point
to positive output effects from carbon taxes (Metcalf and Stock, 2020a,b). Therefore, our
framework is able to reconcile this evidence. In doing so, we highlight how technology
adoption decisions play a decisive role in generating muted adverse labor-market effects
alongside positive macroeconomic outcomes in response to carbon taxes. At the same time,
our analysis shows how changes in firm entry in response to carbon taxes play a key role in
contributing to the short-term expansion in consumption as carbon taxes gradually increase
to reach their higher long-term level.
   Our work is related to the growing theoretical literature on the labor market and macroe-


                                             3
conomic effects of carbon taxes and environmental policy. Several papers in this literature
focus on the link between pollution emissions and business cycles from a positive standpoint,
but abstract from considering labor market outcomes and the potential differences between
the short- and long-term aggregate effects of carbon taxes (that is, the transition path to
an environment with higher carbon taxes).2 Only recently has the literature started to ex-
plore the relationship between environmental policy, macroeconomic outcomes, and labor
markets, including unemployment (Hafstead and Williams III, 2018, Gibson and Heutel,
2020, Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline, 2019, and Castellanos and Heutel, 2021). At the same
time, a few papers have studied the link between market structure, firm entry, and envi-
ronmental policy (see Kreickemeier and Richter, 2018; and Annicchiarico, Correani, and Di
Dio, 2018). Another recent strand of work explores how technology adoption interacts with
firm entry and exit (Coria and Kyriakopoulou, 2018) and, separately, how environmental
policy influences the adoption of green technologies (Acemoglu et al., 2016; Fried, 2018).3
Critically, none of these papers consider the link between carbon taxes and labor market
outcomes, which lie at the center of our analysis. Closest to our work are Acemoglu et
al (2016), who propose a framework where firms choose to produce using either a dirty or
clean technology and invest in research and development, Hafstead and Williams III (2018),
who use a two-sector ("dirty" and "clean") framework with equilibrium unemployment and
find that carbon-tax-induced reductions in emissions entail both output and unemployment
costs, and Annicchiarico, Correani, and Di Dio (2018), who use a one-sector model with
endogenous firm entry and frictionless labor markets and find that greater carbon taxes lead
to lower output, partly via lower firm creation. Our findings show that the adverse effects
from carbon taxes in both Hafstead and Williams III (2018) and Annicchiarico, Correani,
and Di Dio (2018) depend critically on whether firms can adopt green technologies.
       We contribute to the literature on the labor market and macroeconomic consequences of
carbon taxes in three ways. First, while this literature has steadily expanded, the majority
of models focus exclusively on unemployment and the reallocation of workers between sec-
   2
     See Fischer and Springborn (2011), Heutel (2012), Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015), Annicchiarico,
Correani, and Di Dio (2017), Annicchiarico and Diluiso (2019), and Khan, Metaxoglou, Knittel, and Papineau
(2019), among others.
   3
     For recent work on the link between pollution, environmental regulation, firm entry, and trade, see
Shapiro and Walker (2018).


                                                    4
tors without considering how policy changes affect the search behavior of individuals.4 The
inclusion of labor force participation in our framework embodies this labor-supply-side mar-
gin. Second, these same studies abstract from the effects of policy changes on labor markets
and aggregate outcomes via (1) firm entry and exit, and (2) firms' decisions to adopt green
technologies. Our work shows that the interaction of these margins plays a crucial role in
shaping the qualitative and quantitative effects of higher carbon taxes on both labor mar-
ket outcomes and aggregate economic activity in the short and long term, with technology
adoption--and therefore policy-induced endogenous changes in the economy's underlying
technological composition of production--playing a decisive role in generating positive ag-
gregate effects from carbon taxes. This last finding is, to the best of our knowledge, new,
and stands in contrast to those of existing related papers, which generally find that carbon
taxes have adverse labor-market and macro effects. Moreover, our model-based results pro-
vide a theoretical rationale behind recent empirical evidence on the positive macro effects
of carbon taxes (Metcalf and Stock, 2020a,b). Finally, the combination of firm entry and
exit and technology adoption with frictional labor markets contributes to the existing liter-
ature on market structure, technology adoption, and environmental policy, which abstracts
from the implications of adopting green technologies on the labor market. More broadly, we
bring together two important margins of adjustment to carbon taxes that, thus far, have
been studied in isolation, and show that their inclusion plays a central role in shaping the
qualitative and quantitative labor-market and macroeconomic implications of carbon taxes.
        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the model. Section 3
outlines our calibration strategy and presents the main results from our quantitative analysis.
Section 4 concludes.



2         The Model
The economy is comprised of firms, a government, a population of unit mass, and a repre-
sentative household with a measure one of household members that owns all firms. Search
    4
    The only recent exception is Castellanos and Heutel (2021), who consider sectoral labor force participa-
tion.




                                                     5
frictions in the labor market give rise to equilibrium unemployment. Households consume,
make labor force participation decisions, and invest resources in firm creation so that firm
entry is endogenous. As we describe in more detail below, once firms enter the market, they
can choose the technological composition of their production process: one of the two pro-
duction technologies available to the firm generates harmful carbon dioxide emissions as a
by-product and is subject to carbon taxes, while the other is "green" and does not generate
these emissions, but its adoption is subject to fixed costs of operation. Revenue from carbon
taxes is transferred lump-sum to households.
   The production and labor market structure is an adaptation of the framework in Finkel-
stein Shapiro and Mandelman (2021) (henceforth FSM), who modify the production struc-
ture of the well-known Ghironi and Melitz (2005) (henceforth GM) trade framework to cap-
ture technology-adoption and its impact on labor market outcomes. The structure in FSM
has relevant features for the analysis of carbon taxes, mainly the inclusion of technology-
adoption decisions by firms, endogenous firm entry, and job-search decisions by households
via endogenous sectoral labor force participation. In contrast to FSM, we introduce pollu-
tion externalities and focus on how firms' decisions over entry and technology adoption are
influenced by carbon taxes. With this mind, the model description below follows closely the
general setup in FSM.


2.1    Firm and Production Structure

There is an unbounded number of monopolistically-competitive firm entrants whose entry
is subject to a sunk entry resource cost e . Once firms enter, they draw their idiosyncratic
productivity a from a common distribution G(a) with support [amin , ),where the resulting
level of a remains unchanged until the firm exits with exogenous probability 0 <  < 1.
Each firm produces a single output variety  based on a, where yt ( ) denotes the output of
a given firm producing variety  . Thus, in the rest of the model description, we refer to a
firm producing variety  with productivity level a simply as firm a.
   When a household decides to create a new firm, all it knows is the productivity distribu-
tion, G(a), but not the firm's realized productivity. Upon entering and incurring the sunk
entry cost, the new firm's productivity level is realized, allowing it to choose one of two

                                               6
technologies.
   A regular (r) technology is available that generates carbon dioxide (harmful) emissions--
emissions for short. These emissions are subject to a carbon tax but can be mitigated via
expenditures on emissions abatement. A green (g ) technology is also available that does not
generate emissions. Using the green technology, however, entails incurring a fixed resource
cost g associated with the adoption of the technology. Appendix A.1 formally shows that
there is an endogenous threshold level of productivity such that firms with realized pro-
ductivity below this threshold choose the r technology and firms with realized productivity
above this threshold choose the g technology. Households will choose to create a new firm
based on the new firm's expected future profits, which will depend on the distribution of the
productivity parameter a and the resulting technology that is optimal for the firm to choose.
The choice technology makes the measure of firms in each category endogenous.
   Both production technologies rely on labor, which is subject to search and matching
frictions, and physical capital as inputs. Emissions from using the r technology add to
the economy's stock of carbon dioxide pollution that, in turn, has negative externalities on
production for all firms in the economy, as we detail below.


2.1.1   Total Output
                                                        
                                               -1       -1
Total output is given by Yt =      
                                      yt ( )        d        , where  is the potential measure of
firms in the economy and  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across individual output
                                                                              1
varieties. In turn, the aggregate price index is Pt =          p ( )1- d
                                                                t
                                                                             1-
                                                                                  . As in GM, only
a subset of firms t   are ultimately active in any given period.


2.1.2   Firm Structure

In what follows, we separate the production process from technology-adoption and pricing
decisions by introducing intermediate goods producers and firms that use these intermediate
goods. This facilitates the comparison of our framework to related models that abstract
from firm entry and technology-adoption margins without affecting the general economic




                                                7
environment.5


Firm Profits and Threshold Productivity Level As noted earlier, we can think of
a firm a as having access to two possible production lines that differ in their technology.
                                                         y
Individual profits from producing with the r technology, r,t (a), are given by

                                     y                       mcr,t
                                     r,t (a) = r,t (a) -           yr,t (a),
                                                              a

                                                    y
while profits from producing with the g technology, g,t (a), are given by

                                 y                        mcg,t
                                 g,t (a) = g,t (a) -            yg,t (a) - g ,
                                                           a

where j,t (a)  pj,t (a)/Pt , mcj,t , and yj,t (a) denote, respectively, the real output price, the
real marginal cost, and the firm output associated with using technology j  {g, r}, and
g is the fixed cost of g -technology adoption. Firm a is indifferent between production
technologies when


                                            y             y
                                            g,t (ag,t ) = r,t (ag,t ),                                         (1)

where ag,t is the threshold idiosyncratic productivity level above which firms adopt the g
technology.6


Optimal Pricing Given the aggregation of total firm output in Section 2.1.1, it is easy
to show that the demand function for firm a's output is given by yj,t (a) = (j,t (a))- Yt for
                                                    y
j  {g, r}. Then, firm a chooses j,t (a) to maximize j,t (a) subject to the demand function
   5
      While this separation of production from technology adoption is common in the macroeconomics litera-
ture, it may seem unusual to environmental economists. We note that we could equivalently characterize the
production process as one where firms use factors of production to produce a final good. Firms enter, learn
their productivity level, and choose a production technology (regular or green). Having learned their pro-
ductivity level, in equilibrium, they match the technology choice to their productivity level appropriately (as
discussed below). Firms use capital and labor to produce yt (a) with a constant-returns-to-scale production
function. Marginal revenue implied for intermediate goods producers in Section 2.1.3 below simply becomes
marginal cost for final goods producers just below.
    6
      See FSM for an analogous indifference condition in the context of firms' decisions to adopt digital
technologies, and Zlate (2016) in the context of firms' decisions to offshore production. It can be shown that
                                                                                           y           y
if ag,t is not at the extreme ends of the support of the distribution, then the slope of g,t (ag,t ) > r,t (ag,t ),
for g and r firms only intersect once (at ag,t ). See Appendix A.1 for a proof.

                                                        8
                                                                                           mcj,t
for yj,t (a). The resulting optimal real price for firm a is given by j,t (a) =           -1 a
                                                                                                 .


Evolution of Firms Denote by Nt the measure of total active firms and by Ne,t the
measure of new entrants. Then, the evolution of the total number of firms in the economy is


                                        Nt = (1 -  ) [Nt-1 + Ne,t-1 ] .                                      (2)


Recalling that firms draw their idiosyncratic productivity from a distribution G(a) and that
ag,t is the threshold level of productivity above which firms use the g technology, the number
of r firms Nr,t is given by Nr,t = G(ag,t )Nt and the number of g firms Ng,t is given by
Ng,t = [1 - G(ag,t )] Nt .


Firm Averages Denote by ar,t the average idiosyncratic productivity level of r firms and
by ag,t the average idiosyncratic productivity level of g firms. Formally, these averages are
                                                 1                                                  1
                              ag,t               -1                                    -1           -1
given by ar,t =     1
                  G(ag,t )   amin
                                     a-1 dG(a)        and ag,t =          1
                                                                      1-G(ag,t )     ag,t
                                                                                          a dG(a)        . Then,
                                                                   Nr,t y
                                                 y
we can define average individual-firm profits as t =                    +N
                                                                   Nt r,t
                                                                                  g,t y
                                                                                      where r,t
                                                                                 Nt g,t
                                                                                                y    y
                                                                                                     r,t (ar,t )
    y    y
and g,t  g,t (ag,t ) are average individual-firm profits from producing with the r and g tech-
nologies, respectively. Analogously, average real prices and average individual-firm output
are given by r,t  r,t (ar,t ) and g,t  g,t (ag,t ) and by yr,t  yr,t (ar,t ) and yg,t  yg,t (ag,t ),
respectively. Of note, as we show in Section 2.2, given that firms' idiosyncratic productivity
is revealed only after incurring a sunk cost and entering the market, firm creation decisions
                                                              y
are influenced by, among other factors, the expected value of t .


2.1.3    Intermediate Goods Producers

There is a measure 1 of perfectly-competitive producers of intermediate goods for r and g
firms. These producers use category-specific labor, which is subject to search and matching
frictions, and capital. The production of intermediate goods for r firms generates pollution
emissions et that add to the economy's stock of pollution xt (where this stock is taken as
given by firms). We follow the literature and assume that the stock of pollution evolves as
xt = x xt-1 + et + erow                   row
                    t , 0 < x < 1, where et   denotes exogenous emissions from the rest of
the world. Emissions et are taxed, but r firms can mitigate these emissions via abatement

                                                        9
expenditures. In contrast, the production of intermediate goods for g firms does not generate
pollution emissions and is not subject to carbon taxes.
       Formally, intermediate goods producers choose the number of vacancies vg,t and vr,t which
are needed to hire workers to produce each category of intermediate goods; the total amount
of desired capital kt+1 ; the desired measure of g and r workers ng,t and nr,t ; and the fraction
                                                                 i
of emissions abatement µt to maximize E0               t=0   t|0 t subject to7

                    i
                    t = [D(xt )mcr,t H (nr,t , kr,t ) - wr,t nr,t - r vr,t - t et - t ]
                             + [D(xt )mcg,t F (ng,t , kg,t ) - wg,t ng,t - g vg,t ]
                                           - [kt+1 - (1 -  )kt ] ,

the perceived evolution of each category of employment


                                    nr,t = (1 - )nr,t-1 + vr,t q (r,t ),                                   (3)


and
                                    ng,t = (1 - )ng,t-1 + vg,t q (g,t ),                                   (4)

and total physical capital
                                              kt = kg,t + kr,t ,                                           (5)

where t|0 is the household's stochastic discount factor (defined further below), the term


                                       t = µt D (xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ),                                     (6)


is the total cost of abating emissions from the production of intermediate goods for r firms,
and
                                  et = (1 - µt ) [D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t )]1- ,                              (7)

is the total amount of emissions generated by such production net of abatement, where  > 0,
  1, and 0 <   1. Note that both the cost of abating emissions, t , and the emissions
   7
    Recall that households own all firms (and take their profits as given). Hence the joint profit maximization
assumption here.



                                                      10
themselves, et , are a function of the production of intermediate goods for r firms. H (nr,t , kr,t )
and F (ng,t , kg,t ) are constant-returns-to-scale and increasing and concave functions in each
argument (we assume that aggregate productivity is constant and normalized to 1). j
and wj,t are, respectively, the flow cost of posting vacancies and the real wage of workers
in category j  {g, r}, and 0 <  < 1 is the capital depreciation rate.8 t is the tax on
emissions and D(xt ) is a pollution-damages function that is decreasing in the economy's
stock of pollution xt and taken as given by producers. As such, an increase in pollution
effectively reduces output for a given amount of labor and capital. Turning to the evolution
of each category of employment, 0 <          < 1 is the exogenous probability of job separation and
q (j,t ) is the endogenous job-filling probability in category j , which is a function of market
tightness j,t . Finally, we follow the labor-market timing convention in Arseneau and Chugh
(2012) whereby filled vacancies in period t become productive in the same period.
       The first-order conditions yield an optimal emissions abatement rate µt


                                  t (D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ))- = µt
                                                                   -1
                                                                      ,                                  (8)


capital Euler equations


               1 = Et t+1|t [D(xt+1 )mcr,t+1 Hkr ,t+1 - t+1 ekr ,t+1 - kr ,t+1 + (1 -  )] ,              (9)


and
                           1 = Et t+1|t D(xt+1 )mcg,t+1 Fkg ,t+1 + (1 -  ) ,                            (10)

as well as standard job creation conditions for employment in each category
                                                                                  
                          r                  D(xt )mcr,t Hnr ,t - t enr ,t
                                =                                          ,                            (11)
                       q (r,t )                                    r
                                  -nr ,t - wr,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t q(r,t+1 )

and
                      g                                                     g
                            = D(xt )mcg,t Fng ,t - wg,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t            ,                   (12)
                   q (g,t )                                              q (g,t+1 )
   8
    Following the macro literature on endogenous firm entry, we assume that the capital depreciation rate
and the firm exit rate are the same. Introducing differences in firm exit and capital depreciation rates does
not change our main conclusions.

                                                     11
where enr ,t and ekr ,t , denote the marginal increase in emissions from one more worker and
one more unit of capital in the production of intermediate goods for r firms, respectively,
and nr ,t and kr ,t denote the marginal increase in the resource cost of emissions abatement
associated with having one more worker and one more unit of capital in the production of
intermediate goods for r firms, respectively.9
       Intuitively, intermediate goods producers equate the marginal cost of emissions abatement--
given by the resource cost incurred as a result of the marginal increase in emissions abatement--
to the marginal benefit of emissions abatement--given by the marginal output gain (net of
pollution damages) from not having to pay the carbon tax. The capital Euler equations are
standard. Finally, the job creation conditions equate the marginal cost of posting a vacancy
for each category of employment to the expected marginal benefit of doing so. In the case
of posting a vacancy to hire workers who produce intermediate goods for r firms, producers
take into account the regulation cost associated with emissions generation and the marginal
resource cost of emissions abatement associated with having one more r worker. Note that
the damages from pollution affect the expected marginal benefit of hiring workers across
categories.


2.2       Households and Firm Creation

There is a representative household with a measure one of household members who can be
employed, unemployed and searching for employment, or outside of the labor force. House-
holds own all firms and spend resources to create firms. In addition, all proceeds from taxing
emissions from the production of intermediate goods for r firms are transferred lump-sum
to households.
       Formally, households choose consumption ct , the measures of searchers in each employ-
ment category sg,t and sr,t , the desired measures of workers in each category ng,t and nr,t ,
the number of new firms Ne,t and the desired total number of firms Nt+1 to maximize
                                                              -
   9
    That is, enr ,t = (1 -  )(1 - µt ) (D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ))   D(xt )Hnr ,t and nr ,t = µt D (xt )Hnr ,t . Analogous
expressions hold for kr,t .




                                                             12
       
E0     t=0    t [u(ct ) - h(lf pg,t , lf pr,t )] subject to the budget constraint

                                                                                         y       i
ct + e Ne,t + Tt = wg,t ng,t + wr,t nr,t +  [(1 - f (g,t ))sg,t + (1 - f (r,t ))sr,t ] + t Nt +  t + t et ,


the perceived evolution of employment in each category j  {g, r}


                                     nj,t = (1 - )nj,t-1 + sj,t f (j,t ),                             (13)


and the evolution of final-goods firms


                                        Nt+1 = (1 -  ) [Nt + Ne,t ] ,                                 (14)


where labor force participation in each category is given by lf pg,t = ng,t + (1 - f (g,t ))sg,t
and lf pr,t = nr,t + (1 - f (r,t ))sr,t . The utility from consumption and disutility from labor
force participation have standard properties, with u(ct ) being increasing and concave, and
h(lf pg,t , lf pr,t ) being increasing and convex in lf pj,t for j  {g, r}. Total labor income is
                                          y
given by wg,t ng,t + wr,t nr,t . In turn, t Nt and t denote total average profits from firms
and intermediate-goods producers, respectively. t et are lump-sum transfers from taxing
emissions,  denote unemployment benefits, and f (j,t ) is the job-finding probability in
employment category j  {g, r} (defined in Section 2.3 below). In turn, e Ne,t represents
the total resource cost from creating new firms. Finally, Tt are lump-sum taxes that finance
unemployment benefits.
     The first-order conditions yield labor force participation conditions for each employment
category j  {g, r}

     hlf pj,t - u (ct )                                                     hlf pj,t+1 - u (ct+1 )
                           = wj,t -  + (1 - )Et t+1|t (1 - f (j,t+1 ))                               , (15)
       f (j,t )u (ct )                                                        f (j,t+1 )u (ct+1 )

and a final-goods firm creation condition

                                                        y
                                    e = (1 -  )Et t+1|t t +1 + e ,                                    (16)


where t+1|t   u (ct+1 )/u (ct ). Intuitively, for each employment category, households equate

                                                      13
the expected marginal cost of searching for a job, which is given by the marginal disutility
from participating in the labor market net of unemployment benefits and adjusted by the
probability of finding a job, to the expected marginal benefit, given by the wage net of
unemployment benefits and the continuation value from staying employed in the future. In
turn, households equate the marginal cost of creating a firm, given by the sunk entry resource
cost, to the expected marginal benefit, which is given by expected average individual-firm
profits and the continuation value if the firm survives into the next period with probability
(1 -  ).


2.3     Matching Processes and Wage Determination

Let m(sg,t , vg,t ) and m(sr,t , vr,t ) be standard constant-returns-to-scale matching functions
for g and r employment that take vacancies and searchers in their respective categories as
arguments. Then, the job-filling and job-finding probabilities for category j  {g, r} are
given by q (j,t ) = m(sj,t , vj,t )/vj,t and f (j,t ) = m(sj,t , vj,t )/sj,t , respectively, where market
tightness is j,t = vj,t /sj,t . Following the search and matching literature, we assume that
wages are determined via bilateral Nash bargaining between firms and workers. Using the
value functions in Appendix A.2, we can show that the Nash real wages for each category
are given by


    wr,t = n D(xt )mcr,t Hnr,t - nr ,t - t enr ,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t r r,t+1 + (1 - n ) ,             (17)


and
               wg,t = n D(xt )mcg,t Fng,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t g g,t+1 + (1 - n ) ,                     (18)

where 0 < n < 1 is the bargaining power of workers.


2.4     Symmetric Equilibrium and Market Clearing

The price of aggregate output is given by the following expression: 1 = Nr,t (r,t )1- +
Ng,t (g,t )1- . Imposing symmetric equilibrium, market clearing in each output category




                                                   14
implies that10
                                                                    yr,t
                                    D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ) = Nr,t          ,                              (19)
                                                                    ar,t
and
                                                                    yg,t
                                   D(xt )F (ng,t , kg,t ) = Ng,t           .                              (20)
                                                                    ag,t
Of note, using these two expressions alongside the job creation, capital accumulation, and
abatement decisions of intermediate goods producers imply that, as part of our model anal-
ysis in Section 3, we can refer to the decisions of j firms and the decisions of producers
of intermediate goods for j firms interchangeably. Turning to the government budget con-
straint, households pay lump-sum taxes to finance unemployment benefits and revenue from
carbon taxes is transferred lump-sum to households.
       Finally, the economy's resource constraint is given by


                Yt = ct + r vr,t + g vg,t + e Ne,t + g Ng,t + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt + t .                      (21)


Appendix A.4 presents the full list of equilibrium conditions. Per the market clearing con-
ditions for the production of intermediate goods, pollution damages are embedded in Yt so
that the resource constraint is inclusive of these damages. Using expressions (19) and (20)
alongside the job creation, capital accumulation, and abatement decisions of intermediate
goods producers imply that, as part of our model analysis in Section 3, we can refer to
the decisions of producers of intermediate goods for j firms and the decisions of j firms
interchangeably.



3        Quantitative Analysis
As is well known in the macro literature on endogenous firm entry, models with a firm creation
margin feature a love-of-variety component. Thus, when comparing the model's variables to
their empirical counterparts, we follow GM such that the data-consistent counterpart of a
  10
    The two market-clearing conditions below follow from equating the revenue D(xt )mcr,t H (nr,t , kr,t ) from
producing r intermediate goods with the average costs (mcr,t /ar,t ) yr,t for the final goods firms using the r
technology, and similarly for the g firms.



                                                      15
                                                                 1
given real variable in the model m    d   m
                                 t is t = t (Nt )
                                                  1- (see Appendix A.3 for more details).




3.1        Calibration: Baseline Economy

Functional Forms Following the literature, we assume that consumption and labor force
                                                                        -c
                                                                     c1                     r (lf pr,t ))1+1/n
participation are separable: [u(ct ) - h(lf pg,t , lf pr,t )] =       t
                                                                     1-c
                                                                           - (g (lf pg,t )+
                                                                                          1+1/n
                                                                                                                 , where
c ,g , r > 0 and n > 0 dictates the elasticity of participation (see Arseneau and Chugh,
2012, for a similar functional form in a model with a single employment category). Fol-
lowing the macro literature on endogenous firm entry, we use a Pareto distribution for
G(a) = 1 - (amin /a)kp with shape parameter kp >  - 1.11 This implies that the aver-
                                                                                                       1
                                                                               k -(-1)
                                                                                p           k -(-1)
                                                                                             p         -1
                                                                              ag,t        -amin
age idiosyncratic productivities can be written as ar,t = ag,t                        kp   k p              amin and
                                                                                     ag,t -amin
                      1
               kp     -1
ag,t =     kp -(-1)
                           ag,t , and that the number of g firms is Ng,t = (amin /ag,t )kp Nt .
       The production functions for intermediate goods are Cobb-Douglas: H (nr,t , kr,t ) = (nr,t )1-r (kr,t )r
and F (ng,t , kg,t ) = (ng,t )1-g (kg,t )g , where 0 < g , r < 1. Recall that the total abatement
cost t is proportional to the output that generates emissions, so that t = µt D (xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ),

where  > 0 and  > 1 (Heutel, 2012). The matching functions for each category are given
                                               1/
by m(sj,t , vj,t ) = sj,t vj,t / s       
                                  j,t + vj,t        where  > 0 for j  {g, r} (see den Haan, Ramey, and
Watson, 2000).
       The carbon dioxide pollution damages function is D(xt ) = exp [-D0 (xt - x
                                                                                ¯t )] where
D0 > 0 dictates the strength of the pollution externality and x
                                                              ¯t = D1 xt denotes pre-industrial
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, with 0  D1 < 1 (see Annicchiarico, Correani,
and Di Dio, 2018; Annicchiarico and Diluiso, 2019).


Parameters from Existing Literature A period is a quarter. We set g = r = 0.32,
 = 0.985,  = 0.025, and c = 2, which are common values in the macro literature. Based on
micro estimates for the extensive-margin elasticity of participation from Chetty et al. (2011,
2013), we set n = 0.26 as a baseline. Following GM and others, we normalize amin = 1
and choose  = 3.8, kp = 4.2 as a baseline. These values deliver empirically-consistent
  11
    In addition to being highly tractable, as noted in Redding (2011), the Pareto distribution approximates
the firm-size distribution reasonably well.



                                                         16
markups and are commonly-adopted values in the literature. In turn, we set                    = 0.05 and
n = 0.5,both of which are consistent with standard values in the search and matching
literature. Following Heutel (2012), we set x = 0.9979,  = 0.304, and  = 2.8, which
are consistent with estimates from Nordhaus (2008), and set D1 = 0.6983 (Annicchiarico,
Correani, and Di Dio, 2018; Annicchiarico and Diluiso, 2019). This value delivers a share of
post-industrial atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration of one fourth of the total pollution
stock. Following Hafstead and Williams III (2018) and others, we set  = 1. Finally, we set
carbon taxes  = 0 as a baseline, which is consistent with the current absence of a nationwide
carbon tax in the U.S.


Calibrated Parameters To calibrate the remaining parameters, we note that agricul-
ture, construction, mining, utilities, transportation, and durable-goods manufacturing are
commonly considered to be the main generators of carbon emissions. Therefore, we choose
targets for the employment and output shares of r firms that are broadly consistent with the
corresponding combined shares of employment and output in these industries.
    Absent evidence on differential hiring costs between the two employment categories, we
set r = g =  as a baseline. Then, parameters D0 , erow ,, r , g , , , e , and g are chosen
to match the following targets based on U.S. data and related literature: a ratio of carbon
dioxide pollution damages to GDP of 0.0069 (Heutel and Gibson, 2020); a cost of creating a
firm of 1 percent of income per capita (consistent with data on the cost of creating a business
in the U.S. per World Bank data); an average unemployment rate of 6 percent (consistent
with quarterly data from 1985:Q1 to 2019:Q4); an unemployment insurance (UI) replacement
rate of 50 percent of average wages (consistent with data on average U.S. replacement rates);
an average quarterly labor force participation (LFP) rate of 63 percent (consistent with
quarterly data from 1985:Q1 to 2019:Q4); a share of r employment in the labor force of
0.165; a ratio of the total cost of posting vacancies to GDP of roughly 1 percent (a standard
target in the macro-labor literature); a share of total r-firm output in total output of 0.20;
and a share of U.S. emissions in worldwide emissions of 0.20 (consistent with existing data
on emissions for the U.S. and the rest of the world).12 The resulting parameter values are:
  12
     The target for the share of total r-firm output in total output corresponds to the average value added
of agriculture, mining, utilities, transport, construction, chemicals, petroleum manufacturing, and durables


                                                    17
D0 = 0.000010582, erow = 3.6180, = 2.1648, r = 0.7699, g = 0.6599,  = 0.4046,  =
30.9263, e = 0.6821, and g = 0.0051. Table 1 summarizes the parameters, their values,
and their sources or targets.

   Table 1: Parameter Values, Description, and Sources or Targets in Benchmark Model


                                     Parameters from Literature
   Parameter       Value       Description                   Source
     g , r          0.32       Capital share                 Standard value in lit.
                   0.985       Discount factor               Standard value in lit.
       c              2        CRRA param.                   Standard value in lit.
      n             0.26       Elast. of LFP                 Chetty et al. (2011, 2013)
                     3.8       Elast. substit. firm output   Ghironi and Melitz (2005)
       kp            4.2       Pareto shape param.           Ghironi and Melitz (2005)
     amin             1        Min. idiosyncratic prod.      Normalization
                    0.05       Job separation probability    Search lit.
       n             0.5       Worker bargaining power       Search lit.
                   0.4046      Matching elasticity param.    Unempl. rate of 6 percent
       D1          0.6983      Damages parameter             Annicchiarico, et al. (2018)
                     2.8       Elast. of abatement rate      Nordhaus (2008)
                      1        Weight, abate. cost function Hafstead and Williams III (2018)
                   0.304       Elast. parameter, emissions Heutel (2012)
       x           0.9979      Persistence of pollution      Heutel (2012)

                                       Calibrated Parameters
   Parameter        Value      Description                   Target
       D0        0.000010582   Damages parameter             Pollution damages/GDP = 0.0069
     r , g         2.5128      Vacancy posting cost          Vacancy costs/GDP = 0.01
      erow         2.6464      Emissions rest of world       erow /(e + erow ) = 0.80
       r           0.7699      r LFP disutility param.       lf p = 0.63
       g           0.6599      g LFP disutility param.       nr /lf p = 0.165
                   30.9263     Unemployment benefits          = 0.50w
       e           0.6821      Sunk entry cost               e /Y = 0.01
       g           0.0051      Fixed cost tech. adoption     r-Output Share = 0.20



manufacturing as a share of GDP based on annual data from 2005 to 2019 from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA). The target for the share of r employment in the labor force is based on the average share
of employment in these industries over the same time period (also from the BEA).




                                                   18
3.2       Labor Market and Aggregate Effects of Carbon Taxes

Recall that our baseline calibration sets the tax on emissions  to 0. We analyze an increase
in  such that long-run emissions fall by 35 percent (a target for emission reductions that
is roughly consistent with the Paris Agreement commitment). Moreover, when analyzing
the transition path to the higher carbon-tax-rate steady state and for illustrative purposes,
we implement a gradual increase in carbon taxes that takes 20 quarters (or 5 years) to
fully materialize, with uniform increments per quarter. This last policy experiment is both
plausible and sensible since introducing carbon taxes is unlikely to happen via a large, one-
time increase in carbon taxes.


3.2.1      Steady-State Equilibria

Table 2 shows steady state values of select variables under the baseline (pre carbon tax)
calibration, the values post carbon tax, and the resulting percent or percentage-point change
in these variables when we increase the carbon tax to reduce steady-state emissions by 35
percent.
       In the long run, output and consumption increase by roughly 0.29 and 0.17 percent,
respectively. Labor force participation increases by 0.38 percentage points (that is, from
a baseline rate of 63 percent to 63.38 percent), while the unemployment rate increases
marginally by only 0.05 percentage points (that is, from a baseline rate of 6 percent to
6.05 percent).
       Employment in r firms falls by almost 19 percent, while employment in g firms increases
by almost 5 percent. Given the initial allocation of employment across categories, total
employment increases by 0.55 percent. Wages in both categories of employment increase
marginally. The abatement rate chosen by r firms increases by 25 percentage points, while
the ratio of tax revenue to GDP increases by 0.18 percentage points.13 Finally, the number of
g firms increases by 14 percent, while the total number of firms falls by roughly 1.2 percent,
implying a reduction in firm entry. All told, a carbon-tax-based reduction in emissions has
positive (though mild) effects on real wages, consumption, and output, and very limited
  13
    The equilibrium abatement rate in the baseline calibration is effectively zero since there is no incentive
to abate emissions if carbon taxes are zero.


                                                     19
adverse effects on unemployment given the magnitude of the reduction in emissions. Carbon
tax revenue as a share of output equals 0.18 percent. Using 2020 GDP as a baseline for
comparison, this translates into revenue of roughly $40 billion annually. This estimate is
considerably lower than estimates from studies such as the U.S. Treasury study (Horowitz
et al., 2017). However, as we discuss below, the estimated tax rate and revenue are lower
compared to an environment that abstracts from firm creation and green technology adoption
decisions.

      Table 2: Steady State Changes in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model


               Variable                  Benchmark                 Benchmark            Percent
                                        Model Values              Model Values        Change Rel.
                                   Before Tax (Baseline)           After Tax           to Baseline
             Emissions e                       0.91                    0.59                 -35
             Total Output                     6.97                     6.99                0.291
             Consumption                       4.59                     4.60               0.174
                Empl. r                       0.10                     0.09              -18.517
                Empl. g                       0.49                     0.51                4.611
              Total Empl.                     0.59                      0.60               0.551
             Real Wage r                      6.27                     6.28                0.118
             Real Wage g                      5.37                     5.38                0.117
               Capital kr                     79.96                    64.94             -18.784
               Capital kg                    399.78                   398.40              -0.346
               Firms (N )                    592.99                   585.77              -1.218
             g Firms (Ng )                   246.76                   281.36             14.019
                                                                                    Percentage-Pt.
                                                                                     Change Rel.
                                                                                      to Baseline
         Unempl. Rate                         6.00%                   6.05%               0.046
            LFP Rate                         63.00%                   63.38%              0.378
         Abate. Rate µ                        0.00%                  25.01%               25.013
     Share of g -Firm Output                 80.00%                  83.534%              3.534
        Share of g Firms                     41.61%                  48.03%               6.419
        Tax Rev./Output                       0.00%                   0.18%                0.179


 Notes: The first two columns show values rounded to two decimal places. Values in blue denote beneficial
 changes (relative to the baseline economy) of select variables of particular interest whereas values in red
 denote adverse changes (relative to the baseline economy) of select variables of particular interest.



                                                      20
Table 3: Steady State Changes in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model vs. Simpler
Model Variants


                Variable                Benchmark              No Firm              No Firm
                                          Model                 Entry              Entry, No
                                                                                  Tech. Adopt.
                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                         Percent               Percent               Percent
                                       Change Rel.           Change Rel.           Change Rel.
                                        to Baseline           to Baseline           to Baseline
              Emissions e                    -35                   -35                   -35
             Total Output                   0.291                 0.924                 -1.279
             Consumption                    0.174                 0.261                 -1.073
                Empl. r                    -18.517               -36.695               -26.554
                Empl. g                     4.611                 9.119                  6.279
              Total Empl.                   0.551                 1.077                  0.516
             Real Wage r                    0.118                 0.586                 -2.369
             Real Wage g                    0.117                 0.590                 -2.382
               Capital kr                  -18.784               -36.314               -28.358
               Capital kg                   -0.346                0.564                 -2.741
               Firms (N )                   -1.218                  -                      -
             g Firms (Ng )                  14.019                  -                      -
                                     Percentage-Pt.        Percentage-Pt.        Percentage-Pt.
                                      Change Rel.           Change Rel.           Change Rel.
                                       to Baseline           to Baseline           to Baseline
            Unempl. Rate                    0.046                0.019                  0.185
               LFP Rate                    0.378                 0.691                 0.450
            Abate. Rate µ                  25.013                10.800                19.010
        Share of g -Firm Output            3.534                  7.023                4.006
           Share of g Firms                 6.419                13.618                   -
           Tax Rev./Output                  0.179                 0.355                 1.397


 Note: Values in blue denote beneficial changes (relative to the baseline economy of each model version) of
 select variables of interest whereas values in red denote adverse changes (relative to the baseline economy
 of each model version) of select variables of interest.




   In Table 3, we report results from two model variants alongside our benchmark results
from Table 2. First, we consider a version of our model where we shut down the firm-entry


                                                     21
margin but still allow technology-adoption decisions (column (2) of Table 3).14 Second, we
consider a version of our model that abstracts from both firm entry and green-technology
adoption (column (3) of Table 3). This second variant maintains two firm categories--one
that uses the regular (polluting) technology and one that uses the green technology--and
allows for capital and labor to be reallocated across firm categories in response to a change
in carbon taxes, but does not allow firms using the r technology to endogenously adopt the g
technology. That is, there is no technology adoption margin and therefore no possibility for
endogenous changes in the underlying technological production structure of the economy (in
terms of the prevalence of polluting versus green production technologies). In this sense, the
model in column (3) is closest to existing two-sector models with equilibrium unemployment
and pollution externalities in the literature (see, for example, Hafstead and Williams III,
2018). For each model, we show the percent change and, when appropriate, the percentage-
point change, of select variables in response to the increase in carbon taxes relative to the
baseline calibration (i.e., when  = 0) of each respective model.
       The benchmark-model variant without endogenous firm entry (column (2)) delivers qual-
itative results similar to those of the benchmark model (column (1)), though the positive
effects on wages, the share of g firms, consumption, and output are larger, the increase in
abatement is smaller, and the (quantitatively limited) increase in unemployment is smaller.
The most notable results pertain to the model that abstracts from both firm entry and tech-
nology adoption. Indeed, for the same 35-percent reduction in emissions in the long run,
the introduction of carbon taxes in the absence of firm entry and technology-adoption de-
cisions generates non-trivial reductions in real wages, consumption, and output. Moreover,
the increase in the unemployment rate is larger, though still limited considering the output
reduction. In particular, output and consumption fall by more than 1 percent relative to
their pre-policy baseline, and the unemployment rate increases from 6 percent to 6.19 per-
cent (compare the changes in column (1) to those of column (3)). Thus, the adverse effects
of carbon taxes on output are not directly reflected in a large increase in unemployment. In-
  14
     Specifically, this variant of the benchmark model normalizes the total number of firms to 1 so that there
is a continuum of firms over the [0,1] interval, a measure of which decide to incur the fixed cost of green-
technology adoption and become g firms based on their idiosyncratic productivity. For completeness, Table
A2 in Appendix A.7 discusses a related version of the benchmark model where we shut down the abatement
margin while keeping both firm entry and technology adoption.


                                                     22
stead, wages are largely responsible for absorbing the increase in carbon taxes, which in turn
leads to a reduction in labor income and consumption. As we show next, in the absence of
the firm-entry and green-technology adoption margins, the adverse long-term labor market
and aggregate effects of greater carbon taxes manifest themselves in the short term as well.


3.2.2      Transitional Dynamics

The presence of search and matching frictions, costly firm creation, and costly technology
adoption all imply that the transition path to the new steady state can take time and
may potentially entail short-term employment, consumption, and output costs. To assess
the extent of these potential costs, we consider the transition path of the economy amid a
gradual and uniform increase in carbon taxes that delivers a long-run decline in emissions
of 35 percent as in Section 3.2.1. Since, from a practical standpoint, the increase in carbon
taxes to reach a long-term reduction in emissions of 35 percent is likely to be gradual, we
assume that the total increase in carbon to hit this emissions-reduction target taxes takes 20
quarters (or 5 years) to materialize, with uniform increases in the carbon tax each quarter.
       Figures 1 and 2 plots the transition path of select variables in response to the gradual
increase in carbon taxes.15 For comparability, the two figures show the transition path of: (1)
the benchmark model (solid blue line), (2) the benchmark model variant without firm entry
(dash-dotted green line), and (3) the benchmark model variant with neither firm entry nor
technology adoption (dotted red line). Of note, due to the economy's underlying structure
and frictions, the full, long-term effect of the carbon tax may take time to materialize. This
explains the discrepancy between the long-term changes in certain variables in Table 2 and
the short- and medium-term changes of the same variables in Figures 1and 2. Importantly,
we note that emissions have fallen nearly by 35 percent by the end of 20 quarters (five years)
in all scenarios, assuring that the new U.S. Paris Agreement target is achievable by 2030.
  15
     Following the macro-labor/endogenous-firm-entry literature that analyzes transitional dynamics after a
permanent change in policy, we solve the full non-linear version of the model under perfect foresight using
the historical algorithm as described in Juillard (1996) (for an application of these methods to the analysis
of labor-market and goods-market reforms, see Cacciatore and Fiori, 2016).




                                                     23
Figure 1: Transitional Dynamics in Benchmark Model and Model Variants (Gradual Reduc-
tion in Emissions via Carbon Tax)


                                           Total Output                                            Consumption                                                   Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                             Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                    Perc. Dev. from
                                0.5                                                     0.2
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                     Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                               Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                                                                                   0.15

                                 0                                                       0                                                             0.1

                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                          -0.5                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                                                                        0
                                      0    5      10      15   20                             0    5       10      15   20                                   0       5      10      15   20
                                               Quarters                                               Quarters                                                          Quarters
                                                LFP                                               Share of g Firms                                               Total Number of Firms
                                                                                                                                                        0
        Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                              Perc. Dev. from
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                       Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                       Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                               Pre-Policy SS
                                0.6                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                   -0.2
                                0.4
                                                                                         5                                                         -0.4
                                0.2

                                 0                                                       0                                                         -0.6
                                      0    5      10      15   20                             0    5       10      15   20                                   0       5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                                   Quarters                                                    Quarters
                                          Abatement Rate                                               Emissions                                             Tax Revenue-GDP Ratio
                                                                                         0
          Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                                 Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                                                     Perc. Dev. from
            Pre-Policy SS




                                                                      Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                   Pre-Policy SS
                                20
                                                                                       -10                                                              1
                                15

                                10                                                     -20                                                             0.5
                                 5
                                                                                       -30
                                 0                                                                                                                      0
                                      0    5      10      15   20                             0    5       10      15   20                                   0       5      10      15   20
                                               Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                         Quarters
                                                       Benchmark Model                            No Firm Entry          No Entry, No Tech. Adopt.




                                                                                                  24
Figure 2: Transitional Dynamics in Benchmark Model and Model Variants (Gradual Reduc-
tion in Emissions via Carbon Tax, Continued)


                                       r Vacancies                                            g Vacancies                                             r Employment
                              0                                                                                                           0
        Perc. Dev. from




                                                                  Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                       Perc. Dev. from
                                                                                    15
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                        Pre-Policy SS
                          -20                                                                                                            -10
                                                                                    10
                          -40                                                                                                            -20
                                                                                    5
                          -60                                                                                                            -30
                                                                                    0
                                  0   5      10      15   20                             0    5      10      15   20                           0      5      10      15   20
                                         Quarters                                               Quarters                                                 Quarters
                                      g Employment                                            r Searchers                                              g Searchers
                                                                                    0
                              8                                                                                                           15
            Perc. Dev. from




                                                                Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                        Perc. Dev. from
             Pre-Policy SS




                                                                 Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                         Pre-Policy SS
                              6                                                   -20
                                                                                                                                          10
                              4
                                                                                  -40
                                                                                                                                          5
                              2
                                                                                  -60
                              0                                                                                                           0
                                  0   5      10      15   20                             0    5      10      15   20                           0      5      10      15   20
                                        Quarters                                                Quarters                                                  Quarters
                                      g Real Wage                                             r Real Wage
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                               Perc. Dev. from
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                Pre-Policy SS




                              0                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                   Benchmark Model
                          -0.5                                                    -0.5
                                                                                                                                                   No Firm Entry
                           -1                                                       -1                                                             No Entry, No Tech. Adopt.
                          -1.5                                                    -1.5
                                  0   5      10      15   20                             0    5      10      15   20
                                          Quarters                                                Quarters




   We first discuss the transition path of our benchmark model and turn to the transition
dynamics of the two benchmark-model variants in Section 3.3. Recall that column (1) of
Table 2 showed that higher carbon taxes generate higher steady-state consumption and
output, and marginally higher unemployment. Intuitively, as the tax on emissions increases
gradually, r firms respond by devoting more resources to abatement. Both the carbon
tax and the additional resources devoted to abatement reduce r firms' marginal benefit to
having a worker and accumulating capital (see the job creation condition and the capital
Euler equation of r firms). As a result, r firms use less capital, post less vacancies and
hire less workers, which leads to a reduction in r employment and r output. All told, both
the increase in abatement and the reduction in r-firm output contribute to the reduction in
emissions.
   At the same time, by increasing the relative cost of using the r technology, the increase in

                                                                                             25
carbon taxes makes it relatively more attractive for r firms to incur the fixed cost of adopting
the g technology. As a result, the number (and fraction) of g firms increases. All else equal,
the reduction in labor demand by r firms initially puts downward pressure on wages across
the board and, coupled with the increase in the number of firms that adopt the g technology,
leads to greater labor demand by g firms and to greater g employment in equilibrium. Given
the presence of labor market frictions, the reallocation of employment away from r and
into g firms is accompanied by a gradual but limited increase in the unemployment rate
as well as an increase in labor force participation, where the latter is driven by both an
increase in g employment and in the mass of g searchers (of note, the marginal increase in
unemployment is explained by the reallocation of searchers away from jobs in r firms to jobs
in g firms). The increase in output takes time to materialize as resources are reallocated
towards abatement, the creation of g firms, and capital accumulation for these firms. In
contrast, the increase in consumption takes hold earlier compared to output. This takes
place for two reasons. First, carbon-tax revenue is transferred lump-sum to the household,
which bolsters household consumption. Second, the incentive to create firms amid greater
carbon taxes falls, which frees up household resources for consumption that would otherwise
be used to cover the resource costs of firm creation.
   Similar mechanisms are at play when we abstract from endogenous firm entry, the only
difference being the magnitude of the responses with respect to the benchmark model. In
particular, the absence of a firm-creation margin implies that in the short and medium
term, more resources are devoted to cover the fixed costs of green-technology adoption as
opposed to consumption, leading to a larger increase in the share of g firms. Hence the
smaller increase in consumption and the larger increase in output as carbon taxes steadily
rise. At the same time, the larger expansion in the share of g firms increases the incentive
for household members to search for employment in these firms, thereby leading to a larger
short-run increase in g searchers and therefore in unemployment. Ultimately, though, recall
that the long-term unemployment rate increases by less compared to the benchmark model
due to the larger long-term expansion in the share of g firms.
   Finally, abstracting from both firm entry and technology adoption generates a short- and
medium-term contraction in both consumption and output, as well as a more steady and


                                              26
sustained increase in unemployment (even if the increase in absolute terms remains limited
given the sizable reduction in emissions). That is, absent these two margins of adjustment,
increasing carbon taxes entails both short- and long-term consumption and output costs.


3.2.3      Model Mechanisms

The primary way in which carbon taxes affect firms' decisions in our framework is via their
impact on the marginal cost of r firms. The key question is how firm entry and technology
adoption shape the change in this marginal cost in response to carbon taxes. Indeed, amid
positive carbon taxes and for each increase in production inputs (capital and labor), r firms
must not only incur extra expenditures to cover the resulting change in abatement costs
(which depend on r-firm output), but also pay for the incremental change in carbon-tax
expenditures due to the resulting increase in emissions. In other words, the marginal cost of
r firms is directly impacted by carbon taxes and by abatement decisions.
       To see this more clearly, without loss of generality, consider a version of the benchmark
model without physical capital, with an elasticity of emissions with respect to r-firm output of
1, and with zero unemployment benefits. Furthermore, continue to assume that g = r =  .
Then, using the job-creation condition, the market clearing condition, the optimal pricing
condition, and the Nash wage expression for r firms, Appendix A.5 shows that we can write
the steady-state real marginal cost of r firms as16

                                    [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]
                                          (1-n )q (r )
                         mcr =               Nr yr
                                                                + ( (1 - µ) + µ ) .                        (22)
                                             ar nr

where recall that yr denotes average output of an r firm, Nr yr is total r-firm output, Nr yr /nr
is aggregate r-firm labor productivity, and therefore Nr yr /ar nr is aggregate r-firm labor pro-
ductivity adjusted by firms' average idiosyncratic productivity (that is, r labor productivity
                                                     [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]
in efficiency units). In turn, the term                    (1-n )q (r )
                                                                              embodies the effective cost of
hiring an r worker and the term ( (1 - µ) + µ ) captures the net contribution of carbon
taxes and abatement expenditures to the marginal cost of r firms. Another way to inter-
  16
    Note that in the presence of pollution externalities, the steady-state market clearing condition for r firms
in the absence of physical capital is D(x)nr = Nr yr /ar .



                                                         27
pret the first term on the right hand side of expression (22) is as the total effective cost of
                 [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]
hiring workers         (1-n )q (r )
                                             ar nr (that is, the effective hiring cost times the number
of workers inclusive of the firm's average idiosyncratic productivity, ar nr ) adjusted by total
firm output Nr yr . Intuitively, all else equal, higher hiring costs per worker, higher carbon
taxes  , and a higher abatement rate µ all put upward pressure on the marginal cost. In
contrast, greater labor productivity puts downward pressure on the marginal cost.
   Analogously, the steady-state expression for the real marginal cost of g firms is

                                                [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
                                                      (1-n )q (g )
                                   mcg =                    Ng yg
                                                                          .
                                                            ag ng

where the main difference with respect to the marginal cost of r firms is the absence of
carbon taxes and abatement costs. Then, it is clear from the two expressions above that
carbon taxes have a differential impact on firms' marginal costs depending on the technology
they adopt.
   For the purposes of understanding how carbon taxes affect the reallocation of resources
between firm categories, what matters is not the marginal cost of a given category, but the
marginal cost of r firms relative to the marginal cost of g firms. In particular, Appendix A.5
shows that we can write this relative marginal cost as



                    [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]
   mcr                      q (r )
                                              nr /yr                          ( (1 - µ) + µ )
       =  ( ag )                                       +  (ag , N )                                      ,   (23)
   mcg              [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
                                              ng /yg                   [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
                                                                                                ng /yg
                            q (g )                                           (1-n )q (g )


where   (ag ) /ag < 0,   (ag , N ) /N > 0, and   (ag , N ) /ag < 0. Intuitively, the
relative marginal cost is: decreasing in the ratio of g firms' cost of hiring workers based
                                                            [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
on their payroll relative to the firm's output,                   (1-n )q (g )
                                                                                     ng /yg ; increasing in the
corresponding ratio for r firms; and increasing in both carbon taxes and the abatement rate.
Critically, expression (23) shows how (1) the threshold idiosyncratic productivity level above
which firms adopt the green technology, ag , and (2) the total number of firms, N , shape the
strength with which the ratio of labor costs to output, carbon taxes, and abatement affect
the relative marginal cost.

                                                       28
   To see this more clearly, Figure 3 plots the absolute increase in carbon taxes needed to
achieve a 35-percent reduction in emissions after 5 years (relative to the pre-policy level of
0), the change in emissions, as well as the resulting changes in the idiosyncratic produc-
tivity threshold ag,t ,the total number of firms, and the relative marginal cost (mcr,t /mcg,t ).
Following our earlier analysis, the figure shows the benchmark model (solid blue line), the
model without firm entry (dash-dotted green line), and the model with neither firm entry
nor technology adoption margins (dotted red line). Of note, carbon taxes are expressed as
a percentage of aggregate output. While it is not possible to translate these price increases
directly into a price per ton of emissions, Figure 3 shows that the tax rate needed to reduce
emissions by 35 percent is reduced by roughly three-quarters relative to a model with no
firm entry and technology adoption.
   Figure 3 shows how the reductions in ag and N both contribute to limiting the change
in carbon taxes needed to reduce emissions. In turn, these reductions feed into a smaller
increase in firms' relative marginal cost as carbon taxes increase. Indeed, compared to the
benchmark model, the ratio of marginal costs increases at a faster pace in the absence of firm
entry and technology adoption, leading to a larger percent reduction in r-firm employment
and output. Importantly, this takes place without a strong-enough positive response by g
firms that offsets these reductions. The end result is the short-and long-term declines in
consumption and output documented in Table 2 as well as in Figures 1 and 2.
   A comparison of our benchmark model to the model without endogenous firm entry shows
that the underlying driving force behind the positive effects of carbon taxes on consumption
and output is firms' ability to respond to carbon taxes via technology adoption. The faster
pace at which the share of g firms expands absent firm entry limits the increase in carbon
taxes that is needed to reduce emissions, and the resulting reallocation of resources from r to
g firms is able to more than offset the fall in employment and output among r firms. These
responses explain the larger increase in output compared to the benchmark model shown
in Table 2 and Figures 1 and 2. The same mechanisms are operational in the benchmark
model, the only difference being that the reduction in the total number of firms as carbon
taxes increase limits the quantitative extent to which the reallocation of resources from r
firms to g firms bolsters employment and output.


                                               29
Figure 3: Changes in Relative Marginal Cost and Carbon Tax (Gradual Reduction in Emis-
sions via Carbon Taxes)


                                               Carbon Tax                                                     Emissions
                           0.08                                                              0




                                                                       Perc. Dev. from
         Abs. Dev. from
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                        Pre-Policy SS
                           0.06                                                          -10

                           0.04
                                                                                         -20
                           0.02
                                                                                         -30
                                0
                                     0     5        10      15    20                             0        5       10      15   20
                                               Quarters                                                        Quarters
                                          Threshold Prod. a g                                             Share of g Firms
                                0
              Perc. Dev. from
               Pre-Policy SS




                                                                        Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                        Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                         10
                                -2


                                -4                                                           5



                                -6                                                           0
                                     0     5        10      15    20                             0        5       10      15   20
                                                 Quarters                                                   Quarters
                                         Total Number of Firms                                       Relative MC (mcr /mcg)
                                0
         Perc. Dev. from




                                                                           Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                             8
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                            Pre-Policy SS




                           -0.2
                                                                                             6

                                                                                             4
                           -0.4
                                                                                             2
                           -0.6                                                              0
                                     0     5        10      15    20                                  5          10       15   20
                                                 Quarters                                                      Quarters

                                         Benchmark Model         No Firm Entry                            No Entry, No Tech. Adopt.



   Taken together, our results make three important points regarding the qualitative and
quantitative consequences of carbon taxes on labor markets and macroeconomic outcomes.
First, we find that carbon taxes need not have adverse aggregate effects: once we account
for two important margins of adjustment that firms can use--mainly the decision to enter
and the decision to adopt greener technologies--greater carbon taxes can deliver positive
(though quantitatively limited) consumption and output effects, even as carbon taxes have a
net adverse effect on the total number of firms in the economy. These findings are consistent
with recent empirical evidence on the macroeconomic effects of these taxes, and stand in
contrast to existing quantitative studies in the literature predicting adverse effects on aggre-

                                                                       30
gate consumption and output. Second, firms' ability to change production technologies in
response to carbon taxes plays a fundamental role in shaping the positive macroeconomic
effects of these taxes and limiting any adverse effects that policy may have on unemploy-
ment. Third, firm-entry decisions play an important role in generating positive short- and
medium-term consumption effects in response to carbon taxes (even if this is accompanied
by a net reduction in the number of firms in the economy). This last point is particularly
relevant for the assessing the short- and long-term welfare effects of these taxes.


3.2.4    Robustness Checks

Appendix A.6 presents results for alternative baseline calibrations of the benchmark model
that assume: (1) a higher value for parameter kp (which reduces the dispersion in idiosyn-
cratic productivity draws); (2) a lower elasticity of labor force participation; (3), a higher job
separation rate; and (4) a lower elasticity in total emissions-abatement costs to changes in
abatement rates (see Appendix A.6 for more details). The results in Appendix A.6 confirm
that our main conclusions remain unchanged.



4       Conclusion
The potential adverse effect on employment and aggregate economic activity from taxing
carbon emissions is a key concern in policy circles. We explore the quantitative impact of
a carbon tax on labor market and macroeconomic outcomes in a model with equilibrium
unemployment and pollution externalities. Specifically, we consider a carbon tax that re-
duces emissions by 35 percent--a target consistent with the Biden Administration's new
commitment under the Paris Agreement. In contrast to existing quantitative studies, our
framework incorporates two key margins of adjustment to carbon taxes beyond emissions
abatement by firms: firm entry and green-technology adoption decisions. Under a scheme
where carbon-tax revenue is transferred lump-sum to households, we show that the tax bol-
sters labor income, consumption, output, and labor force participation, and has marginal
adverse unemployment effects. In addition, the carbon tax does not entail short-term output
or consumption costs as the economy gradually adjusts to higher carbon taxes. Moreover, we


                                               31
find that allowing for firm entry and green-technology adoption reduces the tax rate needed
to achieve the desired reduction in emissions. This contributes to the tax's negligible impact
on consumption and output in both the short and long term.
   Further analysis of the model stresses the role of joint firm-entry and green-technology
adoption decisions in shaping the net positive effects of a carbon tax on aggregate outcomes
and the limited adverse effects on unemployment, with green-technology adoption--and
what that implies about the policy-induced endogenous changes in the economy's underlying
technological composition of production--being a central mechanism driving these outcomes.
Critically, we show that abstracting from firm entry and technology adoption implies that
greater carbon taxes have non-trivial adverse short- and long-term effects on labor income,
consumption, and output, as well as comparatively larger adverse effects on unemployment.
More broadly, our quantitative findings show that carbon-tax-induced reductions in emissions
need not be accompanied by higher unemployment and lower consumption and output, a
finding that reconciles recent empirical evidence on the macroeconomic effects of carbon
taxes.




                                             32
References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Douglas Hanley, and William Kerr. 2016. "Transition
   to Green Technology," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 124, No. 1, pp. 52-104.

[2] Annicchiarico, Barbara, Luca Correani, and Fabio Di Dio. 2018. "Environmental Policy
   and Endogenous Market Structure," Resource and Energy Economies, Vol. 52, May
   2018, pp. 186-215.

[3] Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Fabio Di Dio. 2015. "Environmental Policy and Macroe-
   conomic Dynamics in a New Keynesian Model," Journal of Environmental Economics
   and Management, Vol. 69, January 2015, pp. 1-21

[4] Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Fabio Di Dio. 2017. "GHG Emissions Control and Mon-
   etary Policy," Environmental and Resource Economics, August 2017, Vol. 67, Issue 4,
   pp. 823-851.

[5] Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Francesca Diluiso. 2019. "International Transmission of the
   Business Cycle and Environmental Policy," Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 58,
   November 2019, pp. 1-29

[6] Arseneau, David M., and Sanjay K. Chugh. 2012. "Tax Smoothing in Frictional Labor
   Markets," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 120, No. 5 (October 2012), pp. 926-985.

[7] Aubert, Diane, and Mireille Chiroleu-Assouline. 2019. "Environmental Tax Reform and
   Income Distribution with Imperfect Heterogeneous Labor Markets," European Eco-
   nomic Review, Vol. 116, pp. 60-82

[8] Cacciatore, Matteo, and Giuseppe Fiori. 2016. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Goods
   and Labor Market Deregulation," Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 20, April 2016,
   pp. 1­24.

[9] Castellanos, Kenneth A., and Garth Heutel. 2021. "Unemployment, Labor Mobility,
   and Climate Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 25797.



                                           33
[10] Coria, Jessica, and Efthymia Kyriakopoulou. 2018. "Environmental Policy, Technology
    Adoption and the Size Distribution of Firms," Energy Economics, Vol. 485, pp. 470-485.

[11] Finkelstein Shapiro, Alan, and Federico S. Mandelman. 2021. "Digital Adoption, Au-
    tomation, and Labor Markets in Developing Countries," Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics, Vol. 151, June 2021, 102656.

[12] Fischer, Carolyn, and Michael Springborn. 2011. "Emissions Targets and the Real Busi-
    ness Cycle: Intensity Targets versus Caps or Taxes," Journal of Environmental Eco-
    nomics and Management, Vol. 62, pp. 352-366

[13] Fried, Stephie. 2018. "Climate Policy and Innovation: A Quantitative Macroeconomic
    Analysis," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 10, No. 1, January 2018,
    pp. 90-118.

[14] Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc J. Melitz. 2005. "International Trade and Macroeconomic
    Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, pp.
    865-915.

[15] Gibson, John, and Garth Heutel. 2020. "Pollution and Unemployment over the Business
    Cycle," NBER Working Paper No. 27445.

[16] Hafstead, Marc A.C., and Roberton C. Williams III. "Unemployment and Environmen-
    tal Regulation in General Equilibrium," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 160, April
    2018, pp. 50-65.

[17] Hafstead, Marc A.C., and Roberton C. Williams III. "Jobs and Environmental Regula-
    tion," NBER Working Paper No. 26093.

[18] Heutel, Garth. 2012. "How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles?
    Optimal Policy under Persistent Productivity Shocks," Review of Economic Dynamics,
    Vol. 15, pp. 244-264

[19] Horowitz, John, Julie-Anne Cronin, Hannah Hawkins, Laura Konda, and Alex Yuskav-
    age. 2017. "Methodology for Analyzing a Carbon Tax," U.S. Department of the Trea-
    sury, Office of Tax Analysis: Washington D.C., Working Paper 115.

                                           34
[20] Juillard, Michel, 1996. "Dynare: A Program for the Resolution and Simulation of Dy-
    namic Models with Forward Variables Through the Use of a Relaxation Algorithm,"
    CEPREMAP Working Papers (Couverture Orange) 9602, CEPREMAP.

[21] Khan, Hashmat, Konstantinos Metaxoglouc, Christopher R. Knittelb, and Maya Pa-
    pineauc. 2019. "Carbon Emissions and Business Cycle," Journal of Macroeconomics,
    Volume 60, June 2019, pp. 1-19.

[22] Kreickemeier, Udo and Philipp M. Richter. 2018. "Environmental Policy and Firm Se-
    lection in the Open Economy," mimeo.

[23] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James H. Stock. 2020a. "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact
    of Carbon Taxes," American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, May 2020.

[24] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James H. Stock. 2020b. "The Macroeconomic Impact of Eu-
    rope's Carbon Taxes," NBER Working Paper 27488.

[25] Nordhaus, William, 2008. "A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global
    Warming Policies," Yale University Press: New Haven and London.

[26] OECD. 2017. "Employment Implications of Green Growth: Linking Jobs, Growth, and
    Green Policies," OECD Report for the G7 Environment Ministers, June 2017.

[27] Redding, Stephen J. 2011. "Theories of Heterogeneous Firms and Trade," Annual Re-
    view of Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 77-105.

[28] Shapiro, Joseph S., and Reed Walker. 2018. "Why is Pollution from U.S. Manufac-
    turing Declining? The Roles of Environmental Regulation, Productivity, and Trade,"
    American Economic Review, Vol. 108, No. 12, December 2018, pp. 3814-3854.

[29] U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2021. "Annual Energy Outlook 2021," Wash-
    ington D.C.

[30] Zlate, Andrei. 2016. "Offshore Production and Business Cycle Dynamics with Hetero-
    geneous Firms," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 100, pp. 34-49.


                                             35
A      Appendix

A.1     Technology Adoption Indifference Condition and Marginal
        Costs

Individual firm profits from producing with the r technology are

                                y                         mcr,t
                                r,t (a) = r,t (a) -             yr,t (a),
                                                           a

while individual firm profits from producing with the g technology are given by

                             y                        mcg,t
                             g,t (a) = g,t (a) -            yg,t (a) - g .
                                                       a

Taking into account the demand curve each firm in category j  {g, r} faces, yj,t (a) =
(j,t (a))- Yt , a given firm sets its optimal price such that

                                                               mcj,t
                                    j,t (a) =                        .
                                                     -1         a

Then, using this last expression along the optimal demand function, individual firm profits
for a given firm in category r can be written as

                  y                mcr,t
                  r,t (a) = r,t (a) -    (r,t (a))- Yt
                                    a
                                                                                      -
                                   mcr,t mcr,t                                mcr,t
                         =               -                                                Yt
                                -1   a        a        -1                      a
                                                                         -
                              1          mcr,t                 mcr,t
                         =                                                   Yt
                              -1          a          -1         a
                                                      -                  1-
                                1                               mcr,t
                         =                                Yt
                                -1          -1                   a
                                           -1
                                  a
                         = Bt                    ,
                                 mcr,t



                                                     36
where Bt > 0. Following analogous steps, we have

                                                            -1
                                 y                   a
                                 g,t (a) = Bt                    - fg .
                                                    mcg,t

Now, denote by ag,t the threshold idiosyncratic productivity level such that a firm is indif-
ferent between production technologies:

                                       y             y
                                       r,t (ag,t ) = g,t (ag,t ).


This can be rewritten as

                                           -1                       -1
                                   ag,t                  ag,t
                            Bt                  = Bt                      - fg .
                                   mcr,t                 mcg,t

Thus, if fg > 0, it must be that

                                               -1                -1
                                     ag,t                ag,t
                                                    >                 ,
                                     mcg,t               mcr,t

or
                                             mcr,t > mcg,t .

This makes intuitive sense since firms would never adopt the green technology and pay the
fixed cost of doing so unless there is a benefit (here, in the form of lower marginal costs of
production).
     Now consider the slope of the individual-firm profit function in category j  {g, r} with
respect to idiosyncratic productivity a:

                              y                                  -1
                              j,t                         1
                                  = Bt ( - 1)                         a-2 .
                              a                          mcj,t

Given the result about marginal cost above, at any given value of a, we have

                                             y     y
                                             g,t   r,t
                                                 >     .
                                             a     a



                                                    37
A.2     Value Functions: Labor Market

Denote by Wj,t the net value to the household of having a worker employed in the production
of j intermediate goods for j  {g, r}. It is easy to show that

                                                h (lf pj,t ) - 
                                       Wj,t =                    ,                               (24)
                                                 f (j,t )u (ct )

for j  {g, r} (see Arseneau and Chugh, 2012). Analogously, denote by Jg,t and Jt,t the net
values to intermediate-goods firms of having workers employed in the production of g and r
intermediate goods. These values are given by


                    Jg,t = D(xt )mcg,t Fng,t - wg,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t Jg,t+1 ,                    (25)


and
            Jr,t = D(xt )mcr,t Hnr ,t - t enr ,t - nr ,t - wr,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t Jr,t+1 .        (26)

Then, the Nash wage for employment category j  {g, r} is implicitly given by

                                                    n
                                       Wj,t =                Jj,t ,                              (27)
                                                  1 - n

where 0 < n < 1 is the bargaining power of workers.


A.3     Data-Consistent vs. Model-Consistent Variables
                                                                                 1
Recall that the aggregate price level is given by Pt =            p ( )1- d
                                                                   t
                                                                                1-
                                                                                     . In a symmetric
equilibrium, the aggregate price can be written as

                                                                        1
                         Pt = [G(ag,t )Nt r,t + (1 - G(ag,t ))Nt g,t ] 1- ,                      (28)


or
                                   1                                    1
                         Pt = Nt1- [G(ag,t )r,t + (1 - G(ag,t ))g,t ] 1- .                       (29)




                                                  38
where recall that the average real prices associated with g and r firms are g,t  g,t (ag,t )
and r,t  r,t (ar,t ). Then, we can write

                                                                         1
                                                           Pt = Nt1- Pt ,                                                            (30)

                                                                   1
where Pt = [G(ag,t )r,t + (1 - G(ag,t ))g,t ] 1- . Finally, following GM, the data-consistent
                                                                                                           1
                                                   m Pt
version of a real model variable m             d         m
                                 t is given by t = t P = t (Nt )
                                                                 1- .
                                                                                         t




A.4         Equilibrium Conditions: Benchmark Model
                                                                       y     y
Taking the exogenous process erow
                              t   as given, the allocations and prices r,t , g,t , r,t , g,t , mcr,t ,
                              y
{mcg,t , ar,t , ag,t , ag,t , t , Ng,t , t , et , µt , vr,t , vg,t , nr,t , ng,t , Nt , Ne,t , sr,t , sg,t , wr,t , wg,t , yr,t , yg,t }, and
{xt , ct , Yt , Nr,t , kt , kg,t , kr,t } satisfy:

                                                     y                   mcr,t
                                                     r,t = r,t -               yr,t ,                                                (31)
                                                                         ar,t

                                               y                    mcg,t
                                               g,t = g,t -                yg,t - g ,                                                 (32)
                                                                    ag,t

                                             1 = Nr,t (r,t )1- + Ng,t (g,t )1- ,                                                     (33)
                                                                    mcg,t
                                                        g,t =               ,                                                        (34)
                                                                   - 1 ag,t
                                                                    mcr,t
                                                        r,t =               ,                                                        (35)
                                                                   - 1 ar,t
                                                                                  1
                                                                kp                -1
                                               ag,t =                                    ag,t ,                                      (36)
                                                           kp - ( - 1)
                                                                                             1
                                                        kp -(-1)      kp -(-1)               -1
                                                       ag,t       - amin
                                     ar,t = ag,t              kp     kp
                                                                                                  amin ,                             (37)
                                                             ag,t - amin
                                                                             kp
                                                                   amin
                                                      Ng,t =                      Nt ,                                               (38)
                                                                   ag,t
                                                         Nr,t = Nt - Ng,t ,                                                          (39)

                                                     y      Nr,t y    Ng,t y
                                                     t =        r,t +      ,                                                         (40)
                                                            Nt        Nt g,t

                                                                    39
                                      y             y
                                      g,t (ag,t ) = r,t (ag,t ),                                       (41)

                                  t = µt D (xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ),                                      (42)

                             et = (1 - µt ) [D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t )]1- ,                               (43)

                            t [D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t )]- = µ    t
                                                                 -1
                                                                    ,                                  (44)
                                                                        
                     r               D ( xt ) mc     H
                                                 r,t nr ,t -  e
                                                             t nr ,t
                           =                                            ,                              (45)
                  q (r,t )    -nr ,t - wr,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t q(r,t+1 )r


                g                                                     g
                      = D(xt )mcg,t Fng ,t - wg,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t            ,                        (46)
             q (g,t )                                              q (g,t+1 )
                               nr,t = (1 - )nr,t-1 + sr,t f (r,t ),                                    (47)

                               ng,t = (1 - )ng,t-1 + sg,t f (g,t ),                                    (48)

                                  Nt+1 = (1 -  ) [Nt + Ne,t ] ,                                        (49)

                                                  y
                              e = (1 -  )Et t+1|t t +1 + e ,                                           (50)

       hlf pr,t - u (ct )                                             hlf pr,t+1 - u (ct+1 )
                             = wr,t -  + (1 - )Et t+1|t                                            ,   (51)
         f (r,t )u (ct )                                                f (r,t+1 )u (ct+1 )
     hlf pg,t - u (ct )                                            hlf pg,t+1 - u (ct+1 )
                            = wg,t -  + (1 - )Et t+1|t                                         ,       (52)
       f (g,t )u (ct )                                               f (g,t+1 )u (ct+1 )

wr,t = n D(xt )mcr,t Hnr,t - nr ,t - t enr ,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t r r,t+1 + (1 - n ) ,                    (53)

          wg,t = n D(xt )mcg,t Fng,t + (1 - )Et t+1|t g g,t+1 + (1 - n ) ,                             (54)
                                                               yr,t
                               D(xt )H (nr,t , kr,t ) = Nr,t           ,                               (55)
                                                               ar,t
                                                               yg,t
                              D(xt )F (ng,t , kg,t ) = Ng,t            ,                               (56)
                                                               ag,t

                                        yr,t = (r,t )- Yt ,                                            (57)

                                        yg,t = (g,t )- Yt ,                                            (58)

                                    xt = x xt-1 + et + erow
                                                        t ,                                            (59)



                                                 40
                                         kt = kg,t + kr,t ,                                (60)

            1 = Et t+1|t [D(xt+1 )mcr,t+1 Hkr ,t+1 - t+1 ekr ,t+1 - kr ,t+1 + (1 -  )] ,   (61)

                        1 = Et t+1|t D(xt+1 )mcg,t+1 Fkg ,t+1 + (1 -  ) ,                  (62)

             Yt = ct + r vr,t + g vg,t + e Ne,t + g Ng,t + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt + t ,          (63)

where all other relevant variables in these conditions are defined in the main text.




                                                41
A.5        Steady State Marginal Cost of r Firms

Consider a version of the benchmark model without capital, with an elasticity of emissions
with respect to r-firm output of 1, and with zero unemployment benefits. This implies that
H (nr,t ) = nr,t , et = (1 - µt ) [D(xt )nr,t ], t = µt [D (xt )nr,t ], and  = 0. Then, the steady-

state versions of the job-creation condition and the Nash wage, for r firms can be written
as
              r                                                      r
                   = D(x)mcr -  (1 - µ)D(x) - µ D(x) - wr + (1 - )        ,                            (64)
            q (r )                                                 q (r )
and
               wr = n [D(x)mcr -  (1 - µ)D(x) - µ D(x) + (1 - )r r ] ,                                 (65)

where recall that the steady-state market-clearing condition for r-firm output is

                                                             Nr yr
                                            D(x)nr =               .                                   (66)
                                                              ar

Combining these three conditions, we obtain

     [1 - (1 - ) ] r                                                        Nr yr
                     = (1 - n ) (mcr -  (1 - µ) - µ )                               - n (1 - )r r .    (67)
           q (r )                                                           ar nr

Solving for mcr ,we have

                    [1-(1- ) ]r                                                            Nr yr
                        q (r )
                                  - n (1 - )r r + (1 - n ) ( (1 - µ) + µ )                 ar nr
            mcr =                                                                                  .   (68)
                                                                    Nr yr
                                                    (1 - n )        ar nr

Rearranging terms, we have

                                   [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]r
                                         (1-n )q (r )
                       mcr =                                    + ( (1 - µ) + µ ) .                    (69)
                                            Nr yr
                                            ar nr

Following similar steps, we can write the steady-state expression for the marginal cost of g
firms as
                                               [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]g
                                                     (1-n )q (g )
                                    mcg =                                     .                        (70)
                                                            Ng yg
                                                            ag ng




                                                       42
Then, taking the ratio of the marginal cost of r firms to the marginal cost of g firms, we can
write



                        [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]r         yg                                                      N g yg
 mcr      ar     Ng             q (r )                  ng
                                                                     ( (1 - µ) + µ ) (1 - n )                   ag ng
     =                                                          +                                                        . (71)
 mcg      ag     Nr     [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]g         yr                           [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]g
                                 q (g )                 nr                                    q (g )


Now recall that in steady state, we have

                                                                         1
                                                    kp                   -1
                                     ag =                                     ag ,                                        (72)
                                               kp - ( - 1)
and                                                                            1
                                            k -(-1)      kp -(-1)              -1
                                           ag p      - amin
                             ar = ag             k      kp
                                                                                      amin .                              (73)
                                                ag p - amin
Assuming amin = 1 without loss of generality, we can write

                                                                                          1
                                                        1            k       -1           -1
                         ar               kp            -1          ag p - ag
                            =                                            k
                                                                                               .                          (74)
                         ag          kp - ( - 1)                     ag p - 1

                                                                              kp                                    kp
                                                                       1                                        1
At the same time, under amin = 1, we have Ng =                        ag
                                                                                   N and Nr = 1 -              ag
                                                                                                                         N , so
that                                                                          -1
                                                                     kp
                                                
                                     kp                         1
                                                 1-
                                1
                 Ng            ag                              ag                                  1
                    =                          =                kp
                                                                                      =                 .                 (75)
                 Nr                  1
                                          kp        1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                           ag p    -1
                         1-         ag                    ag


Then, we can write

                                                                                    1
                                                                                    -
                                                  1           k                       1
                                                                           -1
                  a r Ng            kp            -1         ag p   -    ag
                         =                                                  
                                                                                             (ag ) ,                      (76)
                  ag Nr        kp - ( - 1)                      k
                                                               ag p - 1

where we can show that  (ag ) < 0.

                                                    1
                      Ng             kp            1-
                         =                              (ag )-kp -1 N =  (ag , N ) ,                                      (77)
                      ag        kp - ( - 1)


                                                     43
where N (ag , N ) > 0 and ag (ag , N ) < 0.
   Finally, we can write

                  [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]r
  mcr                     q (r )
                                            nr /yr                  ( (1 - µ) + µ ) (1 - n )
      =  ( ag )                                      +  (ag , N )                                          , (78)
  mcg             [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]g
                                            ng /yg                  [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]g
                                                                                              ng /yg
                           q (g )                                            q (g )


where once again  (ag ) < 0, N (ag , N ) > 0, and ag (ag , N ) < 0. If g = r =  (per our
baseline calibration), then this expression becomes

                   [1-(1- ) (1-n f (r ))]
  mcr                      q (r )
                                            nr /yr                  ( (1 - µ) + µ ) (1 - n )
      =  ( ag )                                      +  (ag , N )                                      .     (79)
  mcg             [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
                                            ng /yg                  [1-(1- ) (1-n f (g ))]
                                                                                              ng /yg
                          q (g )                                            q (g )




                                                     44
A.6     Robustness Analysis

Table A1 and Figures A1, A2, A3, and A4 below confirm that our main findings in the
benchmark model remain unchanged under alternative baseline calibrations. In particular,
we consider calibrations where: (1) kp is higher (kp = 5.2 vs. kp = 4.2 in the benchmark
calibration; this reduces the dispersion in productivity draws); (2) a lower elasticity of labor
force participation (n = 0.17 per Chetty et al., 2013, vs. n = 0.26 per Chetty et al.,
2013, as well, in the benchmark calibration); (3), the job separation rate is higher ( = 0.10
as in Arseneau and Chugh, 2012, vs.       = 0.05 in the benchmark calibration); and (4) the
elasticity of emissions-abatement costs with respect to abatement rates is lower ( = 2.2 vs.
 = 2.8 in the benchmark calibration).




                                              45
Table A1: Steady State Changes in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model under
Alternative Baseline Calibrations


             Variable             Benchmark        Benchmark        Benchmark         Benchmark
                                   Higher kp       Lower LFP         Job Sep.        Lower  = 2.2
                                                   Elasticity n    Rate     = 0.10

                                       (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)

                                    Percent          Percent          Percent           Percent
                                  Change Rel.      Change Rel.      Change Rel.       Change Rel.
                                   to Baseline      to Baseline      to Baseline       to Baseline

            Emissions e               -35                 -35             -35              -35

           Total Output              0.501               0.273         0.276             0.390
           Consumption               0.325               0.156         0.171             0.221
             Empl. r                 -24.678          -18.525          -18.524           -25.956
             Empl. g                 6.166               4.596         4.599             6.481
           Total Empl.               0.752               0.538         0.540             0.787
           Real Wage r               0.359               0.114         0.120             0.153
           Real Wage g               0.358               0.113         0.119             0.150
             Firms N                 -1.626           -1.244           -1.240            -1.803
            g Firms Ng               14.206           13.985           13.991            20.145

                                 Percentage-Pt.   Percentage-Pt.   Percentage-Pt.    Percentage-Pt.
                                  Change Rel.      Change Rel.      Change Rel.       Change Rel.
                                   to Baseline      to Baseline      to Baseline       to Baseline

          Unempl. Rate               0.050               0.047         0.053             0.068
            LFP Rate                 0.507               0.371         0.376             0.542
          Abate. Rate µ              20.813           25.006           25.007            19.814
     Share of g Firms (Ng /N )       8.544               6.417         6.418             9.814
         Tax Rev./Output             0.143               0.179         0.179             0.238




                                                    46
Figure A1: Transitional Dynamics in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model, Calibra-
tion with Higher kp




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                         Total Output                                            Consumption                                                Unemployment Rate
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                  Perc. Dev. from
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                    0.4                                                          0.08
                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.06
                              0.2                                                   0.2                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                               0                                                        0                                                          0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                               Quarters                                                   Quarters
       Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                              LFP                                               Share of g Firms                                        Total Number of Firms




                                                                                                                            Perc. Dev. from
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                      Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                      Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.4
                                                                                        6                                                        -0.2

                                                                                        4                                                        -0.4
                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                 -0.6
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                 -0.8
                               0                                                        0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                     Quarters
                                        r Employment                                             g Employment                                                  g Searchers
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                      Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                                Perc. Dev. from
                               0
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                       Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                 Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                        4
                             -10
                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                        2
                             -20
                                                                                        0                                                          0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                Quarters                                                Quarters
        Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                        Abatement Rate                                            Emissions                                         Tax Revenue-GDP Ratio
                                                                  Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                        0
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS

                              20                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                              10                                                    -20
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                    -30
                               0                                                                                                                   0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                     Quarters

                                                                                    Benchmark Model                   Higher kp




                                                                                                      47
Figure A2: Transitional Dynamics in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model, Calibra-
tion with Lower Elasticity of Labor Force Participation




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                         Total Output                                            Consumption                                                  Unemployment Rate
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                  Perc. Dev. from
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.3                                                                                                                0.06
                                                                                    0.2
                              0.2                                                                                                                0.04
                              0.1                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                               0                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                               Quarters                                                     Quarters
       Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                              LFP                                               Share of g Firms                                          Total Number of Firms




                                                                                                                            Perc. Dev. from
                                                                                                                                                      0
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                      Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                      Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.3

                              0.2                                                       4                                                        -0.2

                              0.1                                                       2                                                        -0.4

                               0                                                        0                                                        -0.6
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                       Quarters
                                        r Employment                                             g Employment                                                    g Searchers
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                      Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                                    Perc. Dev. from
                               0                                                                                                                      8
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                       Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                     Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                        4
                               -5                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                        2                                                             4
                             -10
                                                                                                                                                      2
                             -15
                                                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                Quarters                                                  Quarters
        Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                        Abatement Rate                                            Emissions                                           Tax Revenue-GDP Ratio
                                                                  Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                        0
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS

                              20                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                              10                                                    -20
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                    -30
                               0                                                                                                                      0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                       Quarters

                                                                  Benchmark Model                                Lower LFP Elasticity




                                                                                                      48
Figure A3: Transitional Dynamics in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model, Calibra-
tion with Higher Job Separation Rates




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                         Total Output                                            Consumption                                                  Unemployment Rate
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                  Perc. Dev. from
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.3                                                                                                                0.06
                                                                                    0.2
                              0.2                                                                                                                0.04
                              0.1                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                               0                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                               Quarters                                                     Quarters
       Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                              LFP                                               Share of g Firms                                          Total Number of Firms




                                                                                                                            Perc. Dev. from
                                                                                                                                                      0
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                      Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                      Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.3

                              0.2                                                       4                                                        -0.2

                              0.1                                                       2                                                        -0.4

                               0                                                        0                                                        -0.6
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                       Quarters
                                        r Employment                                             g Employment                                                    g Searchers
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                      Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                                    Perc. Dev. from
                               0                                                                                                                      8
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                       Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                     Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                        4
                               -5                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                        2                                                             4
                             -10
                                                                                                                                                      2
                             -15
                                                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                Quarters                                                  Quarters
        Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                        Abatement Rate                                            Emissions                                           Tax Revenue-GDP Ratio
                                                                  Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                        0
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS

                              20                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                              10                                                    -20
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                    -30
                               0                                                                                                                      0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                  0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                       Quarters

                                                                                Benchmark Model                       Higher                      n




                                                                                                      49
Figure A4: Transitional Dynamics in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model, Calibra-
tion with Lower Elasticity of Abatement Costs with Respect to Abatement Rate




                                                                                                                           Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                         Total Output                                            Consumption                                                   Unemployment Rate
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                  Perc. Dev. from
                                                                                    0.4                                                              0.1
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.4


                              0.2                                                   0.2                                                          0.05


                               0                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                   0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                               Quarters                                                      Quarters
       Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                              LFP                                               Share of g Firms                                           Total Number of Firms




                                                                                                                            Perc. Dev. from
         Pre-Policy SS




                                                                      Perc.-Pt. from
                                                                      Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                             Pre-Policy SS
                              0.4                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                 -0.2
                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                 -0.4
                              0.2                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                 -0.6
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                 -0.8
                               0                                                        0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                   0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                        Quarters
                                        r Employment                                             g Employment                                                     g Searchers
       Perc. Dev. from




                                                                      Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                                                                Perc. Dev. from
                               0
        Pre-Policy SS




                                                                       Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                 Pre-Policy SS
                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                        4
                             -10
                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                        2
                             -20
                                                                                        0                                                             0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                   0      5      10      15   20
                                           Quarters                                                Quarters                                                   Quarters
        Perc.-Pt. Dev. from




                                                                                                                               Perc.-Pt. Dev. from
                                        Abatement Rate                                            Emissions                                            Tax Revenue-GDP Ratio
                                                                  Perc. Dev. from




                                                                                        0
          Pre-Policy SS




                                                                   Pre-Policy SS




                                                                                                                                 Pre-Policy SS
                              20                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                    -10

                              10                                                    -20                                                              0.1

                                                                                    -30
                               0                                                                                                                      0
                                    0    5      10      15   20                             0     5        10    15   20                                   0      5      10      15   20
                                             Quarters                                                 Quarters                                                        Quarters

                                                                                    Benchmark Model                    Lower




A.7    Additional Model Results

Abatement Decisions Amid Firm Creation and Green-Technology Adoption Ta-
ble A2 below compares the steady-state outcomes of the benchmark model to those of the
same model shutting down the abatement margin. Recall that the latter can be interpreted
as an intensive margin of adjustment to carbon taxes, whereas green-technology adoption
can be interpreted as an extensive margin of adjustment. While the qualitative impact of
carbon taxes remains unchanged without the possibility to abate emissions, the quantitative
effects are noticeable: absent abatement, r employment would drop by more than 45 per-
cent, the total number of firms would fall by 3.5 percent, and the unemployment rate would

                                                                                                      50
increase by 0.13 percentage points. The intuition behind these results is simple: without the
ability to abate emissions, higher carbon tax rates are needed to hit the emission reduction
target. These higher rates increase the marginal cost of r firms, which puts additional down-
ward pressure on firm profits, further reducing the incentive to create firms compared to an
environment where r firms can abate emissions. Surprisingly, despite the larger reduction
in the number of firms, the increase in both consumption and output is larger compared
to the benchmark model. These two outcomes are solely due to the sharper reallocation of
resources towards g firms in the absence of abatement by r firms (note the larger expansion
in the number and share of g firms compared to the benchmark model). All told, being
able to abate emissions reduces the sensitivity of the economy to carbon taxes: it limits the
consumption and output gains from resource reallocation but, importantly, also contributes
to limiting the adverse effects of carbon taxes on unemployment.




                                             51
Table A2: Steady State Changes in Response to Carbon Tax­Benchmark Model vs. Model
without Abatement Margin


                         Variable                Benchmark           Benchmark Model
                                                   Model              No Abatement
                                                       (1)                     (2)
                                                   Percent                 Percent
                                                 Change Rel.             Change Rel.
                                                  to Baseline             to Baseline
                       Emissions e                     -35                     -35
                      Total Output                   0.291                    0.682
                      Consumption                     0.174                    0.340
                         Empl. r                    -18.517                  -46.001
                         Empl. g                     4.611                    11.535
                       Total Empl.                   0.551                    1.435
                      Real Wage r                    0.118                    0.317
                      Real Wage g                    0.117                    0.312
                        Firms (N )                   -1.218                   -3.576
                      g Firms (Ng )                 14.019                   38.515
                                               Percentage-Pt.          Percentage-Pt.
                                                Change Rel.             Change Rel.
                                                 to Baseline             to Baseline
                    Unempl. Rate                      0.046                   0.126
                      LFP Rate                       0.378                   0.990
                    Abate. Rate µ                    25.013                     -
               Share of g Firms (Ng /N )             6.419                   18.165
                  Tax Rev./Output                     0.179                   0.394


 Note: Values in blue denote beneficial changes (relative to the baseline economy of each model version) of
 select variables of interest whereas values in red denote adverse changes (relative to the baseline economy
 of each model version) of select variables of interest.




Alternative Values for Parameter kp                  Recall that we assume that the idiosyncratic
productivity of firms is drawn from a Pareto distribution G(a) = 1 - (amin /a)kp                        with
shape parameter kp >  - 1. Following the macro literature on endogenous firm entry
(Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2012), we choose  = 3.8. In turn, as a baseline, we choose


                                                     52
kp = 4.2 (for a similar value in a context of production offshoring decisions, see Zlate, 2016).
       The value of kp has direct implications on the average firm productivity differential be-
tween g and r firms. In particular, values of kp smaller than  = 3.8 deliver implausibly
large productivity differentials. For example, setting kp = 3.4 implies that average g -firm
productivity is more than 50 percent greater than average r-firm productivity. In contrast,
the larger is kp relative to , the smaller--and more plausible--is the average firm produc-
tivity differential.17 Importantly, the larger is the value of kp relative to the value of , the
smaller is the average firm productivity differential between g and r firms, and the larger are
the positive effects of carbon taxes on real wages and output. As such, our baseline results
can be seen as a lower bound on the positive effects of carbon taxes on labor market and
macroeconomic outcomes.




  17
     For example, a value of kp = 6 implies that average g -firm productivity is 25 percent greater than average
r-firm productivity, and a value of kp = 9 implies that average g -firm productivity is 15 percent greater than
average r-firm productivity.


                                                      53
