                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CYCLICAL WORKER FLOWS:
                                CLEANSING VS. SULLYING

                                     John C. Haltiwanger
                                       Henry R. Hyatt
                                      Erika McEntarfer
                                       Matthew Staiger

                                     Working Paper 28802
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28802


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We thank Paul Oyer, Kristin McCue, Jose Mustre-del-Rio, and participants of the 2015 Society of
Labor Economists Conference, the 2015 NBER Conference on the Role of Firms in Wage
Inequality, the Spring 2017 Midwest Macro Conference, the 2017 Federal Reserve Board
Conference on Labor Market Dynamics and the Macroeconomy, the 2021 ASSA Conference and
seminar participants at Drexel University, Arizona State University and U.S. Census Bureau, for
helpful comments and suggestions. Early results were circulated in a 2015 draft entitled "Do
Workers Move Up the Firm Productivity Job Ladder?" John Haltiwanger was also a part-time
Schedule A employee of the U.S. Bureau of the Census at the time of the writing of this paper.
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed (CBDRB-FY21-CED006-0002). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John C. Haltiwanger, Henry R. Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Matthew Staiger. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cyclical Worker Flows: Cleansing vs. Sullying
John C. Haltiwanger, Henry R. Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Matthew Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 28802
May 2021
JEL No. E24,E32,J24,J63,J64

                                          ABSTRACT

Do recessions speed up or impede productivity-enhancing reallocation? To investigate this
question, we use U.S. linked employer-employee data to examine how worker flows contribute to
productivity growth over the business cycle. We find that in expansions high-productivity firms
grow faster primarily by hiring workers away from lower-productivity firms. The rate at which
job-to-job flows move workers up the productivity ladder is highly procyclical. Productivity
growth slows during recessions when this job ladder collapses. In contrast, flows into
nonemployment from low productivity firms disproportionately increase in recessions, which
leads to an increase in productivity growth. We thus find evidence of both sullying and cleansing
effects of recessions, but the timing of these effects differs. The cleansing effect dominates early
in downturns but the sullying effect lingers well into the economic recovery.

John C. Haltiwanger                              Erika McEntarfer
Department of Economics                          U.S. Census Bureau
University of Maryland                           Center for Economic Studies
College Park, MD 20742                           4600 Silver Hill Road
and NBER                                         ACSD HQ-5K179
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu                            Washington, DC 20233
                                                 erika.mcentarfer@census.gov
Henry R. Hyatt
Center for Economic Studies                      Matthew Staiger
U.S. Census Bureau                               Department of Economics
4600 Silver Hill Road                            University of Maryland
Washington, DC 20233                             College Park, MD 20742
henry.r.hyatt@census.gov                         mstaiger@umd.edu
1         Introduction
Economists have long sought to understand how business cycles affect the reallocation of
resources. Do recessions promote economic efficiency by "cleansing" out less productive
firms and redirecting labor to more productive uses? Or, does the decline in job mobility
in recessions "sully" productivity-enhancing worker reallocation, leaving workers matched
to mediocre firms? In this paper we use U.S. linked employer-employee data to decompose
the employment growth of high- and low-productivity firms into two components:
growth accounted for by job-to-job moves and growth accounted for by flows through
nonemployment. We find that job-to-job flows move workers from less productive to more
productive firms and the rate at which workers move up this job ladder is highly procyclical.
In contrast, less productive firms rely heavily on hiring jobless individuals in expansions
and are disproportionately more likely to displace workers back to nonemployment in
contractions. In this way, worker flows through nonemployment shift workers away from
low-productivity firms in contractions.
        We thus find empirical evidence of both cleansing and sullying effects of recessions, which
feature in many models of the labor market. Much of the theoretical literature focuses on
either cleansing or sullying effects. Schumpeter (1939) originally proposed that recessions
may be productivity enhancing, driving out less productive uses of capital and labor and
freeing these resources for more efficient use. The notion of cleansing effects of recessions
was later revived in Davis and Haltiwanger (1990), Caballero and Hammour (1994), and
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994).1 Barlevy (2002) notes that cleansing effects of recessions
appear at odds with observed procyclical job quality. He proposes a model whereby declines
in job-to-job moves cause a drag on productivity in recessions, a sullying effect. Sullying
effects of recessions feature more recently in a set of papers by Moscarini and Postel-Vinay
(2013, 2016) (MPV). The MPV framework in particular yields a rich set of predictions for
the cyclical reallocation of workers across the firm productivity distribution that we largely
confirm in our empirical analysis.2 More recent research by Lise and Robin (2017) and Baley,
    1
      Unlike Schumpeter, the more recent literature does not argue that recessions are desireable but rather
that, conditional on the adverse shock occurring, there may be an acceleration of the ongoing reallocation
of resources to more productive uses in recessions.
    2
      The MPV model builds on the job ladder framework of Burdett and Mortensen (1998) but importantly


                                                     1
Figueiredo, and Ulbricht (2020) use models with heterogeneity of both workers and firms
that induce cyclical variation in sorting over the cycle. Within their frameworks, both of
these papers suggest that the cleansing effect dominates the sullying effect.3 Our empirical
results suggest that the cleansing effects dominate at the start of a recession but that the
sullying effects continue long into the economic recovery.
    In our empirical analysis, we classify firms into high- and low-productivity firms based
upon the relative ranking of firms in the measured distribution of firm-level productivity.
We find that high-productivity firms grow faster: the differential growth rate averages 0.20
percent of employment on a quarterly basis. Decomposing the growth rate differential into
the components due to job-to-job moves versus worker flows through nonemployment, we
find that the propensity of high-productivity firms to grow faster is driven by their advantage
in poaching workers from less productive firms. This advantage is large: the difference in
the growth rates due to job-to-job moves is 0.61 percent per quarter. Low-productivity firms
actually lose workers on net through poaching, and so hire relatively more jobless workers
to sustain growth: the differential employment growth rate from worker flows through
nonemployment (relative to high-productivity firms) is 0.41 percent per quarter.
    We find that these patterns of worker reallocation between low- and high-productivity
firms differ dramatically over the course of the business cycle.                     In expansions, high-
productivity firms actively poach workers from less productive employers.                              During
recessions, this job ladder collapses yielding a sullying effect.                    The nonemployment
margin also changes dramatically across the cycle. In expansions, low-productivity firms
for our purposes incorporates business cycle dynamics. In their framework, search frictions prevent workers
from immediately moving into desirable job matches and workers move to better firm matches via job-
to-job flows. High-productivity firms are able to offer higher wages and thus are able to grow faster in
expansions than less-productive firms, who must rely on the pool of unemployed workers in filling vacancies.
In recessions, this cyclical job ladder collapses, yielding a sullying effect. Our empirical results are largely
consistent with these predicted dynamics. Our results build on the findings in Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn,
and McEntarfer (2018) and Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2018). This earlier work provides support
for a procyclical job ladder in terms of firm earnings and productivity. The current paper is distinguished by
explicitly considering the sullying and cleansing contributions of flows through the lens of the impact on the
share of employment at high and low productivity firms. This earlier work does not explore decompositions
of productivity growth into cleansing and sullying components. Bertheau, Bunzel, and Vejlin (2020) report
broadly similar patterns on poaching by high-paying and low-paying firms using Danish data.
    3
      However, worker flows across firms ranked by firm productivity are not targeted directly when they
estimate their models. While we do not explicitly consider worker heterogeneity in our empirical analysis,
we do provide novel evidence on the patterns of worker flows across firms ranked by productivity that are
relevant for these models of sorting.


                                                       2
grow primarily through hiring jobless workers.               In contractions, worker separations to
nonemployment from low-productivity firms spike disproportionately and hires from
nonemployment into low-productivity firms decline disproportionately. This cleansing effect
peaks earlier in a downturn compared to the collapse of the job ladder that lingers into
the early stages of a recovery. Cleansing effects are stronger than sullying effects when the
unemployment rate surges during recessions, but they are almost completely absent in the
times of high unemployment that follow recessions.
       What are the implications of these business cycle dynamics on aggregate productivity
growth? To answer this question we use an accounting decomposition of an index of aggregate
productivity growth that is the employment-weighted average of a firm-level measure of
productivity, which is measured in logs. On average, worker reallocation through job-to-job
flows contributes 0.1 log points to the index of overall productivity growth each quarter. This
is a substantial contribution to the average quarterly rate of aggregate productivity growth,
which is 0.33 based on our data. However, during recessions there is clear evidence of a
sullying effect. This is particularly true during the Great Recession. Prior to the recession,
in 2006:1, worker reallocation via job-to-job flows contributed 0.13 log points to quarterly
aggregate productivity growth but this contribution declined to 0.02 by 2009:2. Acting
against this is a cleansing effect that operates via worker flows through nonemployment.
In 2006:1, worker reallocation via nonemployment contributed -0.1 log points to quarterly
aggregate productivity growth but this increased to 0.08 in 2009:1. We show that the during
periods of rising unemployment the cleansing impact on productivity outweighs the sullying
impact. However, during periods when unemployment is above trend the sullying impact on
productivity outweighs the cleansing impact.
       Our primary analysis uses revenue per worker to measure relative productivity within
the firm's industry. This has the advantage of allowing us to measure productivity within
most industry sectors, but has two key disadvantages.4 First, we cannot easily compare
productivity across sectors and so our main analysis abstracts from productivity-enhancing
reallocation from less to more productive sectors. Second, revenue per worker reflects both
   4
    Total factor productivity measures are available for only handful of sectors that are a shrinking share of
the U.S. economy.



                                                      3
"innate" firm productivity as well as sorting of workers across firms. We assess these issues
using the AKM decomposition of earnings.5 The AKM firm fixed effect represents the pay-
premium workers receive independent of worker quality and while not a direct measure of
productivity, canonical models suggest that the relative ranking should be highly correlated
with productivity differences within and across industries. We find that the cyclical patterns
of hires and separations via poaching and nonemployment are very similar whether we rank
firms based on revenue per worker of the AKM firm fixed effect. Thus, our results do not
appear to be driven by cyclical sorting of worker types across firms.6
        Finally, we consider the implications of the worker flows across firms ranked by
productivity for worker earnings.          We find that worker movements from low- to high-
productivity firms move workers into higher-paying firms, as measured by both firm average
earnings and the AKM firm fixed effect. These earnings changes move strongly with their
productivity analogues but are roughly half of the magnitude. Thus, workers obtain a
substantial fraction of the gains from movements onto and up the firm productivity job
ladder, but there is suggestive evidence of incomplete pass-through of gains to workers.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 presents evidence
on worker movements onto, up, and off of the firm productivity job ladder over the cycle.
Section 4 quantifies the implications of the cyclical worker flows for cyclical variation in
productivity. Section 5 discusses implications for earnings. Section 6 concludes.



2         Data
A key contribution of our paper is the matching of U.S. Census Bureau linked employer-
employee data to new productivity measures also developed at Census. We will first describe
the linked employer-employee data, and how we use it to decompose firm growth via job-
to-job moves versus flows through nonemployment. The Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics (LEHD) data contain quarterly earnings records collected by state unemployment
    5
    AKM refers to the decomposition developed by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999).
    6
    Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2018) and Crane, Hyatt, and Murray (2020) examine cyclical
sorting of heterogeneous workers across heterogeneous firms. Both papers find evidence that the assortative
matching of workers and firms is countercyclical: a greater share of low-productivity workers are able to
match to better firms in expansions.


                                                    4
insurance (UI) programs, linked to establishment-level data from the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW). LEHD employment coverage is quite broad, covering over
95 percent of private sector workers and almost all state and local government employment.7
State-level data availability varies by year, as states began sharing UI and QCEW data with
the Census Bureau at different times. In this paper we use LEHD data for private-sector
employers in 28 states from 1998-2015.8 Our 28 states include many of the largest states so
that our sample accounts for 65 percent of U.S. private sector employment.
       The LEHD data allow us to decompose firm employment growth by worker hires and
separations. We use the decomposition developed in Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer
(2018) (HHM) and Haltiwanger, Hyatt, Kahn, and McEntarfer (2018) (HHKM) that yields
an exact decomposition of firm employment growth due to workers switching jobs (what we
call net job-to-job or net poaching flows) and growth due to flows between employment and
nonemployment (what we call net nonemployment flows). A challenge for the identification
of job-to-job flows in the LEHD data is that the data do not provide information on why
a worker left one job and began another. We only have quarterly earnings, from which we
infer approximately when workers left and began jobs. HHM and HHKM develop three
alternative measures of job-to-job flows, and demonstrate that key findings on the nature of
job ladders are robust to different approaches for identifying job-to-job moves in the LEHD
data. We use the within/adjacent approach from HHM in this paper. This approach defines
job-to-job transitions as those where the new job begins in the same or following quarter as
the job separation. Based upon the robustness analysis in HHM, we are confident our main
results are not sensitive to the specific rules we use amongst the set of rules they considered.9
       To measure firm productivity, we use a relatively new firm-level database on productivity
from Haltiwanger et al. (2017) based on the revenue and employment data from the Census
   7
     For a full description of the LEHD data, see Abowd et al. (2009).
   8
     Our 28 states are CA, FL, GA ,HI, ID, IL, IN, KS, ME, MD, MN, MO, MT, NC, NJ, ND, NM, NV, PA,
OR, RI, SC, SD, TN, VA, WA, and WV. While we restrict our analysis to employers located in our 28-state
sample, we use the complete set of available states to construct worker job histories. As described later in
this section, our productivity measures reflect the labor productivity of the national firm.
   9
     They also consider job-to-job flows restricted to those where the transition occurs within the same
quarter and those with minimum disruptions in earnings. They find results that are very robust across these
alternatives. Each of the different measures is highly correlated with the alternatives (pairwise correlations
of about 0.98) and each of the LEHD based job-to-job flow series has a correlation of about 0.96 with CPS
based job-to-job flows.


                                                      5
Business Register and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). Since the underlying
revenue and employment data are from the Census Business Register, this database offers
much wider coverage of labor productivity at the firm level than earlier studies that focused
on sectors like manufacturing or retail trade. These data allow us to measure the log of
real revenue per employee on an annual basis for a wide coverage of the private, non-farm,
for-profit firms. Revenue is deflated with the Gross Domestic Product price deflator. This
measure of productivity is a standard gross output per worker measure of productivity that
is commonly used to measure productivity at the micro and macro level but is a relatively
crude measure compared to using total factor productivity (TFP). However, in the empirical
literature, this revenue labor productivity measure has been shown to be highly correlated
with TFP based measures of productivity across businesses within industries. That is, within
detailed industry year cells, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) and Foster, Haltiwanger,
and Syverson (2008) find that the correlation between TFP and gross output (revenue) per
worker across businesses is about 0.6 within industries in the manufacturing sector. This
finding is consistent with the implications of models with labor market adjustment frictions
which motivate our analysis.10 In our analysis below, we use this revenue labor productivity
measure deviated from industry by year means.
    The gross output per worker data while offering much wider coverage than earlier studies
has some limitations. The data only cover about 80 percent of firms in the Census LBD.
The latter cover all firms with at least one paid employee in the private, non-farm sector.
One reason is that the revenue data are not available for non-profits. For another, the
revenue data derive from different administrative sources than the payroll tax data. Most
of the matches between the payroll tax and revenue data are via Employer Identification
Numbers (EINs) but firms can use different EINs for filing income taxes and filing quarterly
payroll taxes.11 For such firms, name and address matching is required. Haltiwanger et al.
(2017) also show that the missingness of revenue is only weakly related to observable firm
  10
     See for example Decker et al. (2020). In their calibrated model of labor adjustment frictions, they obtain
a correlation of TFP and revenue labor productivity of 0.90.
  11
     Another source of mismatch is sole proprietors file income taxes on their individual income tax returns
while payroll taxes are filed via their EIN. Administrative data are available that links the EINs to the filers
via the SS-4 form (application for EINs). While this information is incorporated in the Census Business
Register, it is imperfect.



                                                       6
characteristics such as industry, size, or age.12 We are able to construct measures of labor
productivity at the firm (operational control) level given that the Census Business Register
has a complete mapping of all EINs owned by any given parent firm. Even with these
limitations, we have revenue per worker for more than 4 million firms in each calendar year
which we integrate with the LEHD data infrastructure via EINs. For the remaining private-
sector employers in the LEHD data for which we cannot match to our productivity data,
we impute labor productivity using the size, age, and relative wages paid by the employer
within their industry.13


2.1     Productivity, Growth, and Survival

Our measure of firm productivity­based on revenue per worker­exhibits a number of the key
features that Syverson (2011) emphasized are common in the literature on firm productivity
and dynamics. First, we find tremendous dispersion of revenue labor productivity within
narrowly defined sectors. The within industry/year standard deviation of log real revenue per
worker is about 0.80. This is in the range of labor productivity dispersion indices reported
by Syverson (2004). Second, we find that log real revenue per worker is highly predictive of
firm growth and survival, as shown in Table 1.14 We consider two dependent variables for
all incumbents in period t-1. The first dependent variable is the Davis, Haltiwanger, and
Schuh (1996) firm level growth rate of employment that is inclusive of firm exit from t-1 to
t.15 The second dependent variable is an exit indicator that takes on the value of one if the
firm exits between t-1 and t and is zero otherwise. We use a linear probability model for this
second specification. Firm exit and growth is organic growth and exit in the manner defined
  12
     The productivity data explicitly excludes North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
81 which is Other Services. This industry is very heterogeneous, including non-profits such as religious
organizations where productivity is not well defined.
  13
     The latest year for which we have firm productivity data is 2015, so we end our time series there although
the LEHD data are more current. We investigated imputing post-2015 productivity using lagged productivity
and other covariates but were not satisfied this 100 percent imputation was of sufficiently high quality. In
unreported results, we have found that the patterns of worker flows are robust to excluding the imputed
cases. Including the imputed cases facilitates our quantification of shares of employment at high and low
productivity firms and in turn the productivity decomposition we use in the analysis.
  14
     For this analysis, we do not restrict the sample to those firms in our LEHD data sample. These regressions
use all firm-year observations from the revenue-enhanced Census Business Register.
  15
     This measure is given by git = (Eit - Eit-1 )/(0.5  (Eit + Eit-1 )). It is a second order approximation to
a log first difference that accommodates entry and exit.


                                                      7
                 Table 1: Productivity, Employment Growth, and Firm Death

                                Employment Growth Rate                     Firm Death
                                         (1)                                   (2)
           Productivity                       0.216                           -0.066
                                            (0.00011)                       (0.00005)
           Log of firm size                   0.056                           -0.045
                                            (0.00006)                       (0.00002)
              Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate regression. The dependent
              variable in column 1 is the employment growth rate between the current and
              subsequent year and the dependent variable in column 2 is an indicator equal to one
              of the firm dies in the subsequent year. The independent variables in each regression
              are the log of firm size and productivity, which is defined as the log revenue per
              worked deviated from the industry (defined by the 4-digit NAICS code) average.
              Standard errors are presented in parentheses.


by Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) (i.e., it abstracts from changes in ownership or
M&A activity). We regress these two outcomes on the deviation of log productivity from the
industry average in t-1 and on log size in t-1 (log of firm employment in t-1). While these are
simple reduced form specifications, these specifications are consistent with standard models
of firm growth and survival since these are proxies for the two key state variables for the firm
in making growth and survival decisions. The canonical model implies that holding initial
size constant a firm with higher productivity is more likely to grow and less likely to exit.
We find overwhelming evidence in support of these predictions in Table 1. A one standard
deviation increase in within-industry productivity yields a 20 percentage point increase in
net employment growth and 5 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of exit.16
    These descriptive results give us confidence to proceed with our measure of revenue labor
productivity since we produce patterns that others have found using TFP measures in sectors
such as manufacturing. In line with the existing literature, our findings of a tight relationship
between firm productivity, growth, and survival are consistent with the hypothesis that there
are intrinsic differences in productivity across firms that help account for the high rate of
reallocation of jobs across firms. In addition, such intrinsic differences in productivity have
implications for worker reallocation including the potential role of a productivity job ladder.
   16
      Decker et al. (2020) develop a simple model of firm dynamics with adjustment frictions that shows that
the relationship between growth and survival from t-1 to t with realizations of labor productivity in period
t is very similar as with TFP, holding firm size constant in t-1.




                                                     8
2.2       Defining High- and Low-Productivity Firms

To help mitigate remaining concerns about measurement error, we construct robust rankings
of firms by productivity. We first generate time-invariant measures of employer productivity,
defined as the employment-weighted average of firm productivity over the life of the SEIN
(the state tax identifier number, the key employer identifier in LEHD data). This approach is
broadly consistent with the rank preserving equilibria assumption in Moscarini and Postel-
Vinay (2013). We then compute the employment-weighted and within-industry quintiles
of the productivity distribution. Using these quintiles, we define high-productivity firms
as those in the top two quintiles and low-productivity firms as those in the bottom three
quintiles. In unreported analysis, we find that results are robust to permitting firms to
change ranks over time. This is not surprising given the large differences between high- and
low-productivity firms. For example, the within-industry differences in average gross output
per worker between high- and low-productivity firms are typically in excess of 85 log points.
       As a robustness check on our productivity measure, we also rank firms by the AKM firm
fixed effect and average earnings. We estimate the AKM firm premiums by regressing log
earnings on person fixed effects, firm fixed effects, and controls for time and worker age.17
We estimate the model by implementing the iterative method proposed by Guimaraes and
Portugal (2010). The AKM firm fixed effect abstracts from observable and unobservable
individual characteristics and in canonical models, the firm specific pay premia should
be closely related to productivity differences across firms. We also consider simple non-
parametric measures of relative earnings by ranking firms based on the average log earnings
of full-quarter workers. Just as we do for gross output per worker, we construct employment-
weighted within-industry quintiles based on these measures and define high-ranked firms as
those in the top two quintiles and low-ranked firms as those in the bottom three quintiles.
  17
    To control for time we include a set of year dummies that capture calendar year effects on earnings.
To control for worker age, we follow the specification of Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016). We center age
around 40, include a quadratic and cubic transformation of worker age, but omit the linear term. Note that
we estimate our AKM employer effects at the State Employer Identification Number level rather than the
national level as in our productivity data. This method of estimating AKM effects follows the conventional
implementation strategy when applied to LEHD data. This distinction should have a minimal effect on
whether an employer is counted as low- vs. high-ranked.




                                                    9
3        Worker Flows Over the Business Cycle
We begin by examining how job-to-job moves and worker flows through nonemployment
reallocate workers across high- and low-productivity firms. To understand how worker
reallocation moves workers from one group of firms to another, we use the following identity:


              Net Job Flows = Ht - St =                (Hti - Sti ) =                (Htij - Stij )      (1)
                                              i{p,n}                    i{p,n} j {l,h}


where Ht is the number of hires and St is the number of separations in quarter t. The
superscripts denote subsamples defined by the type of worker flow, where i = p denotes
poaching (job-to-job) flows and i = n denotes flows through nonemployment, and the type
of firm, where j = h denotes high-productivity firms and j = l denotes low-productivity
firms.18 For example, Htp denotes poaching hires and Htph denotes poaching hires at high
productivity firms. We convert all flows to rates by dividing through by employment in time
t - 1.19 We seasonally adjust all series using the X-12 procedure.
       The identity in equation 1 decomposes employment growth at high-productivity
firms (Hth -Sth ) into net growth due to two components: job-to-job moves of workers or
poaching flows (Htph -Stph ) and flows of workers through nonemployment (Htnh -Stnh ).20 In the
aggregate economy, employment growth is entirely attributable to net worker flows through
nonemployment since poaching hires and poaching separations aggregated over both high-
and low-productivity firms are equal. However, for any subset of firms in the economy,
net poaching need not be zero, as some firms will be more successful poaching workers
away from other employers. This "net poaching flows" component of growth captures the
comparative growth advantage one group of firms has over another in their ability to attract
workers away from other firms.
       Figure 1 shows our decomposition of net job flows for high- and low-productivity firms.
  18
     A given type of firm (e.g., high-productivity) may have workers that are hired by that firm via a job-
to-job flow and separate from that firm via a job-to-job flow. We refer to the former as a poaching hire and
the latter as a poaching separation.
  19
     Hires and separations characterize worker mobility between time t - 1 and t. For hires we count all
worker flows into a firm in our sample at time t. For separations, we count all worker flows out of a firm in
our sample at time t - 1.
  20                                                l   l     pl   pl       nl   nl
     Correspondingly for low-productivity firms, Ht   -St = (Ht  -St  ) + (Ht  -St  ).



                                                     10
            Figure 1: Poaching and Nonemployment Flows by Firm Productivity
                                       (a) High-Productivity Firms



                     12
                     10
                   Rate
                    86
                     4




                             2000              2005              2010               2015

                               Poaching hires                 Poaching separations
                               Hires from nonemployment       Separations to nonemployment



                                       (b) Low-Productivity Firms
                     12
                     10
                   Rate
                    86
                     4




                             2000              2005              2010               2015

                               Poaching hires                 Poaching separations
                               Hires from nonemployment       Separations to nonemployment




Notes : High-productivity indicates that the firm is in the top two quintiles of the within-industry
productivity distribution. Low-productivity indicates the firm is the bottom three quintiles of the within-
industry productivity distribution. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-12. The shaded regions mark
quarters in which there was a recession.




                                                      11
As discussed previously, a key prediction of job ladder models is that job-to-job moves should
reallocate workers away from less productive to more productive firms. Figure 1(a) shows
that this prediction from the theory holds true in the data. The most productive firms have
overall positive net employment growth on average and net poaching (Htph - Stph ) is strongly
positive. The average net employment growth of high-productivity firms is 0.33 percent
per quarter with net poaching (the rate at which job-to-job moves reallocate workers to
high-productivity firms) averaging 0.27 percent per quarter. In other words, during the
1998-2015 period, job-to-job moves of workers from less-productive employers account for
most (80 percent) of the net employment growth of high-productivity firms.
   The results of the decomposition are also striking for the less productive firms in the
industry. In Figure 1(b), low-productivity firms grew at a rate of 0.14 percent per quarter on
average from 1998-2015, which is slower than the high-productivity firms. Low-productivity
firms lose -0.34 percent employment per quarter from workers "voting with their feet" and
moving to firms ranked higher in firm productivity distribution. The positive growth rate for
less productive firms is entirely due to strong hiring from nonemployment. In other words,
in a typical quarter less productive firms recruit from the pool of unemployed individuals to
replace workers moving to better firms. This is also consistent with job ladder models of the
labor market. In job ladder models, it is the search and matching frictions that support the
presence of low-productivity firms that primarily hire from nonemployment.
   The patterns of hires and separations in Figure 1 are instructive for understanding
the differences in the cyclical dynamics of job-to-job and nonemployment worker flows.
Poaching hires and separations both decline for high-productivity firms in contractions
with the decline in poaching hires larger so that net poaching declines significantly.
Hires from nonemployment decline sharply for low-productivity firms in contractions
accompanied by a surge in separations so that net employment growth declines sharply for
low-productivity firms. There are similar qualitative patterns for hires from and separations
to nonemployment for high-productivity firms but the magnitudes are smaller.
   To more clearly see how worker flows reallocate workers across the productivity ladder,
we decompose the average overall net job flow differential between high- and low-productivity
groups into the net poaching differential and the net flows from nonemployment differential.


                                             12
                                Figure 2: Differential Flows between High- and Low-Ranked Firms
                 1
     Differential growth rate
               0 -.5
                 -1        .5




                                     2000                        2005             2010                        2015

                                            Poaching (productivity)            Nonemployment (productivity)
                                            Poaching (firm premium)            Nonemployment (firm premium)
                                            Poaching (average earnings)        Nonemployment (average earnings)



Notes : Differential growth rates are the difference in quarterly employment growth rates between firms
in the high category (top two quintiles) and those in the low category (bottom three quintiles). The
different series present results in which the high and low categories are defined by productivity, average
log earnings, and the AKM firm premium. For all measures, the quintiles are calculated within NAICS
4-digit industry codes. Results are presented separately for poaching and nonemployment flows. Data
are seasonally adjusted using X-12. The shaded regions mark quarters in which there was a recession.




                                                                          13
Let Etj-1 denote employment at firm type j at time t - 1. Then i     pj   pj   j
                                                               t = (Ht - St )/Et-1 and
j
t = (Htnj - Stnj )/Etj-1 are the employment growth rates at firm type i  {l, h} through net
poaching flows and net nonemployment flows, respectively. Figure 2 plots the differential
rates between high- and low-productivity firms­i.e., h   l     h   l
                                                     t - t and t - t . The average net

poaching differential between high- and low-productivity firms is 0.61 percent per quarter.
It is also quite cyclical: a minimum of 0.012 in 2009Q1, and a maximum of 1.01 in 2015Q3.
The average net nonemployment differential is -0.41 percent, but this increases at the onset
of economic downturns.21 The negative contribution of flows through nonemployment to
the differential growth rates of high- and low-productivity firms implies that search frictions
are a drag on productivity-enhancing reallocation in expansions, allowing mediocre firms to
attract workers flowing through nonemployment who cannot immediately find better jobs.
       For comparison purposes, we also show in Figure 2 the differential growth rates for firms
ranked by AKM firm fixed effects and average earnings. To make results comparable, the
rankings are calculated within industries. These patterns are very similar to those from the
job ladder decomposition of growth rates when firms are ranked by productivity, both in
levels and business cycle dynamics. The striking similarity between these three measures is
again consistent with job ladder models of the labor market, where high-productivity firms
offer higher wages, and grow faster than less-productive firms in expansions by poaching
workers away from less-productive, lower-paying firms. The strong similarity between the
productivity and AKM fixed effects results also provides reassurance about measurement
error concerns about the revenue productivity measure.
       Figure 2 also shows pronounced cyclical patterns that differ across the components of
net job flows. We quantify the nature of that variation in Table 2. Table 2 presents
the results from regressions where each component of the differential growth rate (net
job flows, net poaching flows, and net nonemployment flows) is regressed on a cyclical
indicator and a time-trend. Each column represents the results of these regressions for firms
when they are ranked by productivity, AKM firm fixed effects, and average firm earnings
  21
    Not shown in Figure 2 is the overall net job flow differential between high and low productivity firms,
which is the sum of the poaching and nonemployment margins, and averages 0.20 percent per quarter. It
reaches a maximum of 0.58 in 2008Q4 and a minimum of -0.13 in 2004, an expansion year. In the set of
regressions in Table 2 we will test the cyclicality of this overall redistribution.



                                                    14
                     Table 2: Differential Net Job Flows Over the Cycle

                                                              High-Low Differential
                                                   (1)                   (2)                   (3)
A. Net Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                     0.136                  -0.179                -0.170
                                                (0.060)                (0.084)               (0.084)
 Deviated unemployment rate                      -0.086                 -0.161                -0.144
                                                (0.023)                (0.029)               (0.030)

B. Poaching Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                     -0.440                 -0.544                -0.560
                                                (0.049)                (0.063)               (0.061)
 Deviated unemployment rate                      -0.097                 -0.128                -0.103
                                                (0.027)                (0.033)               (0.034)

C. Nonemployment Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                     0.576                   0.365                 0.390
                                                (0.043)                (0.047)               (0.049)
 Deviated unemployment rate                      0.011                  -0.033                -0.041
                                                (0.033)                (0.026)               (0.027)

Definition of Job Ladder
 Firms ranked by                             productivity        average earnings        firm premium
 Firms ranked within                           industry              industry               industry
  Notes: Each cell presents results from a separate regression estimated on national quarterly data. The
  dependent variable is the differential worker flow rate between firms on the high and long rung of the job
  ladder, where the type of flow is indicated by the panel label. The job ladder is defined by productivity,
  average log earnings, and the AKM firm premium in columns 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The independent
  variables in each regression include a cyclical indicator as well as a linear time-trend and a constant,
  which are not reported. The cyclical indicators considered include the change in the unemployment
  rate and the deviations of unemployment from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. Aside from the linear trend,
  all dependent and independent variables are measured in percentage point units. Standard errors are
  presented in parentheses.




                                                   15
per worker. Because the results for all three columns are very similar (as suggested by
Figure 2) we focus our discussion on the business cycle dynamics of worker reallocation
across high- and low-productivity firms (column 1). Two cyclical indicators are used: the
change in unemployment and unemployment deviated from a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) trend.
Periods of rising unemployment correspond closely to NBER defined recessions. In contrast,
unemployment remains substantially above trend well into NBER defined recoveries.
       We start by focusing on the net poaching differentials (row B) which shows that net
poaching from low- to high-productivity firms decreases in cyclical downturns. This occurs
in recessions: for every one percentage point increase in the change in the unemployment rate,
the high vs. low net poaching differential declines by 0.440 percentage points. Poaching flows
are also low in the times of high unemployment that follow recessions. For every percentage
point that the unemployment rate is above its HP trend, the net poaching differential is lower
by 0.097 percentage points. These findings are consistent with a sullying effect of recessions.
       There is also evidence of a cleansing effect that works through flows to and from
nonemployment (row C). The net flows from nonemployment differentials provide an
indication of the reallocation of employment from low- to high-productivity firms that
involves transitions to and from nonemployment.                   These transitions inherently involve
intervening spells of nonemployment. In that respect, this type of reallocation is more
costly than job-to-job flows since it involves the time and resource costs of nonemployment.
Row C indicates that the reallocation that works through the nonemployment margin is
countercyclical. When the change in the unemployment rate increases by one percentage
point, differential net nonemployment hiring for high vs. low increases by 0.576 percentage
points. This is a cleansing effect of recessions that is working in the opposite direction
of job-to-job flows and primarily occurs because there is a disproportionately large spike
in separations into nonemployment from low-productivity firms.22 This cleansing effect,
  22                                                     h    l
    The differential net flows from nonemployment (t       - t  ) can be decomposed into the hires component
  nh   h           nl  l                                             nh   h       nl  l
(Ht  /Et -1  - Ht /Et-1 ) minus the separations component (St           /Et -1 - St /Et-1 ). Regressing these
components against the change in the unemployment rate and controlling for the time-trend produces a
point estimate of 0.165 for hires and -0.411 for separations (the difference between these coefficients is 0.576,
which is the coefficient found in Table 2). Thus, when the unemployment rate rises, worker reallocation from
low- to high-productivity firms through nonemployment increases primarily because of a disproportionate
spike in separations to nonemployment from low-productivity firms but also because a disproportionate
decline in the rate at which low-productivity firms hire jobless workers.



                                                       16
however, is almost negligible in the times of high unemployment that follow recessions. An
additional percentage point of the unemployment rate above its HP trend is associated with
only an increase of 0.011 in the net nonemployment differential.
    The coefficient on overall net job flow differentials (row A) is determined by the cleansing
and sullying effects. During recessions, cleansing effects are stronger than sullying effects. A
one percentage point increase in the change in the unemployment rate is associated with an
increase in the relative employment growth of high-productivity firms of 0.136 percentage
points. In the times of high unemployment that follow recessions, cleansing effects are small
and so sullying effects dominate. An additional percentage point of the unemployment rate
above its HP trend is associated with an increase in the relative employment growth of
low-productivity firms of 0.086 percentage points. Thus, Table 2 illustrates that the relative
importance of cleansing and sullying effects varies at different phases of the business cycle.



4     Implications for Aggregate Outcomes
What are the implications of the business cycle dynamics described in the previous section on
aggregate productivity growth? The decline in productivity-enhancing reallocation through
job-to-job moves in slack labor markets should be a drag in productivity growth, while higher
rates of job destruction at less-productive firms in downturns ought to free resources for more
productive use. The magnitude of the effect on aggregate productivity growth will depend
on both the size of the differential employment flows as well as the productivity differential
between high- and low-productivity firms. In this section we formalize this intuition and
implement a decomposition exercise to quantify how worker reallocation through poaching
and nonemployment flows contributes to aggregate productivity growth, and how these
components of productivity growth vary over the business cycle.


4.1    Worker Reallocation and Employment Shares

We begin by focusing on how worker reallocation affects the share of workers at high- and
low-productivity firms. We focus initially on the findings using our gross output per worker



                                               17
measure of productivity.23 We use the following identity to write changes in the share of
employment at high-productivity firms as a function of the differential net poaching rates
(h   l                                             h   l
 t - t ) and differential net nonemployment rates (t - t ),


                                          h
                                          t =~h + ~h + ~h                                              (2)
                                              t    t    t



      ~h = (xh - xl )t
where x              h    l                             h
                       -1 t-1 (Et-1 /Et ) for x  ,  and t is the change in the share of

employment at high-productivity firms between quarter t and t - 1. This expression shows
that the sign of differential net poaching rate, h   l
                                                 t - t , determines whether poaching rates

will increase or decrease the share of employment at high-productivity firms. The magnitude
of this effect also depends on the share of workers at high productivity firms as well as the
growth in overall employment. See Appendix B for details.
       There are two reasons for the existence of the residual term, ~h .24 First, some workers
may move to or from an employer located in a state outside of our 28-state sample. In
contrast to the results from the previous section and because we aim to implement an exact
decomposition, the counts of hires and separations in this section only include worker flows
where both the origin and destination employers are in one of the 28 states in our sample.
Second, the administrative code that identifies the employer, the SEIN, can change over
time and create a spurious flow of workers between the old and new SEIN. We are able to
flag when these changes occur and omit these flows from the poaching and nonemployment
flows. However, there is no straightforward way to account for this issue when measuring
productivity. Thus, a change in an SEIN could lead to a change in the share of workers at
high productivity firms but have no corresponding flow of workers. In unreported results,
we directly measure flows of workers in and out of the states in our sample and show that
the residual term is primarily attributable to changes in the SEIN over time, not migration
in and out of the sample.
       Regardless of the source, these residuals flows are both small in magnitude and do
  23
     As discussed, this is a relative measure for firms within industries. Using a relative measure within
industries somewhat complicates the interpretation of the accounting decomposition we develop and analyze
below. Later in the analysis we consider the AKM firm premia measure which overcomes these limitations.
  24
     Empirically, we measure the residual term as the difference between the observed changes in employment
at high- and low-productivity firms and the changes predicted by the poaching and nonemployment flows.



                                                    18
not exhibit a clear pattern across the business cycle. Specifically, the average size of the
differential net poaching and nonemployment growth rates are three and five times as large
as the differential residual flows, respectively. Figure A.1 in Appendix A presents a version
of Figure 2 that contains the residual flows as well as the poaching and nonemployment flows
constructed with and without the restriction that both origin and destination employers are
in the 28-state sample. The results indicate that the residual flows do not exhibit any notable
cyclicality across the business cycle and the differential net poaching and nonemployment
growth rates that exclude workers moving in and out of our 28-state sample are very similar
(in levels and movements across time) to the results from Figure 2. We infer that this residual
term is not important for the main results discussed in this section.
      Figure 3 shows the time series of the main components of the decomposition in
equation 2 and illustrates how worker reallocation affects the percent of employment
at high-productivity firms.25         Figure 3(a) presents the observed changes in the percent
of employment at high-productivity firms between the current and previous quarters
 h
(t ). Figure 3(b) presents the components of these changes that are attributable to
worker reallocation through poaching flows (~ h ) and nonemployment flows (~h ). During

expansions, worker flows through nonemployment lead to a reduction in the share of workers
at high-productivity firms whereas poaching flows lead to an increase in the share of workers
at high-productivity firms. At the onset of a recession, the rate at which nonemployment
flows contributes to the growth of employment share of low-productivity firms slows.
Indeed, in the Great Recession this change was large enough such that nonemployment flows
briefly contributed positively to the growth of the employment share at high-productivity
firms.     Throughout our sample period, poaching flows always contribute positively to
the growth of employment at high productivity firms, but this largely collapses during
recessions, particularly in the Great Recession. Consistent with our earlier analysis, the
results highlight the staggered nature of the timing of these two effects. The cleansing effect
begins at the onset of a recession where as the sullying effect starts and peaks later on.
 25
      To make the figure more readable, we present the results in percentage point terms.




                                                     19
         Figure 3: Changes in Percent of Employment at High-Productivity Firms
                                                                                (a) Observed Changes



                                          .3
                     Change in employment (percentage points)
                   -.1         0         .1          .2




                                                                 2000               2005             2010          2015


                                                                        (b) Contribution of Worker Reallocation
                                                            .2
                   Change in employment (percentage points)
                         -.1        0     -.2   .1




                                                                 2000               2005             2010          2015

                                                                                  Poaching         Nonemployment




Notes : Panel (a) presents the first difference of the percent of employment at high-productivity firms.
Panel (b) presents the change in the percent of employment at high-productivity firms that is attributable
to worker reallocation through poaching and nonemployment flows. Data are seasonally adjusted using
X-12. The shaded regions mark quarters in which there was a recession.




                                                                                             20
4.2       Worker Reallocation and Productivity

We now quantify how changes in the share of workers at high-productivity firms affects an
index of aggregate productivity growth using the productivity differential between the two
groups of firms. Our analysis focuses on a measure of productivity that is the employment-
weighted average of a firm-level measure of productivity, which is measured in logs. Such
accounting indices of productivity have been widely used in the literature to quantify the
contribution of reallocation effects to productivity (e.g., Olley and Pakes, 1996; Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan, 2001; and Melitz and Polanec, 2015). As we discuss in Appendix
A, an aggregate index based on employment-weighted firm-level labor productivity indices
track official statistics from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) quite well.26
       Let, Rt denote the employment-weighted average of the firm-level measure of log revenue
                                    l l    h h           i
per worker in quarter t. Then, Rt = t Rt + t Rt , where Rt denotes the employment-weighted
average of the firm-level measure of log revenue per worker within firm type i in quarter t
    i
and t is the share of employment at firm type i in quarter t.27 An increase in t
                                                                               h
                                                                                 leads to
an increase in Rt but the interpretation of a change in Rt is complicated by the fact that
log revenue per worker is a measure of productivity that is not readily comparable across
industries. Let Pt denote an unobserved measure of productivity that is the weighted average
of a firm-level measure of productivity, which is comparable across industries.
       Our goal is to use the observed measure of log revenue per worker in order to quantify
               h
how changes in t affect Pt . We achieve this goal by making the following two assumptions:
  26
       See also Figure A.1 in Decker et al. (2017). Conceptually, this aggregate index is consistent with
aggregate productivity in a structural model with a single input (labor), constant returns to scale, and
perfect competition in product markets. While these are strong assumptions (although not inconsistent with
job ladder models), as noted such indices track official statistics closely. Much of the literature that focuses
on misallocation specifies curvature in the revenue function so that there is a well-defined size distribution
even in the absence of distortions. Part of the reason for this is that this enables a measure of allocative
efficiency that is relative to a frictionless/distortionless benchmark (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Bartelsman
et al., 2013; and Blackwood et al., forthcoming). In principle, such curvature is not necessary in models with
adjustment frictions such as search and matching frictions. Models with curvature in the revenue function
have the property that it is not optimal to allocate all resources to the most productive firm. While this
implies caution in using weighted average measures of firm-level productivity in quantitative analysis of
models with such curvature, Decker et al. (2020) show that in models with adjustment frictions that this
type of aggregate productivity index tracks structural measures of true productivity well even if there is
curvature in the revenue function.
    27
       While the firm type (high- or low-productivity) is time invariant, the firm-level measures of productivity
                       i
used to construct Rt     are measured in time t.



                                                       21
 A1. Pti (k ) = Rt
                 i                        i
                   (k ) + Ut (k ), where Rt (k ) denotes the employment-weighted average of the
         firm-level measure of log revenue per worker within industry k , firm type i, and quarter
         t; Ut (k ) is an unobserved term that is constant within industry and quarter; and Pti (k )
         is the employment weighted average of the unobserved measure of productivity within
         industry k , firm type i, and quarter t.28

          i
 A2.  cov t       ~t
            (k ), R i
                      (k )                 i
                                = 0, where t (k ) is the share of employment at firm type i within
                                   ~ i (k )  Ri (k ) - (Rl (k ) + Rh (k ))/2, and  denotes the
         industry k and quarter t, R t        t          t         t

         difference between quarter t and t - 1.

Assumption A1 states that, up to an additive term that is constant within industry and
quarter, log revenue per worker is a measure of productivity that is comparable across
industries. Assumption A2 states that the covariance between the share of employment at
high-productivity firms and the dispersion of log revenue per worker does not change over
time. Appendix B presents empirical evidence that supports the plausibility of assumptions
A1 and A2.
       Assumptions A1 and A2 allow us to isolate productivity growth that arises from worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms. By an accounting identity we can
rewrite the unobserved measure of aggregate productivity as an employment-weighted
                                                                                l
average of firm type by industry averages, Pt =                      k   t (k )[t                h
                                                                                  (k )Ptl (k ) + t (k )Pth (k )].
Combining this accounting identity with assumptions A1 and A2 implies the following
expression for this index of aggregate productivity growth,


                Pt = (R    ~ l )h +l R
                      ~h - R         ~ l + h R
                                             ~h +                                        ¯t (k )]
                                                                                  [t (k )P                   (3)
                       t-1   t-1 t t   t   t  t
                                                                              k
                         Worker Reallocation


      ¯t (k )  [P l (k ) + P h (k )]/2. The first term, (R
where P                                                  ~h - R
                                                              ~ l )h , is the component of
                 t          t                             t-1   t-1 t

productivity growth attributable to worker reallocation between high- and low-productivity
firms.29 The remaining terms capture other aspects of productivity growth, which include
productivity growth driven by firm-level innovations unrelated to worker reallocation. See
  28
    Recall that Pti (k ) is a measure of productivity that is directly comparable across industries.
  29
    While our classification of high- and low-productivity firms is based on a within-industry ranking of log
revenue per worker, our worker flows data are not restricted to within-industry job flows.


                                                     22
Appendix B for a details.
       We can further decompose the component of productivity growth attributable to worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms into the components attributable to
poaching, nonemployment, and residuals flows. Specifically, combining equation 2 with the
first term in equation 3, yields,


             ~t
            (R h     ~l    h    ~h     ~l ~h      ~h     ~ l ~h     ~h     ~l     h
                -1 - Rt-1 )t = (Rt-1 - Rt-1 )t + (Rt-1 - Rt-1 )t + (Rt-1 - Rt-1 )~t                 (4)
             Worker Reallocation       Poaching          Nonemployment           Residual


An increase in the share of workers at high-productivity firms increases the index of aggregate
productivity, and the magnitude of the effect is determined by the productivity differential
between high- and low-productivity firms. The analysis in this section uses equation 4 to
decompose productivity growth attributable to worker reallocation (between high- and low-
productivity firms) through poaching and nonemployment flows.
       Figure 4(a) presents the decomposition of productivity growth into components
attributable to poaching and nonemployment flows and shows clear evidence of the
cleansing and sullying effects of recessions.          On average, worker reallocation through
poaching flows contributes 0.1 log points to overall productivity growth each quarter (all
statistics on productivity changes are quarterly and have not been annualized). This is a
substantial contribution to the overall quarterly average rate of productivity growth of 0.33
when aggregating our micro data.30 However, during recessions there is clear evidence of
a sullying effect. In 2006:1 the poaching contribution is 0.13 log points but this declines
to 0.02 by 2009:2. In contrast, worker reallocation through nonemployment tends to be a
drag on productivity growth, on average, decreasing productivity by 0.67 log points each
quarter.31 However, during recessions there is evidence of a cleansing effect since during
those times nonemployment flows yield declines in the employment share of low-productivity
firms. In 2006:1, the nonemployment component is -0.1 log points but increases to 0.08 in
2009:1. The figure illustrates the staggered nature of these effects in which the cleansing
  30
     As discussed in Appendix A, the comparable average quarterly rate using published BLS statistics is
0.43. The aggregate index from our data and from published BLS statistics are highly correlated (0.85).
  31
     This drag on productivity is consistent with job ladder models with search and matching frictions.
Dispersion in productivity is supported by such frictions in equilibrium.



                                                  23
             Figure 4: Decomposition of Growth in Productivity Over the Cycle
                                                            (a) Poaching and Nonemployment Flows



                                      .2
                   Change in productivity (log points)
                      -.1         0   -.2       .1




                                                         2000          2005               2010        2015

                                                                     Poaching         Nonemployment



                                                                    (b) Combined Effect
                                      .2
                   Change in productivity (log points)
                      -.1         0   -.2       .1




                                                         2000          2005               2010        2015

                                                                        Poaching + nonemployment




Notes : Panel (a) presents the components of quarterly productivity growth that are attributable to worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms through poaching and nonemployment flows and
Panel (b) presents the sum of these two components. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-12. The
shaded regions mark quarters in which there was a recession.




                                                                                24
occurs at the outset of the recession­when unemployment rate is rising most rapidly­and
the sullying effect peaks relatively further on into the downturn­which the unemployment
rate is highest. In addition, the sullying effect lingers well into the recovery.
      Figure 4(b) presents the combined effect of worker reallocation through poaching and
nonemployment flows. During expansions, the total effect of worker reallocation through
poaching and nonemployment flows contributes 0.04 log points to overall productivity growth
each quarter. In recessions, this increases to 0.08. While this might suggest that cleansing
effects dominate, these calculations neglect the fact that the sullying effect lingers well into
the recovery. Using an alternative indicator of the cycle, we find that the combined effect
is 0.07 on average for quarters where the unemployment rate is below HP trend and 0.03
on average for quarters where unemployment is above the HP trend. This reversal is driven
by much larger contributions of poaching flows during periods of low unemployment (0.13)
compared to high unemployment (0.09).
      Column 1 of Table 3 summarizes these patterns.32 Here we show results from a set of
regressions where different components of productivity growth are regressed on a cyclical
indicator and a time-trend. We use two alternative cyclical indicators: changes in the
unemployment rate and deviations of the unemployment rate from the HP trend. Panel
B shows that productivity-enhancing reallocation through job-to-job moves is procyclical
using both measures.          Panel C shows that productivity-enhancing reallocation through
worker flows through nonemployment is counter-cyclical using both measures. The net
effect in Panel A, however, does depends on the cyclical indicator. Sullying effects dominate
when cyclicality is measured using deviations from the unemployment rate: this is because
it takes a while for productivity-enhancing reallocation from job-to-job moves to recover
in expansions. In contrast, cleansing effects dominate when cyclicality is measured using
changes in the unemployment rate. Taken together, these results imply that the cleansing
effect peaks earlier in a downturn compared to the collapse of the job ladder that lingers into
the early stages of a recovery. These results also suggest that slow labor market recoveries
will be generally more damaging to productivity growth than V-shaped recoveries as slow
recoveries exhibit an accompanying slow recovery of job-to-job flows.
 32
      We discuss columns 2 and 3 of this table in the next section.


                                                      25
               Table 3: Productivity Growth from Job Flows Over the Cycle

                                                              Productivity Growth
                                                    (1)                  (2)                   (3)
A. Net Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                      0.040                 0.010                0.005
                                                 (0.015)               (0.016)              (0.043)
 Deviated unemployment rate                       -0.024                -0.026               -0.084
                                                 (0.005)               (0.006)              (0.014)

B. Poaching Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                      -0.052                -0.062               -0.225
                                                 (0.010)               (0.009)              (0.029)
 Deviated unemployment rate                       -0.024                -0.021               -0.073
                                                 (0.004)               (0.004)              (0.013)

C. Nonemployment Job Flows
 Change in unemployment rate                      0.092                  0.072                0.230
                                                 (0.009)               (0.010)              (0.026)
 Deviated unemployment rate                       0.000                 -0.005               -0.012
                                                 (0.006)               (0.005)              (0.015)

Definition of Job Ladder
 Firms ranked by                              productivity         firm premium         firm premium
 Firms ranked within                            industry              industry            full sample
  Notes: Each cell presents results from a separate regression estimated on national quarterly data. The
  dependent variable is the growth in productivity or AKM firm fixed premium as noted by the second
  to last row. The independent variables in each regression include a cyclical indicator as well as a linear
  time-trend and a constant, which are not reported. The cyclical indicators considered include the change
  in the unemployment rate and the deviations of unemployment from the Hodrick-Prescott trend. Aside
  from the linear trend, all dependent and independent variables are measured in percentage point units.
  Standard errors are presented in parentheses.




                                                   26
4.3    Robustness to Using the AKM Firm Premium

We assess the robustness of our results to using an alternative measure of firm performance:
the AKM firm premium. While the revenue per worker measure of productivity has many
strengths, it is not easily comparable across sectors and may partially reflect the sorting of
workers across firms in addition to innate differences in firm productivity. The AKM firm
premium is not subject to these same limitations. Furthermore, canonical models suggest
that more productive firms offer higher wages and therefore the AKM firm premium ought to
be closely related to innate differences in firm productivity both within and across industries.
   Figure 5 decomposes growth in the aggregate firm premium attributable to worker
reallocation across the firm premium ladder through poaching and nonemployment flows.
Firms are re-ranked into high- and low-premium firms and the worker flows (i.e., ~ h and ~h )
                                                                                   t      t
                                                 ~ h -R
and the differentials in the firm premium (i.e., R     ~ l ) are re-calculated to reflect the new
                                                   t-1   t-1

rankings and alternative measure of firm performance. Figure 5(a) follows the methodology
described in equation 4 but uses the AKM firm premium as the measure of firm performance
instead of revenue per worker. Importantly, firms are ranked within 4-digit NAICS industry
codes. Unlike the gross output per worker measure, the AKM firm premium is directly
comparable across industries. Thus, Figure 5(b) also uses the methodology described in
equation 4 but, in addition to using the AKM firm effect as the measure of firm performance,
treats all firms as being part of the same industry. In effect, Figure 5(b) ranks firms in the
pooled sample and accounts for worker reallocation both within and across industries.
   Regardless of the methodology used, both series in Figure 5 present clear evidence of
the cleansing and sullying effects that were apparent in worker reallocation across the firm
productivity ladder using revenue per worker. For the within-industry rankings, we find that,
on average, poaching flows to higher-paying firms lead to an increase in firm premium by 0.09
log points per quarter whereas nonemployment flows lead to a 0.09 log point decrease in the
firm premium per quarter. These estimates are quite similar qualitatively and quantitatively
to those found in Figuure 4(a), which uses revenue per worker to measure productivity
differences within industries. We also find the cyclical patterns of these components are very
similar to those using the direct measure of productivity. Figure 5(b) presents estimates



                                               27
     Figure 5: Decomposition of Growth in the AKM Firm Premium Over the Cycle
                                                                (a) Firms are Ranked within Industry



                                      .2
                   Change in firm premium (log points)
                      -.1           0 -.2      .1




                                                         2000              2005             2010          2015

                                                                        Poaching          Nonemployment



                                                          (b) Firms are Ranked within the Full Sample
                                      .5
                   Change in firm premium (log points)
                      -.25          0 -.5     .25




                                                         2000              2005             2010          2015

                                                                        Poaching          Nonemployment




Notes : This figure presents the components of the growth in the average AKM firm premium that
are attributable to worker reallocation between high- and low-premium firms through poaching and
nonemployment flows. Firms are ranked based on their AKM firm premiums. In panel (a) firms are
ranked within their 4-digit NAICS industry codes. In panel (b) firms are ranked within the full sample.
Data are seasonally adjusted using X-12. The shaded regions mark quarters in which there was a recession.




                                                                                   28
based on ranking firms in the pooled sample (not within industry) and finds that, on average,
poaching flows contribute 0.3 log points to the growth in the AKM firm premium each quarter
whereas nonemployment flows lead a decline by 0.4 log points per quarter. The estimates
are about three times as large as those for the within industry based tabulations. While
much larger in magnitude, the qualitative patterns are very similar.
    Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 quantify the cyclicality of the contributions to the AKM firm
premium. As in the column 1, the cleansing contribution outweighs the sullying contribution
in response to an increase in the unemployment rate while the opposite is true in response
to a positive deviation of the unemployment rate from trend. These findings hold regardless
of whether we rank firms within industries (column 2) or in the pooled sample (column
3). Since the AKM firm premium abstracts from worker heterogeneity, this suggests our
main results by firm productivity are not being driven by variation in the patterns of
sorting of heterogeneous workers across heterogeneous firms over the cycle. The larger
coefficients in column 3 relative to column 2 suggest that cleansing and sullying effects are
larger in magnitude when inter-industry differentials are accounted for but that the relative
contribution of these effects on productivity growth are qualitatively similar.



5     Implications for Earnings
Whereas Section 4 focused on implications for productivity growth, the current section asks
if moving up the firm productivity ladder benefits workers in the form of higher earnings.
We use the same methodology described in equation 4, but we replace the productivity
               ~t
differentials, R h     ~l
                  -1 - Rt-1 , with earnings differentials. We measure firm-level earnings in two

ways: (i) average log earnings of all workers, and (ii) the AKM firm fixed effect. The earnings
differential is the difference between the employment-weighted average of earnings at high-
and low-productivity firms. Consistent with our core analysis, we deviate earnings from the
industry average when calculating the differentials. Note that the exercise is distinct from
the analysis discussed in Section 4.3, since we are investigating the earnings implications of
worker flows across firms ranked by the revenue per worker measure of productivity.
    Figure 6 shows that worker reallocation up the firm productivity ladder through poaching


                                              29
Figure 6: Earnings Growth from Worker Reallocation up the Firm Productivity Ladder
                                                               (a) Average Log Earnings




                                     .1
                  Change in earnings (log points)
                          0             .05
                                     -.05




                                                        2000        2005            2010           2015

                                                                  Poaching         Nonemployment



                                                               (b) AKM Firm Premium
                                     .1
                  Change in firm premium (log points)
                           0         -.05.05




                                                        2000        2005            2010           2015

                                                                  Poaching         Nonemployment




Notes : The figure shows the components of earnings growth that attributable to worker reallocation
between high- and low-productivity firms through poaching and nonemployment flows. Panel (a) uses
the differences between the average log earnings of workers at high- and low-productivity firms in order
to quantify the implications of changes in the share of workers at high-productivity firms whereas panel
(b) uses the AKM firm premium. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-12. The shaded regions mark
quarters in which there was a recession.



                                                                             30
and nonemployment flows has meaningful implications for the earnings of workers. Figures
6(a) and 6(b) present results in which the earnings differentials are measured with average
log earnings and the AKM firm premium, respectively. The results in the two figures are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar. Job-to-job transitions add an average of 0.05 log
points to average earnings in any given quarter. The earnings contribution of job-to-job flows
is lower during recessions. During the 2007-2009 recession, the earnings contribution of job-
to-job flows fell to a series low of 0.01. The contribution of nonemployment transitions to
earnings growth is in the opposite direction and similar in magnitude to the contribution of
job-to-job flows.33 In the average quarter, worker movements into and from nonemployment
subtract an average of 0.03 log points from earnings. This negative effect of nonemployment
transitions is less present during recessions. During the 2001 recession, the contribution of
nonemployment transitions is close to zero. During the 2007-2009 recession, the contribution
of nonemployment transitions to earnings growth is briefly positive.
       Comparing these results to Figure 4, we can draw conclusions about the extent to which
the gains from productivity-enhancing reallocation are realized by workers. The earnings
and productivity implications of employment transitions have similar signs, with job-to-
job transitions providing gains, while nonemployment transitions subtract from each. The
magnitudes, however, differ. The proportionate changes in earnings are roughly half the
magnitude of the analogous changes in productivity. This is suggestive of incomplete pass-
through of the gains in revenue productivity from worker flows into earnings.34



6        Conclusion
Consistent with the existing literature on firm heterogeneity, we find evidence of large
differences in productivity across firms within the same industry. We also find that more
  33
     Hahn, Hyatt, and Janicki (2021) consider the implications of employment transitions for earnings growth
without considering productivity. They report that job-to-job and nonemployment transitions move in
opposite directions and are roughly similar in magnitude, and follow opposite cyclical patterns.
  34
     If revenue per worker and the AKM firm premium produced the exact same ranking then we would
expect Figure 5(a) and Figure 6(b) to be identical, which they are not. The difference between the two
results is partly attributable to the fact that the difference in the average AKM firm premium between high-
and low-premium firms (as used in Figure 5(a)) is greater than the difference in the average AKM firm
premium between high- and low-productivity firms (Figure 6(b)).



                                                    31
productive firms in the same industry are more likely to grow and less productive firms more
likely to contract and exit. The dispersion of productivity across firms is large in magnitude
contributing to a high pace of reallocation of workers across firms. Using a decomposition
of net job flows into those accounted for by job-to-job flows and those accounted for net
flows from nonemployment, we find that much of the overall reallocation of employment
from less productive to more productive firms is accounted for by job-to-job flows. The pace
at which workers move up the productivity job ladder is highly procyclical. The collapse of
the productivity job ladder is consistent with a sullying effect of recessions. In recessions,
we find that the reallocation of workers away from less productive firms via nonemployment
flows increases. This occurs through a spike in separations to nonemployment along with a
decline in hires from nonemployment at low productivity firms. Thus, we also find evidence
that this component of reallocation is consistent with a cleansing effect of recessions.
   The timing of the cleansing and sullying effects differs across stages of the cycle. The
cleansing effect peaks relatively early in a downturn coincident with the relatively early spike
in separations. The sullying effect peaks later in a downturn but lingers into the early stages
of a recovery when unemployment is falling but remains well above trend.
   Our findings are robust to using a direct measure of productivity based on relative
differences in revenue per worker across firms within the same industry and an alternative
measure of firm performance based on using the AKM firm premium. Since the AKM
firm premium abstracts from worker heterogeneity, this robustness suggests our results are
not being driven by variation in the patterns of sorting of heterogeneous workers across
heterogeneous firms over the cycle. This is not to suggest that the latter is unimportant
but rather that there may be additional effects of cleansing and sullying from sorting above
and beyond those we have quantified. We recognize that any conclusions about the role of
sorting over the cycle for productivity fluctuations are tentative at best. Further theoretical
and empirical work is needed in this area.




                                              32
References
 [1] Abowd, John, Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin McKinney, Marc
     Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. 2009. "The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
     Quarterly Workforce Indicators." In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, 68,
     Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Timothy Dunne, J.Bradford Jensen and Mark J. Roberts,
     149-230. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 [2] Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
     Wage Firms." Econometrica 67(2): 251-333.
 [3] Baley, Isaac, Ana Figueiredo, and Robert Ulbricht. 2020. "Mismatch Cycles." Unpublished
     draft, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
 [4] Barlevy, Gadi. 2002. "The Sullying Effect of Recessions." Review of Economic Studies 69(1):
     65-96.
 [5] Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. "Cross Country Differences
     in Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency." American Economic Review 103(1): 305-
     334.
 [6] Bertheau, Antoine, Henning Bunzel, Rune Vejlin. 2020. "Employment Reallocation over the
     Business Cycle: Evidence from Danish Data." IZA Discussion Paper # 13681.
 [7] Blackwood, Glenn, Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf. 2020
     (forthcoming). "Macro and Micro Dynamics of Productivity: From Devilish Details to
     Insights." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
 [8] Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
     Unemployment." International Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.
 [9] Caballero, Ricardo J., and Mohamad L. Hammour. 1994. "The cleansing effect of recessions."
     The American Economic Review, pp.1350-1368.
[10] Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2016. "Bargaining, sorting, and the gender
     wage gap: Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women." The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 131(2), pp.633-686.
[11] Crane, Leland, Henry Hyatt, and Seth Murray. 2020. "Cyclical Labor Market Sorting."
     Unpublished draft, U.S. Census Bureau.
[12] Davis, Steven and John Haltiwanger. 1990. "Gross job creation and destruction:
     Microeconomic evidence and macroeconomic implications." NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
     5, pp.123-168.
[13] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996) Job Creation and Destruction,
     Cambridge: MIT Press.
[14] Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2017. "Declining
     dynamism, allocative efficiency, and the productivity slowdown." American Economic Review,
     107(5), pp.322-26.
[15] Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Javier Miranda, and Ron Jarmin. 2020. "Changes in
     Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness" American Economic
     Review 110(12): 3952-90.
[16] Fernald, John. 2014. "A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity."
     Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19.

                                               33
[17] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. "Aggregate Productivity Growth:
     Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence." In New Developments in Productivity Analysis, 63,
     Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Charles Hulten, Edwin Dean, and Michael Harper, 303-372.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[18] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
     Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?" American Economic Review 98(1):
     394-425.
[19] Guimar~aes, Paulo, and Pedro Portugal. 2010. "A simple feasible procedure to fit models with
     high-dimensional fixed effects." The Stata Journal, 10(4): 628-649.
[20] Hahn, Joyce, Henry Hyatt, and Hubert Janicki. 2021. "Job Ladders and Growth in Earnings,
     Hours, and Wages." European Economic Review 133: 103654.
[21] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Lisa Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer. 2018. "Cyclical Job
     Ladders by Firm Size and Firm Wage." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10(2):
     52-85.
[22] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer. 2018. "Who Moves Up the Job Ladder?"
     Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1): S301-S336.
[23] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, Robert Kulick, and Javier Miranda. 2017. "High Growth
     Young Firms: Contribution to Job, Output, and Productivity Growth." In: Measuring
     Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, 75, Studies in Income and
     Wealth, ed. John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press: 11-62.
[24] Haltiwanger, John, Javier Miranda, and Ron Jarmin. 2013. "Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
     Large versus Young." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 347-361.
[25] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
     and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.
[26] Lise, Jeremy, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2017. "The Macrodynamics of Sorting between Workers
     and Firms." American Economic Review 107(4): 1104-1135.
[27] Melitz, Marc, and Saso Polanec. 2015. "Dynamic Olley-Pakes productivity decomposition with
     entry and exit." The RAND Journal of Economics 46(2): 362-375.
[28] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2013. "Stochastic Search Equilibrium." Review
     of Economic Studies 80(4): 1545-1581.
[29] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2016. "Did the job ladder fail after the Great
     Recession?" Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1), pp.S55-S93.
[30] Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides. 1994. "Job Creation and Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment." Review of Economic Studies 61: 397-415.
[31] Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity                  in   the
     Telecommunications Equipment Industry." Econometrica 64(6): 1263-1297.
[32] Shumpeter, Peter. 1939. Business Cycles New York: McGraw-Hill.
[33] Syverson, Chad. 2004. "Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example." Journal
     of Political Economy 112(6): 1181-1222.
[34] Syverson, Chad. 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature
     49(2): 326-365.

                                               34
Appendix A                   Assessing Measurement Issues
A.1        Worker Flows
There is a residual term, ~h t , in equation 2. Figure A.1 plots this residual and illustrates
that it is smaller in magnitude than the poaching and nonemployment flows and does not
exhibit clear a cyclical pattern. One possible explanation for this residual is that the flows
in this section only include cases in which both the origin and destination firms are located
in our 28-state sample. In unreported results, we directly measure the out-of-sample worker
flows and find that they are not the source of the residual term. To provide evidence that
out-of-sample worker flows are not affecting our results, Figure A.1 also plots the poaching
and nonemployment flows that include all hires into firms in our sample (including hires from
firms located in states outside of our sample) and all separations from firms in our sample
(including separations to firms located in states outside of our sample). The patterns are
quite similar regardless of whether out-of-sample flows are included, suggesting the migration
in and out of our 28-state sample is unlikely to affect our main results.

A.2        Productivity
To put our numbers in perspective we compare them to an aggregate measure of productivity
growth calculated from the RE-LBD. We calculate aggregate productivity growth by limiting
the sample of firms to those that appear in our sample and then calculating the log difference
between total revenue per worker within each 4-digit NAICS industry code. Aggregate
productivity growth for this purpose is measured as the employment-weighted average
of these industry-level growth rates.35 Figure A.2 compares our measure of productivity
growth to other widely used measures from the BLS and the BEA. The measure labeled
BLS(industry) is the closest conceptually to our measure. It is an employment-weighted
average of industry-level (4-digit NAICS) labor productivity growth rates. The industry-
level growth rate is based on the growth rate in what BLS calls sectoral output per
worker. Sectoral output is gross output less intrasectoral transactions. At the 4-digit level
the adjustment for intrasectoral transctions is modest. The mean of the RE-LBD based
measure is 1.3 log points while the mean of the BLS(industry) measure is 1.7 log points.
The correlation of these two series is 0.85.
    The BLS(sector) and BEA measures are growth rates of value added per worker for the
private, non-farm business sector. These measures are distinct conceptually from the RE-
LBD and BLS(industry) measures. The latter only capture within-industry contributions to
aggregate productivity growth while the value-added measures not only use a conceptually
different output measure but also reflect shifts in employment from low- to high-productivity
industries. Still these alternative measures exhibit similar patterns to the RE-LBD and
BLS(industry) measures. Interestingly, the BLS(sector) average growth rate is 2 log points
which is larger than the BLS(industry) measure at 1.7 log points. While appropriate caution
is needed to compare these measures given conceptual differences, this pattern is consistent
with between industry effects contributing positively to aggregate productivity growth.
 35
      The employment used for weighting is the average of employment in the current and previous year.



                                                   A-1
Figure A.1: Differential Flows between High and Low Productivity Firms with Residual
                 1          .5
   Differential growth rate
               0 -.5
                 -1




                                 2000                        2005              2010                      2015

                                    Poaching (full sample)                 Nonemployment (full sample)
                                    Poaching (within-state sample)         Nonemployment (within-state sample)
                                    Residual (within-state sample)



Notes : Differential growth rates are the difference in quarterly employment growth rates between high-
and low-productivity firms. Results are presented separately for poaching, nonemployment, and residual
flows. The poaching and nonemployment flows depicted by the dashed lines are based on the full sample.
The poaching and nonemployment flows depicted by the solid lines are based on a sample that is limited to
worker flows in which both the origin and destination employers are in one of the 28 states in our sample.
The residual growth rate is the difference between the observed changes in the share of employment at
high- and low-productivity firms and what is predicted by the poaching and nonemployment flows. Data
are seasonally adjusted using X-12.




                                                                     A-2
                                         Figure A.2: Aggregate Productivity Growth from Alternative Sources
                      4
   Change in productivity (log points)
    -2          0     -4       2




                                               2000                  2005                2010                 2015

                                                                 RE-LBD               BLS(industry)
                                                                 BLS(sector)          BEA



Notes : This figure presents annual aggregate productivity growth based on four different sources that
include: (1) confidential data from the RE-LBD that characterizes the growth of all firms in our data, (2)
publicly available data from the BLS based on industry-level productivity growth, (3) publicly available
data from the BLS based on sector-level productivity growth, and (4) publicly available data on industry-
level measures of value added from the BEA. To estimate aggregate productivity growth from the RE-
LBD, we follow a methodology similar to the BLS and calculate the log difference in total revenue per total
number of workers between the current and subsequent year for each industry, then take the employment
weighted average across industries.




                                                                            A-3
    Figure A.3 compares aggregate productivity growth to the growth attributable to worker
reallocation. Data in the RE-LBD are reported at an annual frequency so we sum the
quarterly components of productivity growth from our decomposition within each calendar
year. Across all years in the sample, average aggregate productivity growth is 1.3 log points
per year and the components attributable to poaching and nonemployment flows contribute,
on average, 0.4 and -0.3 log points per year, respectively. Thus, at the annual frequency
our decomposition captures a quantitatively important aspect of productivity growth. The
aggregate series exhibit a relatively larger decline in productivity growth during recessions.
For example, between 2007 and 2009 annual productivity growth declined by 4.8 log points.
In contrast, the decline in productivity growth attributable to poaching flows can only
account for 0.3 log points. However, part of the movements in aggregate productivity reflect
measurement error due to cyclical changes in factor utilization.
    One concern with our measure of productivity is that it does not account for intertemporal
variation in factor utilization. During a recession a firm may decide to cut back on production
(possibly by reducing workers' hours or worker intensity), which could lead to a decline in
log revenue per worker without any real changes in productivity. This issue could affect both
our decomposition results and the our aggregate measure of productivity growth.
    Intertemporal variation in factor utilization does not appear to meaningfully affect the
decomposition results. This is because, to the extent that log revenue per worker is subject
to this concern, it affects high- and low-productivity firms to an equal extent. Figure A.4(a)
       ~t
plots, R h     ~l
          -1 - Rt-1 , which is the productivity differential between high- and low-productivity
firms. The productivity differential is orders of magnitudes larger than the short-term
variation, which may be driven by intertemporal variation in factor utilization. To illustrate
that the short-term variation in these differentials does not affect the decomposition exercise,
we construct a smoothed series by fitting a linear time trend to the productivity differentials.
We then use this smoothed series to implement the productivity growth decomposition.
Figure A.4(b) presents the results and shows that the decomposition using the actual and
smoothed productivity series yield essentially the same results. To quantify this we regress
the component of productivity growth attributable to poaching flows using the observed
productivity differentials on the series using the smoothed differentials. The R-squared is
0.99. The analogous R-squared for the nonemployment flows is 0.999.
    Variation in factor utilization over the business cycle is a greater issue for our measure
of aggregate productivity growth. Fernald (2014) produces a series of growth in business
sector TFP that adjusts for factor utilization. Figure A.5(a) presents both the adjusted and
unadjusted growth rates from these data. The unadjusted series exhibit a larger decline
in TFP during recessions relative to the adjusted series. To get a sense of how sensitive
our measure of productivity growth is to changes in factor utilization, we use the difference
between the unadjusted and adjusted series from Fernald (2004) to adjust for variation in
factor utilization.36 Figure A.5(b) compares the productivity growth attributable to worker
reallocation to the adjusted and unadjusted measures of aggregate productivity growth.

  36
    Specifically, we calculate the difference between the adjusted and unadjusted growth rates in 2001 and
2008. We adjust our growth rate by adding these differences to the growth rates in 2001 and 2008. Because
our data also exhibit a large decline in 2009, we also add the 2008 difference from the Fernald (2014) series
to the 2009 growth rate.


                                                    A-4
                                           Figure A.3: Annual Productivity Growth from Worker Reallocation
                        1




                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                               Change in aggregate productivity (log points)
     Change in productivity (log points)




                                                                                                                                                2
                               .5




                                                                                                                                 0
          0




                                                                                                                    -2
                        -.5




                                                                                                               -4
                                                 2000               2005             2010               2015

                                                         Poaching                       Nonemployment
                                                         Poaching+nonemployment         Aggregate



Notes : The figure presents the components of annual productivity growth that are attributable to worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms through poaching and nonemployment flows as
well as the sum of these two components. Annual productivity growth is the sum of the quarterly growth
within a calendar year for these components. The figure also presents a measure of aggregate productivity
growth that is calculated from the RE-LBD micro data.




                                                                           A-5
       Figure A.4: Decomposition and Intertemporal Variation in Factor Utilization
                                                                                        (a) Productivity Differential




                                                                      .95
                   High-low differential in productivity (log points)
                           .8             .85   .75       .9




                                                                            2000                 2005            2010              2015


                                                                                      (b) Productivity Decomposition
                                               .2
                   Change in productivity (log points)
                             0              .1 -.1




                                                                            2000                 2005            2010              2015

                                                                                   Poaching                    Nonemployment
                                                                                   Poaching (smoothed)         Nonemployment (smoothed)




Notes : Panel (a) plots the difference between the average productivity at high- and low-productivity
firms. Panel (b) presents the components of productivity growth that attributable to worker reallocation
between high- and low-productivity firms through poaching and nonemployment flows. The results in
Panel (b) implement the decomposition using both the observed productivity differentials (depicted in
Panel (a)) as well as the productivity differentials from a smoothed series generated by fitting the observed
productivity differentials with a linear time trend. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-12.



                                                                                                         A-6
     Figure A.5: Aggregate Productivity Growth with Factor Utilization Adjustment
                                                         (a) Aggregate Productivity Growth from Fernald (2014)




                                      3      2
                    Change in TFP (log points)
                   -1     0         1 -2




                                                              2000                2005                   2010                                 2015

                                                                                Unadjusted              Adjusted



                                               (b) Productivity Decomposition with Utilization Adjustment
                                      1




                                                                                                                                    Change in aggregate productivity (log points)
                                                                                                                                                                              4
                   Change in productivity (log points)




                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                       0
                           0




                                                                                                                                             -2
                                      -.5




                                                                                                                                   -4




                                                             2000               2005                2010                    2015

                                                                    Poaching             Nonemployment
                                                                    Aggregate            Aggregate (utilization adjusted)




Notes : Panel (a) presents data from Fernald (2014) on the growth in business sector total factor
productivity (TFP) as well as a measure that implements an adjustment for variation in factor utilization.
Panel (b) presents the annual productivity growth from worker reallocation through poaching and
nonemployment flows as well as aggregate productivity growth. In addition, Panel (b) includes a series
that adjusts aggregate productivity growth using the difference between the unadjusted and adjusted
measures of growth from Fernald (2014).



                                                                                       A-7
Appendix B              Decomposition Methodology
B.1     Employment
Equation 2 is an exact accounting identity. To see why this equation holds, begin by assuming
that there is a closed system in which all changes in employment are accounted for by hires
and separations. This assumption implies that,

                                 Eti
                                       = i   i
                                         t + t for i  {h, l }                          (B.1)
                                 Eti-1

Then we can write,

                                Eth Eth
                         h
                         t    =       - -1
                                Et       Et-1
                                E Et-1 - Eth
                                   h
                                                  -1 Et
                              = t
                                       Et Et-1
                                E Eth - Eth
                                   l
                                                    -1 Et
                                                          l
                              = t-1
                                           Et Et-1                                     (B.2)
                                       h
                                  Et         Etl h l          Et-1
                              =      h
                                          -    l
                                                     t-1 t-1
                                  Et-1       Et-1              Et
                                                                  Et-1
                              = h          l     h     l h
                                    t - t + t - t t-1 t-1
                                                             l
                                                                   Et
                                ~ h
                              = t + t  ~ h


where
                                               Et-1
                         ~h = (xh - xl )t
                         x              h    l
                                          -1 t-1 (  ) for x  ,                     (B.3)
                                                Et
In practice, the system is not closed and hires and separations do not perfectly predict
changes in employment. Thus, define the residual term as ~h     h   ~ h ~h
                                                           t = t - (t + t ).


B.2     Productivity
Assumptions A1 and A2 allow us to isolate the component of productivity growth that is
attributable to changes in the share of workers at high-productivity firms. First, note that
using an accounting identity, we can rewrite the unobserved measure of productivity as,

                          Pt =       t (k )Pt (k )
                                 k
                                                                                       (B.4)
                                            l
                             =       t (k )[t (k )Ptl (k ) + t
                                                             h
                                                               (k )Pth (k )]
                                 k




                                                B-1
Then by assumption A1,
                      l      l        h      h
    Pt =       t (k )[t (k )Rt (k ) + t (k )Rt (k ) + Ut (k )]
           k

       =              l
               t (k )[t     ~t
                        (k )R l        h
                                (k ) + t     ~t
                                         (k )R h        ¯t (k )]
                                                 (k ) + P
                                                                                                                             (B.5)
           k

       =              ¯t (k )] +
               [t (k )P                                   i
                                                   [t (k )t (k )]              ~t
                                                                        [t (k )R i
                                                                                   (k )] +              i
                                                                                                  [cov (t       ~t
                                                                                                          (k ), R i
                                                                                                                    (k ))]
           k                          i{l,h}   k                    k                        k

              i       ~ i (k ))           i     ~i                  i                ~i           ¯
where cov (t    (k ), R t        k [t (k )t (k )Rt (k )] - k [t (k )t (k )] k [t (k )Rt (k )] and Pt (k ) 
   l         h
[Pt (k ) + Pt (k )]/2. Equation B.5 in combination with assumption A2 allows to rewrite
productivity growth as,

               Pt =                           ¯t (k )] +
                                       [t (k )P                                    i
                                                                            [t (k )t (k )]               ~ i (k )]
                                                                                                  [t (k )R t
                                  k                        i{l,h}       k                    k


                     =                        ¯t (k )] +
                                       [t (k )P                     i ~i
                                                                    t Rt
                                  k                        i{l,h}
                                                                                                                             (B.6)
                     =                ~t
                                      R i    i   i ~i
                                          -1 t + t Rt + 
                                                                                       ¯t (k )]
                                                                                [t (k )P
                         i{l,h}                                             k

                        ~h - R
                     = (R    ~ l )h + l R
                                        ~ l + h R
                                                ~h +                                                     ¯t (k )]
                                                                                                  [t (k )P
                         t-1   t-1    t   t   t  t
                                                                                             k

The first term is the component of productivity growth that is attributable to worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms.

B.3      Empirical Assessment of Assumptions
Assumption A1 states that log revenue per worker is a valid measure of productivity that is
comparable across industries up to an additive constant. Section 2.1 provides some evidence
to support this assumption by showing that log revenue per worker deviated from the industry
average is predictive of employment growth and survival. To further assess the plausibility
of this assumption we plot the average industry-deviated log revenue per worker, R    ~ i (k ), for
each two-digit NAICS industry code. The results, presented in Figure B.1, illustrate that
there are no outliers in terms of the dispersion of log revenue per worker within industries.
The industry with the least dispersion in productivity is Health Care and Social Assistance
(NAICS=62) and the difference between the average log revenue per work at high- and low-
productivity firms is 76 log points. The industry with the most dispersion in log revenue
per worker is Finance and Insurance (NAICS=52) and the difference between the average
log revenue per work at high- and low-productivity firms is 145 log points. While there are
clearly differences in the dispersion of log revenue per worker within different industries, the
lack of outliers lend some support to the plausibility of assumption A1.
    Assumption A2 states that the covariance between the share of employment at high-
productivity firms and the dispersion of log revenue per worker does not change over time.

                                                               B-2
                            Figure B.1: Log Revenue per Worker Deviated from Industry Average
   Log revenue per worker




                            62 61 49 45 44 33 72 32 81 23 55 54 22 31 56 53 11 42 48 21 51 71 52




                                                    Two-digit NAICS industry code

                                                High productivity      Low productivity


Notes : This figure presents the average value of log revenue per worker deviated from the average at the
four-digit NAICS industry code for each two-digit NAICS industry code.




                                                               B-3
                                         Figure B.2: Magnitude of Change in Covariance Term
   Change in productivity (log points)




                                             Poaching           Nonemployment           Covariance


Notes : This figure presents the components of productivity growth that attributable to worker
reallocation between high- and low-productivity firms through poaching and nonemployment flows as
well as the covariance term,  cov t i       ~t
                                      (k ), R i
                                                (k ) . Assumption A2 states that the covariance term is
zero. This term is numerically equivalent for high- and low-productivity firms. Data are seasonally
adjusted using X-12.




                                                                B-4
This assumption could be violated if industries that experience an increase in productivity
growth also experience an increase in the dispersion of productivity across firms. While this
is possible, we argue that any violation of this assumption is not quantiatively important.
The term  cov t    i       ~t
                     (k ), R i
                               (k ) would show up on the right-hand-side of equation 3 if it were
nonzero and we can show that the term is substantially smaller than the components of
productivity growth that are attributable to worker reallocation. Specifically, the average
value of the absolute value of the productivity growth attributable to worker reallocation
through poaching and nonemployment flows is nine and six times larger than the average
value of the absolute value of the covariance term, respectively. Figure B.2 makes this
same point in more detail by plotting the covariance term as well as the components of
worker reallocation through poaching and nonemployment flows over time. Taken together,
assumption A2 appears to be a reasonable assumption.




                                              B-5
