                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EXPERIENCES AND COPING STRATEGIES OF COLLEGE STUDENTS DURING
                         THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                        Christine Logel
                                       Philip Oreopoulos
                                       Uros Petronijevic

                                      Working Paper 28803
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28803


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




This project would not have been possible without the enthusiastic support of the Department of
Economics at the University of Toronto and the Department of Economics at York University,
especially the instructors of first-year economics courses. We thank James Lahey for this tireless
commitment to designing the project's well-run website and online exercises, as well as for his
help with organizing and extracting the data. Sophie Fiala and Nicolas Perreault provided
outstanding research assistance. We are also grateful to the Social Science Research Council of
Canada (Insight Grant #435-2018-0268 and Insight Development Grant # 430-2017-00779), the
Jamal Poverty Action Lab, and the University of Toronto's Learning and Education
Advancement Fund for financial support. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christine Logel, Philip Oreopoulos, and Uros Petronijevic. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experiences and Coping Strategies of College Students During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Christine Logel, Philip Oreopoulos, and Uros Petronijevic
NBER Working Paper No. 28803
May 2021
JEL No. I23,I31,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

An emerging literature documents the many challenges faced by college students during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Little is known, however, about how students responded to the adversity.
Focusing on two large Canadian universities, we provide some of the first evidence on the coping
strategies students reported and the relationships between their endorsement of specific coping
strategies and their subsequent well-being. Students focused on compensating for a lack of
structure by creating new routines, maintaining social connections, and trying new activities.
Conditional on baseline problems indexes, students who initially endorsed social connectedness
as a strategy score significantly higher on a comprehensive well-being index five to twelve weeks
later.

Christine Logel                                 Uros Petronijevic
Renison University College                      York University
240 Westmount Road North                        Department of Economics
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G4                            Vari Hall
Canada                                          4700 Keele Street
clogel@uwaterloo.ca                             Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
                                                CANADA
Philip Oreopoulos                               upetroni@yorku.ca
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca




A appendices is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28803
I. Introduction

The disruptive effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have been felt worldwide across many

demographics, sectors, and institutions. College students, for example, have been affected by

school closures, shifts to online learning, and the elimination of social and networking

opportunities. Early studies suggest that the associated lack of routine and isolation have given rise

to increasing mental health problems among an already vulnerable population (Anderson, 2020;

Hamza, Ewing, Heath, and Goldstein 2020). Several recent studies convincingly document the

wide-ranging effects of the pandemic on college students. Surveying students at Arizona State

University, Aucejo, French, Araya, and Zafar (2020) show that the pandemic caused delays in

degree progress, lost wages and employment opportunities, and diminished students' post-

graduation labor market expectations. Low-income students were particularly affected, a finding

echoed in Rodriguez-Planas (2020), who further demonstrates low-income students in the City

University of New York system were more likely to experience stress and challenges with online

learning. Surveying students across seven U.S. universities, Browning et al. (2021) find that many

students felt a lack of motivation, anxiety, stress, and isolation.

       Indeed, the emerging literature paints a bleak picture of college students' experiences

during the COVID-19 pandemic. Yet, despite the rapid emergence of these important studies, we

still know little about how college students responded to the adversity. That is, what coping

strategies did they employ during the pandemic, and which strategies were effective at improving

outcomes? Given the widespread negative effects of the pandemic on students, there is a clear need

for evidence on best coping practices during the pandemic to help colleges better support their

students. This paper aims to provide some of that evidence.




                                                   1
        We proceeded in two parts. Study 1 was an open-ended survey of over 500 students at the

University of Toronto (UofT) in Toronto, Canada. The survey was conducted approximately four

weeks after the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a pandemic, at the end of participants'

winter semester in 2020. Students were asked about the challenges they faced during the early

stages of the pandemic and the strategies they used to overcome them, providing answers in open

text boxes. We coded their responses to identify common challenges and coping strategies. Study

2, conducted during the 2020 summer semester at UofT and at York University in Toronto, used

the results of that coding to inform the design of a set of Likert scale survey items that could

quantify the degree to which students faced specific challenges and the degree to which they

thought certain coping strategies would be most helpful. Administered approximately nine weeks

after the WHO's pandemic declaration, 1,600 students completed this baseline survey. Between

fourteen to twenty-one weeks after the pandemic declaration (depending on when summer courses

concluded), students completed a follow up survey including Likert scale items measuring their

well-being on dimensions such as satisfaction with life and university, social connections, mental

and physical health, and specific concerns or disruptions caused by the pandemic.1

        In Study 1, coding of students' open-ended responses revealed that many struggled with

establishing a new routine, felt lethargic or lacked motivation, and faced logistical problems with

online learning. Students also felt lonely, depressed, and expressed financial concerns. Importantly

for the present research, coding also revealed that many students used proactive and creative

coping strategies, such as trying to establish a new daily routine in the absence of their usual

structure, focusing on physical exercise, cooking and eating well. The most common coping


1
  Study 2 measures were included in a larger randomized controlled trial testing the effects of providing information
about coping strategies to students. Half of students were provided with additional information about how previous
students had coped (information condition) and half were not (no-information condition). There were no effects of the
informational manipulation on any of the survey items reported in the present study.

                                                         2
strategy, used by many students, was trying to maintain social or group activity remotely or within

their household.

       In Study 2, commencing about five weeks later in May 2020, half of all students reported

being worried about paying tuition, and, on average, students reported feeling nervous or anxious,

having uncontrollable worry, and feeling depressed between eight to ten days in the last month.

Many students also identified a lack of motivation, missing family and friends, and missing a

predictable routine as concerns heading into the semester. These problems are not without

consequence on student well-being: an index combining all reported problems significantly and

negatively predicts many follow-up outcomes (recorded in late June or July 2020), including

reductions in life satisfaction, feelings of control, a sense of belonging, mental and physical health,

and greater stress.

       Three coping strategies resonated with at least 45% of the students in Study 2: maintaining

social connections, developing a satisfying routine, and trying new activities. While it is important

to acknowledge that we cannot make causal claims because we do not have experimental or

exogenous variation in coping strategy reporting or use across students, we do consider the

potential effectiveness of various coping strategies by exploring the associations between reporting

each strategy and follow-up outcomes. Here, we find a strong association between reporting

maintaining social connections as a strategy and subsequent well-being: students who reported

"maintaining social connections" as a coping strategy that resonated with them at the beginning of

the semester reported better well-being five to twelve weeks later. Even when conditioning on

baselines problems indices and many background variables, these students score 20 percent of a

standard deviation higher on an aggregate well-being index consisting of measures of life

satisfaction, feelings of belonging, social connection, control, mental and physical health, and

                                                  3
stress. None of the other coping strategies are associated with student well-being at the end of the

semester.

       This finding is consistent with well-established findings in the psychology literature that

social connections are crucially important during stressful times. Social connections provide social

support, which in turn is crucial for mental and physical well-being. Social support is defined as

the perception or experience that one is valued and cared for by others, and that one is part of a

social network that can be counted on to help each other when needed (Wills, 1991). Sources of

social support can include romantic partners, family, friends, coworkers, connections to social,

community, or religious groups. These sources can provide support that is informational (i.e.,

helping an individual determine resources and coping strategies), instrumental (i.e., providing

tangible services such as financial support or transportation), and/or emotional (i.e., conveying that

the individual is cared for and valued during a difficult time; see Taylor, 2011 for a comprehensive

review).

       Decades of research show the causal relationship between social support and mental and

physical health outcomes. Classic research sought to document the relationship and understand the

mechanisms through which it functioned. A classic review of the early literature found that social

support fosters successful coping and adaptation (Cobb, 1976), crucial for well-being. The

buffering hypothesis maintained that social support is a resource that enables people to deal with

stress more effectively (Cohen & Wills, 1985), important because stress plays a significant role in

poorer mental and physical health. Reviews that summarize the physiological mechanisms by

which social support improves health and well-being find that it has benefits for the endocrine

system, the cardiovascular system, and the immune system (see Uchino et al., 1996, for a review

of 81 studies that support that conclusion). In contrast, a recent review of 40 other reviews found

                                                  4
that social isolation and loneliness are predictive of poorer well-being outcomes (Leigh-Hunt et

al., 2017).

        This paper contributes to a small but growing literature on student experiences during the

COVID-19 pandemic. We add to the literature on the negative effects of pandemic-induced

changes to higher education (Aucejo et al., 2020; Rodriguez-Planas, 2020; Browning et al., 2021)

by documenting the challenges students at two large Canadian universities faced during the initial

and medium-run stages of the pandemic. More importantly, we extend that literature by focusing

specifically on the coping strategies students use (Study 1), and how the coping strategies that

resonated with them predict well-being outcomes an average of five to twelve weeks later (Study

2). The findings about the importance of maintaining social connections, in particular, point to

ways that college administrators and policymakers might support students' coping with the

negative effects of the pandemic.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the open-ended

survey that we administered in Study 1 approximately four weeks after the WHO declared

COVID-19 a pandemic and presents the associated findings. Section III then describes the survey

data gathered in Study 2 approximately nine (initial survey) and fourteen to twenty-one (follow-

up survey) weeks after the WHO declared a pandemic and reports the associations between

students' coping strategies and well-being outcomes. We offer concluding remarks in Section IV.




II. Study 1: Open-Ended Survey

In early April of 2020, approximately four weeks after the WHO declared COVID-19 a pandemic

on March 11, 2020, we conducted an open-ended survey of 527 students at the University of


                                                5
Toronto (UofT). These students were drawn from a sample of all first-year economics students

from the fall semester of 2019 who had participated in a data-gathering project we administered

as part of our broader research agenda in the Student Achievement Lab. Participants in the project

had completed weekly online exercises throughout the fall semester, in which they either detailed

their study habits and grade expectations or learned about common problems faced by college

students and how to overcome them. 2 The data-gathering effort for this project concluded in

December 2019. In April 2020, we emailed all students who participated in the fall intervention,

inviting them to complete the short open-ended survey about their experiences with the COVID-

19 pandemic. As an incentive, the first 100 students to complete the survey were offered either a

$20 e-transfer or Amazon.ca gift certificate. The full survey, consisting of eight open-ended

questions, is available in Appendix A (Section A.1) and was designed to help us understand how

the COVID-19 pandemic affected students and how they were coping.

Summary Statistics

    We linked survey participants to their administrative university data and to the baseline survey

data we gathered as part of the fall 2019 intervention. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 provide summary

statistics for the open-ended survey sample in Study 1. Nearly 20 percent of students are first-

generation college students, 40 percent live on campus, approximately half are Canadian, half are

male, and the average student is 18.5 years old. The average incoming high school grade average




2
  Course instructors assigned students 2 percent of their overall grade for participating in these exercises during the
fall semester. For more detail on these exercises, see Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2019). For much more detail on
the Student Achievement Lab, its protocols, and the past interventions, see https://studentachievementlab.org/ and the
following articles: Oreopoulos, Patterson, Petronijevic, and Pope (forthcoming); Oreopoulos, Petronijevic, Logel, and
Beattie (2020); Dobronyi, Oreopoulos, and Petronijevic (2019); Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2018), Beattie,
Laliberte, and Oreopoulos (2018), and Beattie, Laliberte, Michaud-Leclerc, and Oreopoulos (2019).

                                                          6
of these students is quite high at 89 percent, consistent with UofT being one of the most selective

institutions in Canada.

   We coded students' responses to the eight questions in the survey in a systematic way. Two of

the authors reviewed participants' responses to identify potential themes related to either the

challenges students were facing or the coping strategies they were using. Given that participants

had been provided with specific questions (e.g., "What have been the biggest changes to your

routine since being asked to physically isolate?"), the themes were straightforward to identify. For

example, related to challenges, we observed some students reporting they had previously been

diagnosed with depression and/or anxiety, and that their new living situations and the uncertainty

of the pandemic were exacerbating their symptoms. Additionally, some students were reporting

anxiety about themselves or a family member contracting the virus. This observation was

converted to the variable, "Experienced Depressive or Anxious Feelings" (0-mental health/outlook

remained positive; 1-experienced depression or anxiety from transition to online learning, the

pandemic, etc). Related to coping strategies, we observed some students reporting exercising

specifically to deal with stress related to the pandemic. This observation became the coded variable

"Physical Exercise" (0-no effort to incorporate physical exercise into new living situation; 1-

actively tried to or incorporated regular exercise into new routine). The complete list of coded

variables and definitions are provided in the codebook appearing in Section A.2 of Appendix A.

After receiving one-on-one training, a graduate student research assistant classified the full set of

open-ended survey responses by following this codebook.

   Summary statistics for the problems and coping strategies students reported are listed in Table

2. We group problems in column 1 by whether they are related to student well-being or the logistics

of online education. Considering well-being first, column 2 shows that 28.9 percent of students

                                                 7
felt depressed or anxious, 27.7 percent felt lonely, 28.3 percent experienced sleep disruptions, and

31.8 percent had financial concerns or worries. The largest negative reports were around feeling

lazy and unmotivated (38.1 percent), and having difficulty concentrating (58.9 percent). 3 Turning

to education logistics, half of all students faced overall difficulty in adjusting to online learning,

and 45 percent struggled to establish a new daily routine or had logistical issues with online

learning. Only a quarter of students, however, reported grades suffering because of the switch to

online learning, and an even smaller minority, approximately 9 percent, reported having problems

with how their instructors handled the transition to the online learning. Most students reported

being pleased with the effort instructors made.

    We offer a further glimpse into student experiences by reporting quotes that indicate students

felt depression or anxiety, loneliness, lethargy or lack of motivation, difficulty with online

learning, and difficulty establishing a routine in Table B1 in Appendix B. These quotes capture

students feeling depressed because of the loneliness that came from not seeing friends and anxious

about the well-being of their families, their ability to succeed in their studies, and using the

additional free time productively instead of squandering it away. Others reported trying to

counteract feelings of loneliness by calling friends and family regularly or using social media to

stay connected, even though these methods are imperfect substitutes for in-person interaction.

Students had trouble with online learning for many reasons. Some did not have a quiet workspace

at home because of neighbors or roommates, and others were in different time zones, making it

challenging to follow with a synchronous course schedule. Although most students were quite


3
  These figures imply the incidence of negative well-being is strikingly high. Looking ahead to Study 2, we corroborate
this result by asking students directly (instead of coding from open-ended text) how many days in the last four weeks
they experienced depression, anxiety, uncontrollable worry, or little pleasure in doing things. We found that
approximately 30 percent of students reported feeling depressed or anxious at least 10 of the past 30 days, 38 percent
reported feeling uncontrollable worry in at least 10 days, and 45 percent reported having had little interest or pleasure
in doing things during at least 10 days.

                                                           8
pleased with the effort instructors made, some found it difficult to keep track of all the different

ways each instructor shifted their course online. Further, the absence of structure in students' new,

online learning environments contributed to a lack of motivation to complete schoolwork. The

feeling that every day was the same as the last, along with a sudden abundance of free time, made

it difficult to establish a new schedule.

   But many students also responded to these negative experiences caused by the pandemic with

creative coping strategies. Column 4 of Table 2 shows that nearly 40 percent of students reported

trying to create a new daily routine while under lockdown and 55 percent reported turning to

physical exercise to cope. Maintaining social or group activity remotely was by far the most

common coping strategy, with 64 percent of students reporting it, and the proportion of students

reporting social or group activity is statistically different (at the one-percent level) than the

proportions of students reporting each of the other strategies listed in Table 2. Students also

reported focusing on developing good sleeping habits, cooking or eating well, meditating, and

focusing on developing a new hobby or learning new skills.

   Table B2 in Appendix B shows randomly selected quotes indicating that students coped by

forming a new routine, making social or group activities a priority, or turning to physical exercise.

Students introduced structure into their lives in many ways, including introducing new practices

like meditation, cooking, and exercise, going for regular walks, taking part in extracurricular

activities remotely, and modifying their physical work environments to make it easier to be

productive. With respect to social activities, many students reported a daily focus on exchanging

text messages, speaking on the phone, and using software that facilitated face-to-face

communication (e.g., FaceTime) with friends, while others who live at home reported enjoying the

extra time with family. Some even came to see their bonds with friends and family strengthen

                                                 9
during the pandemic and reported having new perspective on how to maintain those relationships

in the future. Many students also turned to different forms of physical exercise as a coping

mechanism: some changed their exercise routines by using equipment they had at home in lieu of

having access to a gym while others turned to daily walks or biking.

    Overall, the open-ended survey reveals that students struggled with the unfamiliar,

unstructured, and isolating circumstances of early pandemic lockdowns. But most students also

expressed efforts to try to address the situation by finding productive coping strategies, such as

establishing new routines, turning to others for companionship, and bettering themselves through

exercise or new hobbies. We used the content from this open-ended survey to create materials on

common problems faced and coping strategies used by students during the COVID-19 pandemic.

In the following section, we describe the study in which we made these materials available to

students, before exploring the associations between coping strategies and well-being outcomes.




III. Study 2: Likert Scale Survey

Building on the open-ended survey, we measured a series of variables that could be used to test

longitudinal correlational hypotheses such as the ones in the present paper. These variables were

collected as part of a field experiment during the summer semester of 2020 to test the efficacy of

an intervention designed to help students cope with the common problems encountered during the

COVID-19 pandemic. The intervention ultimately revealed null effects on the dependent variables

of interest.

        We ran the study under the standard protocol of the Student Achievement Lab, in which all

students in summer first-year economics courses (starting in May 2020) at UofT and York


                                               10
University (also in Toronto, Canada) received a small participation grade for completing a short

online exercise at the beginning of the summer semester along with a follow-up survey at the end

of the semester. All intervention materials are available in Section A.3 of Appendix A.

        All students first completed the same baseline survey and were then randomly sorted to

treatment and control groups. Treated students received materials that we designed after analyzing

answers to the open-ended survey in Study 1 discussed above. We asked them to read five stories

that were framed as testimonials from students who participated in a Student Experience Survey

from April of 2020, a well-established approach in social psychology (Wilson and Linville, 1982).

Each story conveyed common problems students had reported on the open-ended survey, as well

as the coping strategies that were used to improve life circumstances during the pandemic. After

reading the stories, students were then asked to identify their biggest concerns for the upcoming

summer term and the coping strategies that most resonated with them from the stories.4 The

treatment exercise concluded by having students write their own stories about coping during the

pandemic to a first-year student in the fall semester of 2020.5 Students in the control group were

asked to complete a modified version of the open-ended survey from April 2020, in which we

removed questions about coping strategies and personal growth to avoid any potential treatment

effect, leaving questions about challenges during the pandemic, experiences with online learning,

and plans for enrollment in the fall semester of 2020. Both groups completed the same follow-up

survey later in the semester, in which we collected rich data on mental health and well-being.




4
  Students selected both concerns and strategies from a prepopulated list that included the option to expand with an
open-ended response.
5
  We additionally invited treated students to participate in a text message coaching program, in which we sent weekly
messages about study tips, mental health tips, and check-in messages soliciting a response.

                                                         11
           As noted, in both the full sample and pre-registered subgroups, our experimental evaluation

revealed no impact of treatment on course grades and a variety of well-being outcomes collected

during the follow-up survey at the end of the summer semester. We do not report the (null)

treatment effect estimates in this paper;6 instead, we focus on documenting variables that further

describe the problems students experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic and on identifying

which coping strategies appear most effective at improving well-being outcomes.

Baseline Summary Statistics

           Columns 3 to 6 of Table 1 provide summary statistics for the Study 2 sample, reported

separately for UofT (columns 3 and 4) and York University (columns 5 and 6). At UofT, 872

students completed the initial survey and 585 completed the follow-up survey; at York University,

737 completed the initial survey and 657 completed the follow-up survey. Students completed the

initial baseline survey and intervention materials in early May, approximately nine weeks after the

WHO declared COVID-19 and pandemic. In terms of academic preparedness, students in Study

2 at UofT are negatively selected compared to students in Study 1 because we conducted Study 2

in the summer semester when students are more likely to be repeating previously failed or dropped

courses. Compared to students from Study 1, UofT students in Study 2 are more likely to be first-

generation and male, are older, have lower incoming high school grade averages, and are less likely

to be Canadian citizens. Compared to UofT students in Study 2, students from York University

are even more likely to be first-generation students (13 percentage points), are approximately two

years older, have much lower incoming high school grades, and are much less likely to expect to

earn an A average across their summer courses.




6
    Results are available upon request.

                                                   12
        Table 3 documents the problems and coping strategies students reported. Focusing first on

the problems reported during the baseline survey taken by all students, column 2 shows that a third

of all students worried about whether they would run out of food before having money to buy more

while half of students worried about being able to pay their university tuition. The next five

variables are measured on a 1 to 7 scale capturing the degree of agreement with a given statement

and coded such that higher values represent worse outcomes (e.g., stronger agreement with the

statement "The pandemic has made life challenging" or lower confidence in ability to cope with

stress). We also recorded the number of days in the last four weeks students have experienced

nervousness, worrying, little interest in doing things, or depression. On average, students

experienced these feelings between 8 to 10 days in the last four weeks.

        We construct a summary problems index using all the variables reported in column 1 of

Table 3 following the method in Oreopoulos et al. (2020) ­ that is, we first standardized each

variable to have mean zero and standard deviation one and we then take the average of the

standardized variables as the value of the problems index for each student. Reported in the last row

of column 2, the problems index has mean zero (mechanically) and a standard deviation of 0.59.

In subsequent analyses, we use the problems index as a summary measure of the difficulty students

face at baseline.

        Columns 4 and 6 of Table 3 restrict the sample to treated students, because those students

answered questions that are key to the hypotheses tested in Study 2, and show the fraction of

students who reported being concerned about each problem listed in column 3 or reporting whether

each coping strategy in column 5 resonated with them after reading the stories. 7 Nearly two-thirds



7
 To be clear, both problems and coping strategies were selected immediately after reading the stories and were part
of the initial (i.e., at baseline) exercise for treated students.

                                                        13
of students were worried about lacking the motivation to complete schoolwork during the summer

semester, while half missed a predictable routine and their family and friends. Approximately 44

percent of students reported being anxious about how long public health restrictions related to the

pandemic would last. We also construct a treatment problems index (reported as the last entry in

columns 3 and 4), again reflecting a measure of the difficulty that students faced at baseline, by

taking a simple average of the original four variables indicating each concern.

        Given that students competed the baseline survey and treatment exercise at the beginning

of the semester, we did not ask about which strategies they were already using. We instead

discussed coping strategies throughout the stories in a way that reflected the experiences of

students in the Study 1 survey and then asked treated students in Study 2 to tell us which of these

strategies resonated most with them. As noted, many students in Study 1 reported trying to

maintain a feeling of social belonging, creating a new routine, trying new activities (e.g., physical

exercise, cooking, reading) or hobbies, and helping others. They were also highly satisfied with

how instructors handled the online transition and suggested getting help from instructors. Our

stories, available in full in Appendix A.3, reflected these themes. Story 2, for example, explicitly

discusses establishing a new routine as a strategy, while Story 5 additionally outlines the

effectiveness of discovering new activities and hobbies. Story 3 discusses physical exercise,

maintaining social connections, and helping others as coping strategies. In Story 4, we convey that

most professors have been helpful during the pandemic, and again emphasize the benefits of

establishing a new routine.

   In column 5 of Table 3, we group the coping strategies students could have selected as

resonating most with them after reading the stories into three broad categories: "Social Belonging,"

"New Routine or Structure," and "Additional Strategies." Column 6 reports the fraction of treated

                                                 14
students who selected each of the coping strategies in column 5 as resonating most with them after

reading the stories. Creating a new routine resonated with the most students, with 65 percent of

students selecting it. Approximately half of all treated students reported trying new activities and

hobbies as a strategy that resonated and 46 percent selected socially connecting with others. A

quarter of students identified with helping others as a strategy, 33 percent reported getting help

from instructors as resonating with them, and 41 percent reported trying to learn from setbacks.

       Having described our data on problems students faced in the beginning of the summer semester

and the coping strategies that most resonated with them, we now explore the relationships between

these coping strategies and well-being outcomes measured at the conclusion of the summer

semester.

The Associations Between Coping Strategies and End-of-Semester Outcomes

           Our measures of well-being outcomes come from the follow-up survey students completed

at the end of their summer first-year economics course. We restrict the sample to treated students

in this section because only they were asked to read about, and respond to questions about, coping

strategies at the start of the summer semester. For students attending York University and the main

(downtown Toronto) campus of UofT, St. George, the follow-up survey was taken in early to mid-

June, about fourteen weeks after COVID-19 was a declared a pandemic. Students attending UofT's

two suburban satellite campuses, UofT Mississauga or UofT Scarborough, completed their courses

in August and took the follow-up survey in late July or early August, approximately 21 weeks after

the pandemic was declared. 8




8
    To account for this and other across-campus differences, all regressions in this section include campus fixed effects.

                                                            15
         Table B3 in Appendix B documents the twenty-six questions we use to construct a

summary index of student well-being, categorized into eight broad categories for ease of

presentation. As one might expect given the conceptual similarity across the full twenty-six items,

Cronbach's alpha, a measure of internal consistency reliability, across the items is very high,

estimated at 0.9. To provide a concise set of estimates and avoid issues around multiple hypothesis

testing, we therefore grouped all twenty-six items into a single well-being index. Following our

approach in Oreopoulos et al. (2020), we first coded each variable such that higher values

correspond to better outcomes (e.g., higher values of the stress variables correspond to students

feeling less stress) and then standardized each of the variables to have mean zero and standard

deviation one. For each student, we then took the mean of all twenty-six standardized variables to

construct the overall well-being index. The well-being index in the full sample of treated students

has a mean of zero (mechanically) and a standard deviation of 0.548.

         Table 4 shows our main results from Study 2. Here we regress the overall well-being index

on six binary variables, each indicating whether a student selected a particular coping strategy as

resonating with them after reading the stories during the baseline exercise. For completeness, we

first show raw correlations in Column 1 (without any additional control variables), but note that

these estimates reflect in part the degree to which coping strategies are predicted by baseline levels

of problems, given the correlation between baseline problems and coping strategies and the

correlation between baseline problems and follow-up well-being outcomes. 9 Our preferred

estimates in columns 2 and 3 correct for these associations by controlling for both baseline problem



9
  For example, the correlation between selecting instructor helping as a strategy and the overall well-being index is -
.10. But the correlations between selecting this strategy and the baseline problems and the treatment problems index
are 0.15 and 0.2, respectively. All coping strategies are generally positively correlated with the baseline problems
indexes, suggesting that students with greater problems at baseline are more likely to report various strategies as
resonating. These correlations are available upon request.

                                                          16
indexes in the analysis, thereby more appropriately addressing our research question about the

degree to which endorsing certain coping strategies after reading about their effectiveness predicts

improvements in well-being across the semester.

         The estimates in column 2 of Table 4 show, unsurprisingly, that each problem index

significantly and negatively predicts the follow-up well-being index: one standard deviation

increases in the baseline survey problems index and in the index specific to treated students are

associated with 0.44 and 0.21 standard deviation decreases in the well-being index, respectively.

Conditional on these indexes, however, students who reported socially connecting with others as

a strategy that resonated with them score 22 percent of a standard deviation higher on the well-

being index than students who did not report resonating with this strategy. Although this result is

robust to accounting for many other unique control variables in column 3, remaining statistically

significant at the 1 percent level, we highlight again that one cannot interpret this estimate causally,

as we do not have exogenous variation in coping strategy reporting. 10 Indeed, we posit that this

result is suggestive and consistent with prior work on the importance of social connections, but

that further research should be done to assess the effectiveness of this strategy on student well-

being during the COVID-19 pandemic. None of the other strategies are significantly associated

with the well-being index.

         Table 5 explores the associations between coping strategies and the well-being index in

four subgroups of interest while conditioning on the full set of control variables. Reporting social

connections as resonating appears to be particularly important for women, as women who reported

resonating with this strategy scored 34 percent of a standard deviation higher on the well-being


10
  Additional control variables include first-generation status, age, gender, race, citizenship, prior university grades,
baseline self-reported goals in university, a measure of locus of control at baseline, and expected summer semester
grades at baseline.

                                                          17
index than women who did not. In contrast, there is no difference in the well-being index among

men who reported social connections as a coping strategy that resonated and men who did not, and

the differential significance of reporting this coping strategy across men and women is significant

at the 5 percent level. While the point estimates are not statistically different from each other across

the remaining subgroups, the pattern of results shows that endorsing socially connecting with

others is equally important among Canadian and international students (columns 3 and 4), more

important for first-generation than non-first-generation students (columns 5 and 6), and equally

important for students with higher versus lower values of the baseline survey problems index

(columns 7 and 8).

        In Table 6, we show that the main results are remarkably consistent across different

contexts that vary in student populations and location characteristics (e.g., urban vs suburban) by

excluding one campus at a time from the regression analysis in columns 1 to 4 and obtaining very

similar results. Dropping York University or each of UofT's three campuses (the main campus, St.

George, or the two satellite campuses, Mississauga and Scarborough) has little effect on main

results: students who selected socially connecting with others as a coping strategy that resonated

score higher on the well-being index at follow-up, and the point estimate is not statistically

different across any of the columns. These analyses are an additional indicator of the robustness

of this association, in that it is not constrained to one particular social context. As before, none of

the other coping strategies significantly predict the well-being index.

        In columns 5 and 6 of Table 6, we assess the sensitivity of the results to the timing of the

follow-up survey. Students at York and UofT's main campus, St. George, took the follow-up

survey in June of 2020 because their economics course concluded in that month. Students at

UofT's two satellite campuses, Mississauga and Scarborough, took the survey in August of 2020--

                                                  18
when their courses came to an end. Although the point estimate on socially connecting with others

is larger in the sample who completed the follow-up survey in August (column 6), it is estimated

imprecisely owing to the smaller sample size and is not statistically different from the point

estimate in column 5, where the sample is restricted to those who competed the follow-up survey

in June.

       In summary, the results suggest that students who reported maintaining social connections

as a coping strategy that resonated with them score approximately 20 percent of a standard

deviation higher on an index measuring overall well-being at the conclusion of their summer

economics course, controlling for problems reported at baseline, meaning that resonating with

social connection as a coping strategy predicted an improvement in well-being over the course of

a semester. This result appears to be stronger among women than among men, is robust across the

different campuses in our sample, and does not appear to be driven by the time elapsed between

the initial and follow-up survey.

IV. Conclusion

   The present research sheds light on the coping strategies college students use to deal with the

stress and novel problems created by the pandemic and the need for social distancing (Study 1).

Given findings that students face significant challenges during the pandemic, from mental health

problems, financial strain, isolation, and challenges adapting to online learning (Anderson, 2020;

Hamza et al. 2020; Rodriguez-Planas, 2020; Browning et al., 2021), understanding the coping

strategies students use could help elucidate their experience and point to ways that colleges can

support their success and well-being. Additionally, while we do not have experimental variation,

this research shows that out of a comprehensive list of coping strategies used by students, only

endorsement of social connection predicted important well-being outcomes at the end of the

                                               19
semester, controlling for initial levels (Study 2). This finding highlights the importance of focusing

on social connection and social support during times of stress and suggests that colleges may

support students' well-being by providing opportunities for them to connect with each other and

make time to connect with people who are not associated with the college (e.g., family; old

friends).

    The key finding, that endorsing social connection as a coping strategy predicts well-being

weeks later, is consistent with existing research in social psychology. Social connection is essential

for social support, and social support plays an important role in well-being. Social connections

with individuals and/or groups predict better well-being over time (see Taylor, 2011, for a review),

and interventions that improve social support cause improved well-being on a variety of outcomes

(Hogana, Lindena, and Najarian, 2002).

        Subgroup analyses showed that the finding that resonating with social connection predicts

better well-being over time was driven by women. We suggest caution in interpreting these results,

as random variation could play a role. However, one of the few consistent and relatively stable

psychological differences between women and men is that women tend to be more interdependent

than men, (e.g., Maccoby 2002) and more likely than men to turn to others for support in stressful

situations (e.g., Taylor, 2002), perhaps explaining why women who do not resonate with social

connection as a coping strategy could be particularly likely to have lower well-being over time.

    A limitation of the present research is that, in Study 2, students did not specifically report their

intent to seek social connection as a coping strategy, nor did the study include observations of the

extent to which they objectively used social connection as a coping strategy. Instead, students

reported which coping strategies resonated with them after reading about how other students

successfully used social connection and other coping strategies. It is plausible, however, that

                                                  20
students at least attempt to use the coping strategies that resonate with them (and, conversely, do

not attempt to use coping strategies that did not resonate with them). That is, students' reports of

whether a coping strategy resonated with them is likely to be a fair predicator of whether they later

attempted to use that coping strategy.11

     However, even if students did interpret the question "which of these coping strategies resonate

with you?" as unrelated to their plans to use those coping strategies, the findings in this paper

remain consistent with past research about social connection and well-being. Research in social

psychology finds that perceptions of social support can matter as much as objective measures of

social support in predicting important outcomes. Outside raters' quantifications of social support,

such as counts of the number of social contacts one has in a particular time period, or counts of the

number of friends a person has, do indeed predict well-being outcomes. But a large body of

research shows that peoples' perceptions of their social support, (e.g., the perception that they have

people in their lives who value them, and perceptions that those people will be there when needed)

also predict important outcomes. For example, students with low self-esteem, who research

consistently finds tend to underestimate the degree to which they are valued in their close

relationships (i.e., tend to perceive weaker social connections), have poorer physical health over

time, even controlling for baseline health (Stinson et al., 2008). As such, even if resonating with

social connection as a coping strategy does not predict actually using it, past research suggests that

just knowing it is coping option that is there if needed could predict better well-being weeks later.

        Past research also finds that social interactions do not have to be in-person to be

experienced as true social connection. Connecting through social media, although known to have



11
  Indeed, the use of coping strategies among students in evident from Study 1, where students reported using many
coping strategies, with maintaining social connection being the most popular.

                                                       21
drawbacks, has also been found to help people connect with friends, stay in touch with extended

family, and find support in stressful times (Pew, 2009; Pinker, 2014; Rainie et al, 2011). It can

also deepen existing relationships--people are less self-conscious when communicating

electronically, and therefore share more of their joys, worries, and stresses. Such self-disclosure is

associated with positive relationship outcomes (Valkenburg & Peter, 2009). This suggests that

finding ways to connect, such as by text or virtual meeting platforms, can provide much-needed

social support to foster students' well-being during difficult times.




                                                 22
References

Acejo, Esteban, Jacob French, Maria Paola Uglade Araya, and Basit Zafar. 2020. "The impact of

       COVID-19 on student experiences and expectations: Evidence from a survey." Journal of

       Public Economics, 191: 1 ­ 15.

Anderson, Greta. 2020. "Mental Health Needs Rise with Pandemic." Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved

       from      https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2020/09/11/students-great-need-mental-

       health-support-during-pandemic

Beattie, Graham, Jean-William P. Laliberte, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2018. "Thrivers and divers:

       Using non-academic measures to predict college success and failure." Economics of

       Education Review, 62: 170-182.

Beattie, Graham, Jean-William Laliberte, Catherine Michaud-Leclerc, and Philip Oreopoulos.

       2019. "What sets college thrivers and divers apart? A contrast in study habits, attitudes,

       and mental health." Economic Letters, 178: 50-53.

Browning, Matthew H. E. M., Lincoln R. Larson, Iryna Sharaievska, Alessandro Rigolon, Olivia

       McAnirlin, Lauren Mullenbach, Scott Cloutier, Tue M. Vu, Jennifer Thomsen, Nathan

       Reigner, Elizabeth Covelli Metcalf, Ashley D'Antonio, Marco Helbich, Gregory N.

       Bratman, and Hector Olvera Alvarez. 2021. "Psychological impacts from COVID-19

       among university students: Risk factors across seven states in the United States." PoLS

       ONE, 16(1): e0245327. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0245327

Dobronyi, Christopher R., Philip Oreopoulos, and Uros Petronijevic. 2019. "Goal setting,

       academic reminders, and college success: A large-scale field experiment," Journal of

       Research on Educational Effectiveness: 12(1): 38-66.

                                               23
Hamza, Chloe A., Lexi Ewing, Nancy L. Heath, and Abby L. Goldstein. 2020. "When Social

       Isolation Is Nothing New: A Longitudinal Study Psychological Distress During COVID-

       19 Among University Students With and Without Preexisting Mental Health Concerns."

       Canadian Psychology, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/cap0000255

Hogana, B. E., Lindena, W. & Najarian,B. (2002). Social support interventions: Do they work?

       Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 381-440. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-7358(01)00102-

       7

Leigh-Hunt, N., Bagguley, D., Bash, K., Turner, V., Turnbull, S., Valtorta,N., & Caan, W. (2017).

       An overview of systematic reviews on the public health consequences of social isolation

       and loneliness. Public Health, 152, 157­171. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2017.07.035

Maccoby, E. E. (2002). Gender and group process: A developmental perspective. Current

       Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 54-58.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Richard W. Patterson, Uros Petronijevic, and Nolan G. Pope. "Low-Touch

       Attempts to Improve Time Management among Traditional and Online College Students."

       Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Uros Petronijevic, Christine Logel, and Graham Beattie. 2020. "Improving

       non-academic student outcomes using online and text-message coaching," Journal of

       Economic Behavior and Organization, 171: 342-360.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic, 2018. "Student Coaching: How Far Can Technology

       Go?" Journal of Human Resources, 53(2): 299-329.




                                               24
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic, 2020. "The Remarkable Unresponsiveness of College

       Students to Nudging And What We Can Learn from It" NBER Working Paper 26059.

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pew. (2009, November 4). Social isolation and new technology: how the internet and mobile

       phones impact Americans' social networks. Pew Research Centre (pewresearch.org)

Pinker, S. (2008). The village effect: Why face-to-face contact matters. Toronto: Random House

       Canada

Rainie, L., Purcelle, K., Goulet, L. S. & Hampton, K. H. (2011, June 16). Social networking sites

       and our lives. Pew Research Centre (pewresearch.org)

Rodriguez-Planas, Nuria. 2020. "Hitting Where It Hurst Most: COVID-19 and Low-Income Urban

       College Students." City University of New York, Queens College, Working paper.

Stinson, D. A., Logel, C., Zanna, M. P., Holmes, J. G., Cameron, J. J., Wood, J. V., & Spencer, S.

       J. (2008). The cost of lower self-esteem: Testing a self-and-social-bonds model of health.

       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 412-428.

Taylor, Shelley E. (2002). The tending instinct: How nurturing is essential to who we are and how

       we live. New York: Times Books.

Taylor, Shelley E. (2011). Social support: A review. In H. S. Friedman (Ed.) The Oxford

       Handbook     of   Health   Psychology,    Oxford    University    Press,   USA.      DOI:

       10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195342819.001.0001

Uchino, B. N., Cacioppo, J. T., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. 1996. The relationship between social

       support and physiological processes: A review with emphasis on underlying mechanisms


                                                25
       and     implications    for    health.   Psychological     Bulletin,    119(3),    488­531.

       https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.119.3.488

Valkenberg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2009):. Social consequences of the Internet for adolescents: A

       decade of research. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18, 1-5.

Wills , T.A . 1991 . Social support and interpersonal relationships . In M.S. Clark (Ed.), Prosocial

       behavior (pp. 265 ­ 289 ). Newbury Park, CA : Sage

Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. 1982. "Improving the academic performance of college freshmen:

       Attribution therapy revisited." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42(2), 367­

       376. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.42.2.367




                                                26
                                                      Table 1: Student Summary Statistics
                                                        Study 1 Sample                         Study 2 Sample
                                                             UofT                         UofT                York
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)
                                                  Mean/SD       Sample Size     Mean/SD Sample Size Mean/SD Sample Size
Prior Grade*                                        72.666                  483                    70.457              836            67.393              647
                                                   [11.825]                                       [10.692]                           [15.268]
Final Grade*                                        77.394                  481                    73.036              861            73.538              778
                                                    [9.975]                                       [11.457]                           [14.704]
First Generation                                     0.176                  516                     0.301              873             0.456              737
                                                    [0.381]                                        [0.459]                            [0.498]
Age                                                 18.424                  502                    19.919              933            21.528              779
                                                    [1.315]                                        [2.026]                            [4.106]
Male                                                 0.464                  502                     0.542              933             0.534              779
                                                    [0.499]                                        [0.498]                            [0.499]
Canadian                                             0.554                  502                     0.379              933             0.445              779
                                                    [0.498]                                        [0.486]                            [0.497]
Incoming High School Grade                          89.010                  411                    87.598              758            80.581              314
                                                    [5.755]                                        [5.803]                            [7.285]
Lives on Campus                                      0.413                  508                       -                  -               -                  -
                                                    [0.493]                                           -                                  -
High Effort Approach to College                      0.717                  516                     0.601              873             0.643              737
                                                    [0.451]                                        [0.490]                            [0.479]
Expected Grade Average+                             79.994                  513                     0.584              873             0.509              737
                                                    [7.295]                                        [0.493]                            [0.500]
Locus of Control (4-Point Scale)                       -                      -                     2.591              873             2.614              737
                                                       -                                           [0.687]                            [0.692]
Race
 White/Caucasian                                        -                     -                     0.072              873             0.085              802
                                                        -                                          [0.259]                            [0.279]
 East Asian                                             -                     -                     0.600              873             0.347              802
                                                        -                                          [0.490]                            [0.476]
 South Asian                                            -                     -                     0.134              873             0.226              802
                                                        -                                          [0.341]                            [0.418]
 Other                                                  -                     -                     0.194              873             0.343              802
                                                        -                                          [0.395]                            [0.475]

Weeks Since Pandemic Declared
 Initial Survey Taken                               4.38                    527                     8.829              872             9.426              737
                                                   [0.085]                   -                     [0.901]                            [0.542]
 Follow-Up Survey Taken                               -                      -                     17.296              585            13.896              657
                                                      -                      -                     [4.144]                            [0.836]
Notes : *In the Study 1 sample, the prior grade is students' average grade across all 2019 fall semester courses and the final grade is their average grade across all
2020 winter semester courses. In the Study 2 sample, the prior grade is students' average grade across all 2019-2020 fall and winter semester courses and the final
grade is their average grade across all 2020 summer semester courses. +In Study 1, the expected grade average is the overall average grade students' reported
expexceting to earn throughout the 2019-20 academic year. In Study 2, the expected grade average is an indicator variable equal to one for students who expect to
earn an A average or more during the 2020 summer semester and zero otherwise. The top entry in Columns (1), (3), and (5) is the mean of each variable and the
bottom entry reports the standard deviation in brackets. Columns (2), (4), and (6) report the number of observations over which summary statistics are calculated for
each variable.
                                Table 2: Problems and Coping Strategies Summary Statistics - Study 1
                               (1)                            (2)                        (3)                                                            (4)
                            Problem                         Mean                 Coping Strategy                                                       Mean

Well Being
 Difficulty Concentrating                                                  0.589         Social or Group Activity                                      0.637
 Lethargy or Lack of Motivation                                            0.381         Physical Exercise                                             0.545
 Financial Concern/Worries                                                 0.318         Created New Routine                                           0.391
 Depression or Anxeity                                                     0.289         Cooking or Eating Well                                        0.280
 Sleep Patterns Affected                                                   0.283         Focusing on Getting Sleep                                     0.175
 Loneliness                                                                0.277         New Hobbies or Learning New Skills                            0.168
                                                                                         Reading                                                       0.163
                                                                                         Meditation                                                    0.120
Education Logistics
 Adjustment to Online Learning Difficult Overall                            0.526
 Struggling to Establish New Routine                                        0.454
 Logistical Problems with Online Learning                                   0.446
 Grades Suffering due to Online Learning                                    0.262
 Problems with Instructors                                                  0.087

Notes : Column (2) reports the fraction of students who report experiencing each problem listed in Column (1). Column (4) reports the fraction of students who report
trying each coping strategy listed in Column (3).
                                                                Table 3: Problems and Coping Strategies Summary Statistics - Study 2
                                    Full Sample                                                                                            Treated Sample
                                  (1)                                               (2)                             (3)                 (4)                     (5)                     (6)
                       Baseline Survey Problems                                   Mean/SD            Problems Listed During Treatment Mean/SD Coping Strategies Listed Post Treatment Mean/SD

Worried about Purchasing Food                                                       0.340            Lack of Motivation                             0.658      Social Belonging
                                                                                   [0.474]                                                         [0.475]      Socially Connect with Others                          0.463
Worried about Paying Tuition                                                        0.520            Missing Family and Friends                     0.461                                                            [0.499]
                                                                                   [0.500]                                                         [0.499]       Get Help from Instructors                            0.339
Personal Situation Under Pandemic Better than Most (1-7)                            3.397            Missing a Predictable Routine                  0.509                                                            [0.473]
                                                                                   [1.542]                                                         [0.500]     New Routine or Structure
The Pandemic has Made Life Challenging (1-7)                                        4.703            Anxious about the Lockdown                     0.438       Develop More Satisfying Routine                       0.659
                                                                                   [1.707]                                                         [0.496]                                                           [0.474]
Am Able to Stay Socially Connected During Pandemic (1-7)                            3.554            Treatment Problems Index                       0.517        Try New Activities or Hobbies                        0.533
                                                                                   [1.794]                                                         [0.319]                                                           [0.499]
Amount of Stress in the Last 4 Weeks (1-7)                                          4.060                                                                      Additional Strategies
                                                                                   [1.547]                                                                      Make Effort to Learn from Setbacks                    0.413
Confidence in Ability to Cope with Stress (1-7)                                     4.095                                                                                                                            [0.493]
                                                                                   [1.408]                                                                       Help Others                                          0.253
Number of Days in Last 4 Weeks You have Felt...                                                                                                                                                                      [0.435]

 Nervous, Anxious, or on Edge                                                       9.699
                                                                                   [7.636]
 Unable to Stop or Control Worrying                                                 8.798
                                                                                   [7.952]
 Little Interest or Pleasure in doing Things                                       10.267
                                                                                   [8.190]
 Down, Depressed, or Hopeless                                                       7.981
                                                                                   [7.897]
Problems Index (Average of Standardized Variables Above)                            0.000
                                                                                   [0.590]
Observations                                                                        1,610                                                            892                                                               892
Notes: Column (2) reports the fraction of students who report experiencing each problem listed in Column (1) along with the standard deviation in brackets. Column (4) reports the fraction of treated students who report being
concerned about each problem listed in Column (3) along with the standard deviation in brackets. Column (6) reports the fraction of treated students who report each coping strategy listed in Column (5) as resonating with them
along with the standard deviation in brackets.
    Table 4: Associations Between End-of-Semester Outcome Index and Coping Strategies - Study 2
                                                             (1)                           (2)                              (3)

Socially Connect with Others                                0.075                         0.115                           0.124
                                                          [0.047]                     [0.040]***                       [0.043]***
Get Help from Instructors                                  -0.098                       -0.034                           -0.014
                                                         [0.050]*                       [0.043]                          [0.043]
Created New Routine                                         0.014                         0.017                           0.009
                                                          [0.048]                       [0.041]                          [0.046]
Try New Activities                                          0.078                         0.066                           0.024
                                                          [0.047]                       [0.042]                          [0.045]
Make Effort to Learn from Setbacks                         -0.059                        -0.010                           0.025
                                                          [0.046]                       [0.042]                          [0.045]
Help Others                                                -0.069                         0.013                           0.006
                                                          [0.051]                       [0.045]                          [0.046]

Baseline Survey Problems Index                                -                         -0.410                            -0.405
                                                              -                       [0.037]***                       [0.041]***
Treatment Problems Index                                      -                         -0.335                            -0.249
                                                              -                       [0.085]***                        [0.099]**

Additional Control Variables?                                N                              N                                Y

Observations                                                616                            551                              470

Dep Var. Mean                                                0                             0                                0
Dep Var. SD                                               [0.548]                       [0.548]                          [0.548]
Notes : Column 1 reports the estimated coefficients from regressions of the outcome index from the follow-up survey on the coping strategies
treated students listed as resonating with them and campus fixed effects. In addition to campus fixed effects, column 2 also controls for the
baseline survey problems index and the post-treatment problems index. Column 3 additionally accounts for the following control variables: an
indicator for first-generation student; age; an indicator for being male; an indicator for being a Canadian citizen; mean prior grade; an
indicator for taking a maximum effort approach to university studies; a measure of baseline locus of control; expected grade average at the
start of the 2020 summer semester, and student race indictors. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets below coefficient estimates. ***
indicates statistical significance at the 1 percent level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * indicates statistical
significance at the 10 percent level.
                            Table 5: Associations Between End-of-Semester Outcome Index and Coping Strategies Across Subgroups - Study 2
                                                       (1)       (2)                      (3)            (4)                        (5)                 (6)            (7)              (8)
                                                          Gender                             Nationality                             First Generation Status       Baseline Problems Index Value
                                                      Men       Women                 Canadian      International            First Generation Not First Generation Above Median Below Median

Socially Connect with Others                          0.037            0.191              0.112               0.130                0.149                    0.068                    0.119                  0.109
                                                    [0.056]        [0.068]***          [0.067]*            [0.062]**             [0.073]**                 [0.055]                [0.060]**              [0.065]*
Get Help from Instructors                            -0.031            0.003              0.004              -0.029                0.014                    0.004                    0.026                 -0.002
                                                    [0.060]          [0.063]            [0.062]             [0.065]               [0.086]                  [0.053]                 [0.062]                [0.065]
Created New Routine                                  -0.037            0.033              0.002               0.021                -0.011                   -0.031                  -0.011                 -0.026
                                                    [0.061]          [0.070]            [0.068]             [0.067]               [0.069]                  [0.065]                 [0.073]                [0.069]
Try New Activities                                    0.030           -0.009              0.002               0.060                -0.011                   0.031                    0.048                 -0.024
                                                    [0.062]          [0.069]            [0.070]             [0.064]               [0.081]                  [0.058]                 [0.068]                [0.067]
Make Effort to Learn from Setbacks                    0.049           -0.000             -0.012               0.062                0.021                    0.049                   -0.030                  0.093
                                                    [0.061]          [0.066]            [0.068]             [0.066]               [0.079]                  [0.055]                 [0.065]                [0.065]
Help Others                                          -0.029            0.010             -0.006               0.020                -0.111                   0.046                    0.064                 -0.081
                                                    [0.065]          [0.069]            [0.068]             [0.069]               [0.077]                  [0.058]                 [0.059]                [0.075]

Baseline Survey Problems Index                       -0.316          -0.514            -0.485                -0.348                -0.520                  -0.347                  -0.440                -0.451
                                                  [0.056]***       [0.058]***        [0.059]***           [0.060]***            [0.072]***               [0.052]***              [0.082]***            [0.112]***
Treatment Problems Index                             -0.270           -0.192            -0.103               -0.402                -0.130                  -0.336                   -0.220               -0.276
                                                   [0.128]**         [0.144]           [0.130]             [0.165]**              [0.149]                [0.123]***                [0.142]              [0.143]*

Observations                                          244              226                226                  244                   170                      300                     232                   238

Dep Var. Mean                                        0.043           -0.046            -0.059                 0.055                 -0.011                  0.025                    -0.219               0.229
Dep Var. SD                                         [0.531]          [0.566]           [0.537]               [0.553]               [0.530]                 [0.536]                  [0.490]              [0.480]
Notes : Each column reports the estimated coefficients from regressions of the outcome index from the follow-up survey on the coping strategies treated students listed as resonating with them in a subsample of
students defined by the column title. All regressions control for the the baseline survey problems index and the treatment problems index and additionally account for the following control variables: an indicator for
first-generation student; age; an indicator for being male; an indicator for being a Canadian citizen; mean prior grade; campus fixed effects; an indicator for taking a maximum effort approach to university studies; a
measure of baseline locus of control; expected grade average at the start of the 2020 summer semester, and student race indictors. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets below coefficient estimates. ***
indicates statistical significance at the 1 percent level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
         Table 6: Associations Between End-of-Semester Outcome Index and Coping Strategies Across Campuses - Study 2
                                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                    (4)                   (5)            (6)
Excluded Campus:                                     York           St. George           Mississauga            Scarborough           Miss & Scar York & St. George

Socially Connect with Others                          0.151              0.120               0.092                  0.132                  0.098                   0.190
                                                   [0.062]**          [0.052]**            [0.046]**             [0.044]***              [0.048]**               [0.103]*
Get Help from Instructors                            -0.065             -0.007               0.005                 -0.005                  0.020                   -0.183
                                                    [0.070]            [0.049]              [0.046]                [0.044]                [0.048]                [0.109]*
Created New Routine                                   0.071              0.007               -0.015                 0.011                  -0.011                  0.241
                                                    [0.064]            [0.057]              [0.047]                [0.047]                [0.049]                [0.123]*
Try New Activities                                   -0.068              0.051               0.053                  0.017                  0.051                   -0.068
                                                    [0.066]            [0.052]              [0.049]                [0.048]                [0.052]                 [0.104]
Make Effort to Learn from Setbacks                    0.029              0.043               0.015                  0.025                  0.014                   0.059
                                                    [0.067]            [0.052]              [0.049]                [0.047]                [0.051]                 [0.110]
Help Others                                           0.014              0.016               -0.013                 0.006                  -0.016                  0.096
                                                    [0.075]            [0.052]              [0.049]                [0.047]                [0.051]                 [0.126]

Baseline Survey Problems Index                       -0.338             -0.441              -0.407                  -0.416                 -0.422                  -0.449
                                                  [0.062]***         [0.047]***           [0.044]***             [0.042]***             [0.046]***              [0.095]***
Treatment Problems Index                             -0.351             -0.166              -0.291                  -0.220                 -0.264                  -0.249
                                                   [0.165]**           [0.109]            [0.107]***              [0.102]**              [0.112]**                [0.234]

Observations                                           216               353                   406                    435                   371                      99

Dep Var. Mean                                          0                  0                     0                      0                    0.01                   -0.039
Dep Var. SD                                         [0.548]            [0.537]               [0.549]                [0.555]               [0.557]                 [0.511]
Notes: Each column reports the estimated coefficients from regressions of the outcome index from the follow-up survey on the coping strategies treated students listed as
resonating with them in a subsample that excludes students attending the campus(es) listed in the column title. Students in the sample in column 5 took the follow-up survey in
June; students in the sample in column 6 took the follow-up survey in August. All regressions control for the the baseline survey problems index and the post-treatment problems
index and additionally account for the following control variables: an indicator for first-generation student; age; an indicator for being male; an indicator for being a Canadian
citizen; mean prior grade; campus fixed effects; an indicator for taking a maximum effort approach to university studies; a measure of baseline locus of control; expected grade
average at the start of the 2020 summer semester, and student race indictors. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets below coefficient estimates. *** indicates statistical
significance at the 1 percent level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
                                                                              Table B1: Sample Quotes for Problems - Study 1
                   (1)                                                  (2)                                                                (3)                                                                     (4)
                Problem                                         Sample Quote 1                                                     Sample Quote 2                                                          Sample Quote 3
                                          Being at home and not being able to go outside is giving me        Academically, half of my final exams got cancelled so the          It has affected my social wellbeing. Due to the fact that I am inside
                                          anxiety and I have never had a problem with anxiety before but     pressure and motivation of school seems like it has                the house everyday, with very little human interaction, I feel that it has
                                          this situation is really taking a toll on my mental health.        dissipated. This is especially weird as I now have a lot more      caused me to talk a lot more with myself than I usually do. It has also
                                                                                                             idle time, more so than I think I have ever had at any point       given me more anxiety when completing online school work because
         Depression or Anxiety                                                                               in my life. This has been accompanied by a feeling that            not only do I have this pandemic and my family's wellbeing to worry
                                                                                                             oscillates between nagging anxiety and manic/productive            about, but now I have to worry about completing school work as well.
                                                                                                             energy that I should utilize this opportunity for personal         And that anxiety causes me to not do as well on my school work than
                                                                                                             growth.                                                            I usually do.

                                          In order to feel connected, I usually video call with my friends   Firstly, the social isolation has been quite hard. I have found From the experience, I have really developed my communication
                                          and parents almost every day. This gives me a chance to meet       myself to have grown quite sociable and extraverted skills in the way that I have really exploited my social media accounts
                                          with others and talk to each other. There are also others          throughout my first year at university and have found an to feel less lonely.
                                          measures such as exercising or reading that helped me to cope      amazing group of friends. Now, due to timezone differences
                                          with the loneliness that I feel during this time.                  and the abrupt nature of the end of first year, it has been
               Loneliness                                                                                    quite sad to not be able to see people and socialize in
                                                                                                             person. This is exacerbated by the fact that I am truly a big
                                                                                                             believer in face to face interaction and although technology
                                                                                                             really helps in bridging the distance, there is always a glass
                                                                                                             barrier.

                                          One of the biggest challenges for me is adapting to the new        It is difficult to be away from all of my friends at school,       Studying from home has become a big challenge, I live with 5 other
                                          online learning environment. I think this new environment has      and it makes it much more difficult to attend my classes and       people and all at home its very hard to concentrate and find quiet
                                          caused me to lose motivation and I have struggled to finish        stay motivated because I need to take all my classes online.       space. My biggest concern is my lack of motivation to get work done
    Lethargy or Lack of Motivation        tasks on time. My sleep schedule has been negatively affected      The weather is really nice now, so it is really hard not being     and to study properly. It's hard to have had plans months in advance,
                                          because I am in bed for most of the day. I only ever go outside    able to go out and hang out with my friends.                       that are now all cancelled due to health measures and precautions. I'm
                                          when I have work, or if I need to buy something.                                                                                      thankful not to have to worry financially, because I live with my
                                                                                                                                                                                family, but I do miss my job and going out. I don't feel very useful.

                                          It's difficult to focus because my neighbors have been doing       My daily life has been affected greatly. I recently had to         Every professor in every course handled this transition very
                                          construction so I've been having to right my exams through loud    leave the country to go back to my family. Due to the time         differently, and thus made different changes to the course work.
                                          drilling noises.                                                   difference, it is quite difficult to attend online lectures. The   Trying to stay on top of all this in all the chaos has been difficult. The
                                                                                                             exams next week will also take place a lot later for me due        professors have been trying to overcompensate for the prospect of
                                                                                                             to the time difference, making me stay up later than I am          academic dishonesty by raising the difficulty of exams considerably.
Adjustment to Online Learning Difficult                                                                      used to. I've become separated from from the friends I made        In terms of term work, professors do not seem to be very considerate
                                                                                                             at university, but we still keep on contact regularly through      of the fact that we are not only going through the physical challenge of
                                                                                                             social media. Overall, staying indoors all the time also feels     moving and finances, but also mental issues. It is challenging for
                                                                                                             mentally draining.                                                 everyone to cope right now as these are uncertain times for everyone.


                                          Currently I am facing the challenge of struggling with being       It has effected me mentally as there is no social life and I am finding it difficult to stay on task with schoolwork and manage
                                          socially distanced from many other people. It can be hard on me    doing the same routine as every other day                  my time. I have much more free time than I am used to and it is hard
                                          that I am not able to see my friends and interact with other                                                                  to decide when to do work. When I do work, I find it hard to not get
                                          people. This can make me sometimes feel down. I also struggle                                                                 distracted.
  Struggling to Establish New Routine
                                          with doing school from home - maintaining a routine, having
                                          structure etc. and also struggling with technology/wifi.



Notes : This table presents three quotes from students in Study 1 illustrating each of the problems listed in column 1.
                                                                  Table B2: Sample Quotes for Coping Strategies - Study 1
                (1)                                             (2)                                                       (3)                                                        (4)
         Coping Strategy                                 Sample Quote 1                                            Sample Quote 2                                                Sample Quote 3
                                     I've began my meditating routine which I had not           Initially, I went biking a lot at a bike trail near my   To take care of my mental health, I would ask my father to
                                     taken seriously before. It is helping and doing wonders    house but since concerns have grown I stopped            drive me around and soon will ask him if he can teach me
                                     to combat my daily anxieties. I have also begun            doing that. However, going for walks with my dog         how to drive since we have so much time. I also sit in my
                                     reading books, watching / following through online         help me get fresh air and some activity. Since not       balcony with my computer so I can feel like I am outside. I
                                     courses that I did not have the time to do before (or      being on campus, I do feel that I am living a far        also open the windows all the way so as much sunlight as
                                     procrastinated to do so).                                  more sedentary lifestyle and it is problematic for       possible can get in. I find when I wake up to the sunlight I
                                                                                                me personally. Another thing I have done is work         am in a better mood then if I keep the blinds shut. I also
       Created New Routine                                                                      remotely for clubs and non-profits that I was active     have starting watching unboxing videos since I am not able
                                                                                                in during the school year. For example, I helped         to inbox my own packages. (there goes retail therapy ;/) A
                                                                                                make a quarantine-reading list for the                   lot of these unboxing videos have an ASMRish kind of vibe
                                                                                                [Organization Removed for Privacy] and those             and are kind of calming to watch. I also spend time with my
                                                                                                readings keep me busy. In moving forward, I want         siblings so that helps.
                                                                                                to find more ways to be active from home and
                                                                                                would like to call my friends more often.

                                     Now that i can't go to the gym so i thought why not        I learned to appreciate going outside and hanging        I spend more time with my family which makes isolation
                                     bring the gym to myself, that way i dont have an           out with my friends, and I will likely bail out on       much more easier. I used to be on campus all day and barely
                                     excuse to not workout and im eating much healthier         plans less after this is all over. Even though we        get to see my family but now that I am at home all day its
                                     because we can't go out to eat :)                          can't see each other in person, I feel that my friends   nice to spend some time with them, watch tv/movies
                                     as for my mental health, my friends and text and speak     are getting closer because we talk online almost         together, go bike riding, etc..
                                     on the phone everyday and sometimes facetime.              every day, which wasn't the case before.
     Social or Group Activity




                                     I have weights and an elliptical at home so I work out     The most difficult change is having to adjust my         I used to go to school, go to the gym and meet friends on
                                     here and there as well as eating proper foods to           studying style and technique. Additionally I get         campus but now I have to stay home all the daytime. The
                                     maintain physical health. Mental health has been a         distracted easily so online classes become more          most difficult one is my exercise routine, because it's hard
                                     challenge since applying for CS POSt is very stressful     challenging. The most positive change is I take          to do some exercise at home. [...]
                                     and given the situation its hard to tell whether or not    daily walks and have started doing home exercises        I changed those exercise which can be done on the yoga
         Physcial Exercise           I'll actually be able to make it. As mentioned                                                                      mat.
                                     previously though, talking to friends over a voice call
                                     is great and helps with the social distancing. I don't
                                     really have any additional strategies planned going
                                     forward.

Notes : This table presents three quotes from students in Study 1 illustrating each of the coping strategies listed in column 1.
                                      Table B3: Variables in Overall Well-Being Outcome Index - Study 2
     Category                                          Component Variables of Outcome Index                                             Scale for Component Variables
                      All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days?
    Satisfaction      All things considered, how satisfied are you with your experience at University of Toronto this term?                      1 to 7 Scale
                      How satisfied are you with [your] academic performance?

                      In the last 4 weeks, how often have you felt that you were unable to control the important things in your life?
 Feeling In Control                                                                                                                              1 to 5 Scale
                      In the last 4 weeks, how often have you been upset because of things that were outside of your control?

                      The COVID-19 pandemic has, so far, made my life challenging
                      My situation during the COVID-19 pandemic is better than most other students at UofT
                                                                                                                                                 1 to 7 Scale
                      During the COVID-19 pandemic I am able to feel socially connected to friends and family
Life Under Pandemic
                      During the COVID-19 pandemic I still feel part of the University of Toronto community
                      My situation trying to adapt during COVID-19 has, so far, been challenging                                                 1 to 6 Scale
                      In the last 4 weeks, how do you feel your situation under COVID-19 has changed?                                            1 to 5 Scale

                      How much stress would you say you have been experiencing in the last 4 weeks?
                                                                                                                                                 1 to 7 Scale
                      How confident do you feel that you are able to cope with your stress on a day-to-day basis?
                      Over the last 4 weeks, how often have you been bothered by Feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge?
       Stress
                      Over the last 4 weeks, how often have you been bothered by Not being able to stop or control worrying?
                                                                                                                                                 1 to 4 Scale
                      Over the last 4 weeks, how often have you been bothered by Little interest or pleasure in doing things?
                      Over the last 4 weeks, how often have you been bothered by Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless?

                      I feel like I belong here at U of T
                      UofT wants me to be successful here
    Belonging         I know where to go if I need academic advice right now                                                                     1 to 6 Scale
                      I know where to go if I need personal advice right now
                      UofT does its best to help support me

                      In the last 4 weeks, how often do you feel disconnected from others?
Social Connections                                                                                                                               1 to 4 Scale
                      In the last 4 weeks how often do you feel that you lack companionship?

                      In the last 4 weeks, would you say your physical health is:
      Health                                                                                                                                     1 to 5 Scale
                      In the last 4 weeks, would you say your mental health is:
