                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL

                                       Kenneth R. Ahern

                                      Working Paper 28805
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28805


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




For helpful comments, I thank John Matsusaka and seminar participants at Baruch College,
Michigan State University, University of Mannheim, University of Southern California, and the
University of Texas at Dallas. The author has no conflicts of interest regarding this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kenneth R. Ahern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Business of City Hall
Kenneth R. Ahern
NBER Working Paper No. 28805
May 2021
JEL No. H4,H7,R1,R5

                                           ABSTRACT

Compared to the federal government, the average citizen in the U.S. has far greater interaction
with city governments, including policing, health services, zoning laws, utilities, schooling, and
transportation. At the regional level, it is city governments that provide the infrastructure and
services that facilitate agglomeration economies in urban areas. However, there is relatively little
empirical evidence on the operations of city governments as economic entities. To overcome
deficiencies in traditional datasets, this paper amasses a novel, hand-collected dataset on city
government finances to describe the functions, expenses, and revenues of the largest 39 cities in
the United States from 2003 to 2018. First, city governments are large, with average revenues
equivalent to the 78th percentile of U.S. publicly traded firms. Second, cities collect an
increasingly large fraction of revenues through direct user fees, rather than taxes. By 2018, total
charges for services equal tax revenue in the median city. Third, controlling for city fixed effects,
population, and personal income, large city governments shrunk by 15% between 2009 and
2018. Finally, the growth rate of city expenses is more sensitive to population growth, while the
growth rate of city revenues is more sensitive to income. These sensitivities lead smaller, poorer
cities' expenses to grow faster than their revenues.


Kenneth R. Ahern
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, HOH 718
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kenneth.ahern@marshall.usc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28805
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                       1



  Large cities play a predominant role in the national economy. Within the ten largest metropolitan
areas of the United States, 26% of the country's total population lives on just 1.8% of the country's
total land area, but generates 32% of the country's total GDP. These same ten metro areas account
for 54% of total urban land value in the U.S. (Albouy, Ehrlich, and Shin, 2018). In addition, the
predominance of large cities is growing. Since 2000, the population of these ten metro areas has
grown at an annual rate that is 50% larger than the rest of the country (1.12% vs. 0.74%).
  One of the key elements of a city's economic engine is its local municipal government. For
example, city governments provide essential infrastructure to support the population density needed
for agglomeration economies (Fujita and Thisse, 1996), such as roads, ports, and water treatment
plants. City governments also indirectly influence private economic activity in numerous ways,
including zoning regulations, building codes, and public-private real estate development projects.
Finally, competition in the provision of local public goods may attract people and businesses to
migrate to a city (Tiebout, 1956; Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008).
  Given municipal governments' integral role in the success of large cities, there is surprisingly
little systematic evidence on the economic fundamentals of city governments. For example, urban
economics has long studied the determinants of the sizes of cities (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009), but
in comparison, there is relatively little empirical evidence on the determinants of the sizes of city
governments. A better understanding of basic facts about the economics of city governments, such
as their revenue sources, their expenditures, and their functional areas, will help shed light on the
critical role that city governments play in the development of urban areas.
  One potential explanation for the relative paucity of empirical evidence on municipal operations
is the lack of reliable data. In contrast to the uniform and mandatory accounting standards of
public corporations, cities have historically provided unaudited financial reports using a variety
of opaque reporting standards on a fund-by-fund basis. This lack of uniform standards prevents
an analysis of the entire government organization as a whole. The standard source of data for
empirical research on local government, the Annual Survey of the Census of Governments (ASCG)
published by the U.S. Census Bureau, suffers from these same inconsistencies.
  In this paper, I overcome existing data limitations by amassing a new dataset on city finances.
Following mandated changes in governmental accounting standards in the early 2000s, cities began
2                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



publishing audited, government-wide financial statements using full accrual-based accounting, con-
sistent with reporting standards for large public companies. However, these data are not published
in any publicly-available dataset. Therefore, I hand-collect these financial statements from city
government websites and through document requests. The result is a panel dataset of the complete
income statement of the 39 most populous cities in the U.S. from 2003 to 2018. Though 39 cities
may appear to be a small sample, in 2010, these cities had a total population of 42.5 million peo-
ple within their city boundaries (14% of U.S. population), and are the primary government in 34
Metropolitan Statistical Areas, with a combined population of 127 million people, or 41% percent
of the US population. To my knowledge, this is the most comprehensive dataset using consistent
accounting standards that exists on city government operations.
    The primary purpose of this paper is to provide a descriptive analysis of city governments using
this new dataset. In particular, I aim to better understand the cross-sectional and time series
variation of large cities' operations and to quantify how city government finances are related to
changes in population and personal income.
    First, I provide stylized facts about population and incomes of large U.S. cities. Over the period
from 2003 to 2018, the population of the average large city grew by 16%, compared to 13% for
the nation overall. Likewise, inflation-adjusted personal income per capita grew by 22%. Second,
population growth from 2003 to 2018 is negatively correlated with population in 2003, while income
growth is positively correlated with income in 2003. Thus, the population of larger cities grew slower
than smaller cities and the incomes of wealthier cities grew faster than poorer cities. These results
suggest that the cross-sectional convergence in incomes documented in Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1992) and Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer (1995) has reversed in recent years.
    Next, I provide three stylized facts about the scale and operations of city governments. First, city
governments are large. In a typical year, the average city government spends $5.4 billion in 2018-
inflation adjusted dollars ($2.4 billion at the median). To normalize these numbers, the average
city spends $4,047 per resident per year, or 7.5% of the average resident's per capita income. To
provide more context, the average city in the sample has revenues equivalent to the 78th percentile
of U.S. publicly-traded corporations, with 20 of the 39 cities receiving a level of revenues that would
rank them in the top five public corporations headquartered in the same city. Given the outsized
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                        3



role large firms play in the economy (Gabaix, 2011), these results suggest that city governments
also have a large influence on both local and national economies. However, while the growth of
city government expenses was higher than inflation and population growth, expenses per dollar of
personal income decreased by 14% over the sample period.
  Second, the data show that city governments provide an extremely diverse range of services.
The largest expense in the average city is for public safety at $1.2 billion per year or 25% of total
expenses. The second largest expense is utilities at $755 million or 20% of total expenses. Primary
education is provided by a separate authority than the city government in the majority of cities in
the sample. Of the cities that do provide education, it is the largest expense. Other major functional
areas of city governments are health services, general administration, public works, ports, culture
and recreation, and economic development. Though total city budgets fluctuate over time, I find
that each functional area's expenses as a fraction of the total city budget are highly persistent from
2003 to 2018, even though the period includes large changes in macroeconomic conditions.
  Third, while academics and policy-makers focus on tax policy, cities actually receive a substantial
portion of their revenues from non-tax sources. Excluding grants from higher levels of government
and revenues from utilities, 21% of the average city's revenues are generated from direct charges
for services. This reliance on direct fees has increased over the sample period such that by 2018,
the median city generates roughly the same amount of revenue from direct charges for services as
it does from taxes.
  Having established basic facts about city operations, the second set of analysis studies how
population and income help determine a city's expenses and revenues. The focus on population
and income is both intuitive and theoretically motivated. In particular, the club model of Buchanan
(1965), as applied to municipalities (Berglas, 1976; Hochman, Pines, and Thisse, 1995), predicts
that wealthier residents demand more public goods and that larger populations lower the cost per
resident of providing public goods but also increase the congestion of the good. In equilibrium, the
provision of a local public good is determined simultaneously by population and personal income.
Other theories also relate population and income to local public goods, including Wagner's Law
4                                       THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



and Baumol's (1967) theory of the growth of the public sector.1 Though these theories motivate
the importance of population and income as determinants of city expenses, the paper's goal is not
to test a particular theory.
    First, in cross-sectional, between-effects models, I find that a city that is 1% more populous than
the average city has expenses that are about 1.1% higher than average. In contrast, a city that has
1% more income than the average city has expenses that are about 1.6% larger than the average
city. This means that holding income fixed, expenses per capita are statistically equal across cities
of different populations, but holding population fixed, cities with higher personal incomes have
higher expenses per capita.
    To control for omitted factors that vary across cities, including price levels, geography, and
governance, I run within-city regressions with city and year fixed effects. I find that a 1% increase
in a city's population is associated with an increase in revenues of 1%, but an increase in expenses
of 1.8%, statistically larger than one. In contrast, a 1% increase in a city's personal income is
associated with an increase in revenues of 1%, but an increase in expenses of 0.25%, statistically
lower than 1%. These results show that city expenses are more sensitive to population than income,
while revenues are the opposite. Thus, cities with high population growth, but low income growth,
such as Fort Worth and Charlotte, have a higher growth in city expenses than revenues. In contrast,
cities like San Francisco and San Jose, that have high income growth and lower population growth
experience higher growth in city revenues than expenses. Given the path dependence in city
population and income, these results reveal that large, wealthy cities in 2003 enjoyed larger growth
in city revenues relative to expenses, whereas smaller, less wealthy cities in 2003 experienced larger
growth in expenses compared to revenues.
    Finally, after controlling for city and year fixed effects, population, and income, I find that the
size of the average city government peaked in 2009 and declined in every year after. Public safety
expenses increased from 2003 to 2009, but reversed following the Great Recession to return to nearly
the same level in 2018 as they were in 2003. In contrast, health care expenses declined substantially
from 2006 to 2013, but by 2018, were at higher levels than 2003. On the revenues side, tax revenue

1
 Income and population also play a role in other theories of the provision of public goods that focus on land
rents (Stiglitz, 1977), competition among municipalities (Tiebout, 1956), and different municipal revenue sources
(Mieszkowski and Zodrow, 1989).
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                     5



fell from 2009 to 2012 and remained low through 2018. In contrast, charges for services increased
from 2003 to 2010, and remained high through 2018. Thus, while the allocation of city resources to
various functions has remained relatively constant over time, the source of revenues for cities has
shifted from taxes to direct user fees.
  The central contribution of this paper is to provide a new description of large city governments
as holistic economic enterprises. In particular, the hand-collected data used in this paper provides
some of the first accurate, government-wide accounts of city finances. A few recent papers have
also used similar data as in this paper to study local governments' responses to economic down-
turns (Ross, Yan, and Johnson, 2015; Rivenbark, Afonso, and Roenigk, 2018). Prior work in this
area includes Dilorenzo (1981), which studies the growth of cities from 1962 to 1977 and Glaeser,
Scheinkman, and Shleifer (1995), which studies the growth of cities from 1960 to 1990. Second,
while prior work has focused on taxes (Forbes and Zampelli, 1989; Campbell, 2004), and grants
(Buetnner and Wildasin, 2006; Gadenne, 2017), my paper also shows that city governments gener-
ate a significant and growing fraction of revenue through direct user fees. My paper also provides
new estimates of the fraction of total city expenses allocated to important functional areas, such
as public safety and public health, which may help inform current public policy debates. More
generally, this paper's results help explain how population and income are related to the provision
of local public goods, which has been shown to be an important determinant of income disparities
across geographic space (Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and Saez, 2014; Chetty and Hendren, 2018).



                                          I. Data Sources


I.A. Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports for City Governments

  To construct the sample, I start with the 40 most populous cities in the United States as of the
2010 census. For each city, I hand-collect Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports (CAFRs) from
2003 to 2018. CAFRs are annual financial statements published by local governments that comply
with accounting standards set by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Most
state and local governments are required by law to publish a CAFR and all 40 most populous cities
publish CAFRs. I contacted cities directly to obtain CAFRs not posted on city websites. The
6                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



sample starts in 2003 because that is when the GASB required CAFRs to present government-wide
financial statements using full accrual-based accounting.
    CAFRs divide city operations into three types of activities: governmental, business-type, and
discrete component units. Though local governments have discretion over classifying operations
into each type of activity, activities are usually grouped by the source of revenues. Governmental
activities are typically funded by non-exchange revenues, such as grants and taxes, whereas business-
type activities are typically funded by fees charged directly to users. A component unit is a legally
separate organization from the city government, but still controlled by the city. Typical examples
of component units are utility companies and housing authorities.
    In this paper, I aggregate governmental, business-type, and component units into one entity.
Because all three forms of enterprises are controlled by the same entity, this provides the most
complete picture of government activities. In addition, combining the three types of operations
eliminates intra-city transfers that could distort the understanding of city finances. Similarly,
aggregating into a single entity eliminates reclassification of an activity from one form of enterprise
to another (e.g., reclassifying a utility from a component unit to a business-type activity).
    The level of reporting detail in CAFRs varies across cities and over time. To provide consistent
classifications, I aggregate city functions into 11 areas plus interest paid. The 11 functional areas
are public safety, education, health, utilities, administration, public works, ports, culture and
recreation, neighborhood, development, and miscellaneous. Similarly, I aggregate taxes into nine
different types: property, income, sales, business, entertainment, utility, shared, automobile, and
miscellaneous tax. Panel A of Table I provides examples of city services for each of the 11 functional
areas. Panel B provides examples of specific taxes for each of the nine types of taxes.
    In addition to tax revenues, cities also collect revenues in the form of charges for services and
grants. Charges for services is revenue generated by the direct user or recipient of the goods
and services a government provides, such as building permit fees, parking citations, ambulance
fees, and utility bills. Operating grants and contributions are revenues from other governments,
organizations, or individuals that are restricted for the operations of a particular function. These
revenues are typically from another government, such as county, state or federal. Capital grants
and contributions are similar except they are restricted to purchases of capital assets.
                                        THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                              7



I.B. Comparison of CAFRs with Census Data

    Nearly all prior research on local public finance in the U.S. relies on data from the Annual
Survey of the Census of Governments (ASCG) published by the U.S. Census Bureau.2 However,
ASCG data are not suited to a government-wide analysis because governments have the choice to
use either modified accrual or full accrual basis accounting standards, even within a single city's
census response. Full accrual accounting, as used by public companies, tracks transactions when
they occur, rather than cash flows. Modified accrual accounting records expenses on a full accrual
basis, but records revenues on a cash basis. Without further information, modified and full accrual
accounting cannot be reconciled (Wallace, 2000). In addition, Census responses are not audited by
independent accountants.
    In contrast, since the GASB issued Statement No. 34 in 1999, CAFRs are required to include
audited, government-wide financial statements using full accrual-basis accounting. In addition,
GASB No. 34 requires governments to report a net-cost presentation by functional area in their
CAFRs, in contrast to the aggregated data in the Census. The net-cost analysis matches revenues
and expenses within each functional area to identify which functional areas are funded by general
revenues versus fees and restricted grants. For example, the CAFR data allows us to observe the
expenses, revenues, and contributions specific to public safety functions, whereas the Census data
only provide expenses for public safety.
    To illustrate some discrepancies between data reported in CAFRs and the Census, consider the
following. In its 2012 CAFR, the city of Austin reports total charges for services of $113,747 (in
thousands) from governmental activities and $1,960,312 from business-type activities, for a total
of $2,074,059. In the ASCG records, Austin's total charges are only $704,342, or about 33% of
the level of charges reported in the city's CAFR. However, this discrepancy is not caused by a
uniform scaling issue because the value of Austin's total expenditures reported in the CAFR is
nearly identical to the value in the ASCG ($2,962,255 vs. $3,002,315). In addition, the discrepancy



2
 Papers that use data from the ASCG include Zax (1989), Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer (1995), MacDonald
(2008), Clemens and Miran (2012), Shoag (2013), Boustan, Ferreira, Winkler, and Zolt (2013), Ferreira and Gyourko
(2014), Moretti and Wilson (2017), Feler and Senses (2017), Lafortune, Thostein, and Schanzenbach (2018), and
Green and Loualiche (2021).
8                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



is not caused by differences in how CAFRs and ASCG categorize budgets into particular line items
because both charges for services and total expenses are high-level, aggregate reporting items.
    Similar issues are found across nearly all cities in the sample. For example, Long Beach reports
property taxes of $179,746 in its CAFR, compared to $254,867 recorded in the ASCG, a 42%
difference. Yet, total expenditures are nearly the same ($1,970,303 in the ASCG compared to
$1,908,132 in the CAFR). Memphis's charges for services in its CAFR are five times as large as in
its ASCG reports, yet total expenses differ by 5%.
    In most cases, I cannot find an obvious explanation for the discrepancies, though in some cases,
I can deduce the differences. For instance, Philadelphia's property tax reported in the 2012 ASCG
is $500,699, which is nearly identical to the property tax collections from governmental functions
reported in the CAFR of $500,759. However, the CAFR also reports that the city's component
units collect an additional $658,540 in property taxes, for a total of $1,159,299. Because the
component units are controlled by the city, they should be included in a holistic evaluation of city
operations. Indeed, Philadelphia's component units collected more property taxes than the "core"
governmental agencies. Other identifiable reasons for discrepancies that I could identify include
omissions in the ASCG data of shared taxes with states and omissions of extraordinary gains from
dissolving agencies or selling utilities.
    Given two conflicting data sources, we must decide which is more accurate. As mentioned
previously, the advantage of CAFRs is that they are audited financial reports that are required
to follow full accrual accounting standards. Moreover, these data can be observed directly in a
city's annual report. In contrast, the Census data are not audited and are not required to follow
consistent accounting standards. There is no primary document available for study and no detailed
explanations of reporting decisions, as in CAFRs. Therefore, this paper relies on data from CAFRs
because they provide more accurate and complete records than data from the ASCG.



I.C. Data Omissions and Final Sample

    CAFRs sometimes present relevant data outside of the Statement of Activities. In particular, the
Statement of Activities might only report the total tax revenues, but not revenues by individual
tax types. In these cases, I use the notes to the financial statements in the CAFRs to identify
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                      9



the amounts of individual tax revenues. However, in the few cases where this is not possible,
I drop the city-year observation entirely. Second, CAFRs from earlier years sometimes present
more aggregated information than later years (e.g., grouping automobile and entertainment taxes
with miscellaneous taxes). When possible, I use later CAFRs to impute individual values from
the aggregated values. In addition, I recode earlier data to reflect restated information from later
CAFRs. The Internet Appendix provides details on these corrections for each city in the sample.
  Based on the above limitations, I omit observations for Nashville from 2003 to 2007, Memphis
from 2003 to 2007, and all years of Milwaukee. In addition, I drop Atlanta's 2006 observation
because it changed its fiscal year-end date in this year. Finally, I was not able to obtain CAFRs for
Portland, Oregon in years 2003, 2005­2007. After these omissions, the final sample includes 610
city-year observations.
  In robustness tests discussed below, I exclude nine city governments that are also county govern-
ments: New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Washington DC, Denver, Indianapolis, Jacksonville,
Louisville, and Nashville. Because these governments include both city and county functions, they
are larger than governments that only represent cities and likely provide a different set of services
and collect different levels of revenues.



I.D. Additional Data Sources

  Throughout the paper, I present city finances in three ways: inflation-adjusted, per capita, and
per dollar of personal income. First, all dollar values in the paper are adjusted for inflation to
2018 dollars using city-specific Consumer Price Indices (CPI) for Urban Consumers provided by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). If the BLS does not report CPI data specific to one of the
39 sample cities, I use either the CPI for the MSA of the city (e.g., Los Angeles CPI data for
Long Beach), or CPI Region data (e.g., West CPI data for Portland). Second, per capita values
are normalized using estimated population data from the U.S. Census Bureau. Finally, per capita
personal income data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Personal income is the sum of
wages and salaries, supplements to wages and salaries, proprietors' income, dividends, interest,
and rent, and personal current transfer receipts, less contributions for government social insurance
(Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019).
10                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



     Inflation-adjusted dollar amounts control for price levels within a city's time-series. There is
no standard method to adjust for cost of living differences across cities (Handbury and Weinstein,
2015). Therefore, I use two alternative approaches to control for variation in price levels across
cities. First, I normalize expenses and revenues by personal income and also by controlling for
personal income in regressions. Second, I include city fixed effects in regressions which absorb
time-invariant cross-city differences in price levels.


                             II. Constituencies of Large U.S. Cities

     Figure I presents a map of the 40 largest cities in the U.S. The cities are spread across 26 states,
though seven of the cities are located in California, five in Texas, and two in Tennessee. A number of
the cities represent individual municipalities within the same urban clusters, such as San Francisco
and San Jose, or Phoenix and Mesa.
     Table II presents a list of the 39 cities in the sample, ordered by population in 2010.3 The largest
city is New York City with an average population of 8.2 million over 2003 to 2018. Dallas and
San Jose have populations closest to the average population of 1.1 million. The median city in the
sample is El Paso, with a population of 646,000. The least populous cities are Virginia Beach, and
Atlanta, with an average population of about 440,000. Atlanta's small population highlights the
difference between cities and Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). Of the sample cities, Atlanta
is part of the eighth largest MSA, but is the 39th largest city. In contrast, Jacksonville, Florida is
the 11th largest city, but part of the 28th largest MSA.
     Next, Table II reports that during 2003 to 2018, the average person in the average (median)
city has a personal income of $52,000 ($49,000). The population weighted average income across
the 39 cities is $54,700, considerably higher than the national average of $48,600. There is large
variation between the highest income per capita in San Francisco ($103,200) and the lowest in
El Paso ($32,000). The correlation between average population and per capita income is 18%,
consistent with Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009).
     Figure II presents the time series of population and personal income. The population growth in
the average city from 2003 to 2018 is 16.0%, compared to 12.7% for the nation overall. There is

3
As stated above, data limitations cause me to drop Milwaukee from the sample.
                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                      11



large variation in population growth across cities. For example, Fort Worth, Charlotte, and Austin's
populations grew by more than 40%, while Detroit's population fell by 24%. Panels C and D of
Figure II show that inflation-adjusted personal income increased in every year except 2008, 2009,
and 2013. From 2003 to 2018, personal income in the average large city increased by 22%, from
$47,343 to $58,400, identical to the growth rate of personal income for the country. Large, coastal
cities dominate the high end of the spectrum, including San Francisco (58%), Philadelphia (43%),
and Boston (37%). At the other end of the spectrum, smaller cities in the south and southwest
experienced smaller income growth: Las Vegas (3.7%), Albuquerque (4.6%), and Memphis (5.2%).
  Finally, there is path dependence in population and income growth: smaller cities grew faster
than bigger cities, but wealthier cities' income increased faster than poorer cities' income. In
particular, the correlation between population in 2003 and population growth from 2003 to 2018 is
-26%, while the correlation between income in 2003 and income growth is 61%. To visualize these
results, Figure III presents a connected scatter plot of population growth against income growth
for four groupings of cities from 2003 to 2018 based on initial conditions. Large cities with high
personal income, such as New York and Los Angeles, experienced the lowest population growth
(10%), but the highest growth in personal income (26%). Small cities with low personal income,
such as Mesa and Virginia Beach, experienced larger population growth (14%), and low growth in
income (14%). Small cities with high incomes, such as Boston and Seattle, also experienced large
population growth (18%), but also higher growth in personal income (19%).
  These data show that since the early 2000s, the population of large US cities has been converging,
while personal income has been diverging. The convergence of populations is consistent with prior
research, though the divergence of incomes is a new finding. In particular, Barro and Sala-i-
Martin (1992) find convergence in per capita income at the state level from the 1880s to the 1980s.
Similarly, Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer (1995) find evidence of weak convergence in incomes
among U.S. cities from 1960 to 1990. However, Glaeser et al. find stronger convergence in incomes
from the 1950s to the 1970s than from the 1970s to the 1990s. My findings suggest that the trend
towards divergence in incomes across cities has continued through the 2000s. These facts will play
an important role in explaining city revenue versus city expenditures, as discussed below.
12                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



         III. The Profile of Expenses and Revenues of Large City Governments



III.A. The Size of City Governments



     Table II reports that the average (median) total expense per city is $5.4 billion ($2.4 billion)
per year. New York City has the highest average expenses per year ($78.4 billion), followed by
Los Angeles ($13.4 billion). The cities with the smallest expenses are Las Vegas ($873 million)
and Fresno ($695 million). Thus, New York City's annual expenses are 32 times the median city's
expenses and over 100 times as big as the 39th city's expenses.
     Next, Table II reports that the average (median) city in an average year has $5.5 billion ($2.4
billion) in revenues, for a positive change in its net position of $49 million ($98 million). The average
(median) city's change in net position is 0.9% (0.4%) of its total revenues. At the extremes, New
York City's revenues of $75.8 billion are $2.6 billion less than its expenses, representing about 3.5%
of total revenues. This means that New York City's average deficit is larger than the total expenses
of the median city. In contrast, Los Angeles's revenues of $14.5 billion generate an average increase
in its net position of $1.1 billion per year, or 7.5% of total revenues. The finding are consistent
with persistent city budget deficits reported in Haughwout, Inman, Craig, and Luce (2004).
     The average (median) city has $4,047 ($3,250) in expenses per capita. Average (median) per
capita revenues are $4,232 ($3,149). Thus per person, the average city collects $186 more in
revenues than its spends. The highest per capita expenses are in Washington D.C. ($18,950) and
San Francisco ($10,500). Excluding city-counties, the highest are Baltimore ($6,560) and Memphis
($5,955). In contrast, Las Vegas, Fresno, and El Paso, all have expenses that are less than $1,500
per person.
     To adjust for variation in price levels across cities, Table II also reports city finances normalized
by personal income. The average (median) city collects 7.9 cents (6.2 cents) in revenue and spends
7.5 cents (6.5 cents) on expenses. Large East Coast cities have the highest revenues per income,
including Washington D.C. (30.2%), Philadelphia (17.5%), and New York (14.2%). Excluding
city-counties, the highest are Portland (13.8%) and Columbus (12.9%). In contrast, Indianapolis
collects only 2.7 cents and San Jose collects 2.8 cents per dollar of personal income.
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                       13



  The above statistics normalize city size by person-level metrics, but they do not provide a good
indication of the total scale of city governments. To provide an alternative benchmark, Figure IV
compares the size of city revenues to publicly-traded corporations. The red line in the figure presents
the probability density estimate of the log revenues of publicly traded firms. Corporate revenues
are centered around $1 billion. The blue bars in the figure represent the frequency distribution
of the 39 cities in my sample. City revenues follow a similar distribution as the right tail of
the corporate revenues, though centered around $1.75 billion. The average city in the sample
has revenues equivalent to the 78th percentile of the revenues of U.S. publicly-traded firms. The
revenues of the top six cities are above the 90th percentile of corporate revenues. Fresno, the city
with the smallest revenues is equivalent to the 58th percentile of corporate revenues.
  Because cities are geographically concentrated, it is also useful to compare city revenues to the
revenues of firms headquartered in the same city. For example, in 2018, 20 out of the 39 cities in
the sample had revenues that would rank them in the top five companies by revenues located in the
same city. In particular, from 2003 to 2014, the revenues of the City of Los Angeles were larger than
the revenues of all of the roughly 55 public companies headquartered in Los Angeles. Likewise, in
an average year, New York City's revenues are equal to the 98th percentile of the revenues of the
nearly 300 publicly-traded firms headquartered in the city. To give specific examples, the size of
Atlanta's revenues is closest to Equifax, one of the top three credit bureaus; Baltimore is closest to
T. Rowe Price, one of the top five mutual fund managers; Denver is closest to Molson-Coors, the
second largest brewer in the U.S.; San Francisco is closest to Visa, the leading credit card payment
network; and New York's revenues are closest to some of the largest financial services firms in the
world, including Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Citigroup.
  These results suggest that the largest cities in the U.S. are comparable to the largest private-
sector corporations. Given that Gabaix (2011) finds that the volatilities of the largest 100 firms
in the economy explain about one-third of the economy's aggregate volatility, these results suggest
that city governments are among the most significant entities in the economy.




III.B. The Growth of City Governments
14                                       THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



     Figure V presents the time series of total city revenues and expenses from 2003 to 2018. Panel A
shows that the average city's total expenses and revenues have increased considerably faster than
inflation from 2003 to 2018. Revenues increased from $4.89 billion in 2003 to $6.20 billion in 2018, a
27% increase. Expenses increased from $4.92 billion in 2003 to $6.04 billion in 2018, a 23% percent
increase. Revenues are larger than expenses in all years except those around the financial crisis,
when average city expenses spiked.
     Even though city populations have increased considerably since 2003, Panels C and D show that
from 2003 to 2018, the size of city governments increased faster than population growth. Controlling
for inflation, per capita revenues increased by 8.8%, while expenses per capita increased by 5.9%,
with significant declines following the Great Recession in 2009. Revenues per capita in the median
city have increased by 34% from $2,762 in 2003 to $3,707. Expenses per capita in the median
city rose by 18%. In contrast to the increase in per capita city size, Panel E shows that average
city revenue per dollar of personal income declined by 12%, from 8.1% in 2003 to 7.1% in 2018.
Expenses per income decreased by 14% over the same period. Thus, personal income has grown
faster than the size of city budgets.
     These results emphasize that interpretations of growth rates of city governments depend critically
on which benchmarks of city size are used. As populations and incomes increase, city governments
naturally increase. However, the results show that the size of city governments has tended to
decrease relative to the income of the population since the Great Recession.


III.C. City Functional Areas

     Table III presents expenses and revenue sources for each of the 11 functional areas.4 The largest
expense of the average city is public safety, accounting for 25% of total city expenses. Public safety
includes police, fire, jails, and animal control departments. Using observations from cities with
disaggregated data on sub-functions, police account for about 60%, fire for 28%, and jails for 11%.
On average, cities spend $1.18 billion, or $838 per person, on public safety. The median city spends
$539 million in total, or $705 per person per year. Public safety expenses are covered primarily
through general revenues, as charges for services are small ($64 per capita per year), as are grants
4Internet Appendix Table I provides summary statistics on all city budget items. Internet Appendix Tables II-IV
presents the same information in per capita, per income, and per total terms.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                       15



($60 per capita), leaving an aggregate of about $1 billion, on average, and $480 million at the
median, to be funded by general revenues. Thus, though public safety represents 25% of expenses,
it represents 60% of net expenses that are funded by general revenues. In terms of an income tax
equivalent, public safety costs 1.4% per dollar of income in unfunded expenses.
  For the average city, the next largest expense is education at $1 billion, or $520 per capita.
However, the median city has no education expenses. Only 10 cities out of the sample of 39 have
education expenses greater than 1% of total expenses. In the remaining 29 cities, public education
is provided by an independent authority. For cities that fund eduction, it is the largest expense
of all functional areas. For example, education is 56% of total expenses in Virginia Beach, 44%
of expenses in Boston, and 40% of expenses in Baltimore. While charges for services are small,
education receives large operating grants, typically from the state government. This reduces the
net expense, and hence education represents only 8% of total net expenses for the average city.
  Health expenses are the next largest expense for the average city at $795 million on average ($65.7
million at the median), or $445 per capita on average ($94 at the median). Like education, health
services receive large operating grants. Thus, for the average city, health expenses account for 5.5%
of total expenses, but receive 17% of total operating grants. Finally, general administration costs of
city government are $444 million on average ($154 million at the median), or $322 per capita ($203
at the median). This represents about 8% of total expenses, 8% of charges for services, and 11%
of net expenses. These costs can be regarded as the overhead costs of running a city government,
including courts, judicial services, legislative bodies, and finance and budgeting departments.
  Figure VI plots the time-series of the average expenses on public safety, health, and administra-
tion. In absolute terms, public safety expenses have increased significantly from 2003 to 2018 (39%
on average, 41% at the median). For comparison, average health services have increased by 6% and
administration expenses have increased by 37%. On average, per capita expenses on public safety
have also increased from $745 in 2003 to $860 in 2018, a 15% increase.
  Though these statistics suggest that average city budgets have changed significantly from 2003
to 2018, normalizing by total expenditures reveals that budget allocations are much less volatile.
Panel D of Figure VI shows that public safety, health, and administration expenses as a fraction
of total expenses are highly persistent. Public safety expenditures have increased from 23.6% in
16                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



2003 to 25.4% in 2018. Administration expenses also persistent. Given that the period 2003 to
2018 includes both boom and bust years, these results suggest that cities allocate a fixed fraction
of total resources across city functions, regardless of major changes in the economy.
     Table III provides the expenses and revenues for the next largest city expenses: utilities, public
works, and ports. Utilities and ports operate as business-type activities, collecting large charges
for services. In particular, utilities have $755 million in expenses in the average city year, but
collect $719 million in fees, roughly 50% of the total charges for services received by the average
city. After accounting for grants, utilities provide a small net revenue of $2.7 million on average,
and $37 million at the median.
     Figure VII shows that the absolute amount of utility expenses have increased by 32% from $610
million in 2003 to $808 million in 2018. Similarly, port expenses have increased by 39%. In contrast,
expenses on public works increased by only 4%. As above, Panel D of Figure VII shows that the
fractions of total expenses allocated to these functions has changed little from 2003 to 2018.



III.D. Revenue Sources

     Table III shows that large city governments cover a substantial portion of their expenses with
direct fees charged to consumers and with restricted grants and contributions. In the average city-
year, cities cover 57% of their expenses with charges for services and grants. Excluding grants, 36%
(32%) of total expenses are covered by direct charges and fees in the average (median) city-year.
Excluding grants, 21% of total non-utility expenses are covered by direct charges for services.
     Figure VIII presents the time series of the two major sources of city revenues: taxes and charges
for services. First, in absolute terms, tax revenue is considerably higher than charges for services in
the average city. In 2018, tax revenue is $3 billion, 1.8 times larger than fee revenue of $1.6 billion.
In contrast, in the median city, tax revenue and fee revenue are roughly equivalent ($980 million
vs. $990 million). Second, tax revenue in the average (median) city increased by 47% (28%), while
charges for services increased by 32% (44%).
     Controlling for population growth in Panels C and D, fee revenue per capita in the average city
has been flat since 2007, though tax revenue has increased significantly since 2012. In contrast,
in the median city, tax revenue per capita is roughly constant over the entire sample period (8%
                                           THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                   17



growth), but fee revenue increased by 27%. Controlling for income growth in Panels E and F, the
average city's tax revenue per dollar of income has remained relatively constant around 3%, while
fee revenue decreased 17% from its peak in 2009. In contrast, the median city's fees per income
have increased and tax revenue has decreased, such that the two are are nearly identical since 2011.
   The above results show that though the average city covers more than half of its expenses with
direct charges for services and grants, 43% of its expenses need to be covered with general revenue,
most importantly, taxes. Cities use a wide variety of taxes to cover these expenses. Table IV
presents the general revenues of the average and median cities. The average (median) city raises
$2.5 billion ($873 million) in taxes, which is equivalent to about $1,650 ($1,025) per person, or
3% (2%) of personal income. Total taxes of the average city are comprised of property tax (42%),
income tax (16%), sales tax (16%), and business tax (5%). In contrast, the median city relies more
heavily on property and sales taxes, and has no income tax. This suggests that larger cities collect
a wider variety of taxes than smaller cities.


 IV. The Relationship Between City Revenues, Expenses, Income, and Population

   In this section of the paper, I test the relationship between a city's expenses and revenues with its
population, and the personal income of its residents. It is useful to understand these relationships
both across cities, using cross-sectional variation, as well as within cities' time-series, holding time-
invariant cross-sectional variation fixed.


IV.A. Econometric Model

   To understand the underlying patterns in the data, I estimate variations on the following model
using both between-effects and fixed-effects estimators.


   log(City budget item)ct = e log(Populationct ) + e log(Income per capitact ) + t + c + ct ,       (1)


where City budget itemct represents city c's expense or revenue in year t, t are year fixed effects,
and c are city fixed effects. The e subscript on the coefficients represents elasticity because the
coefficients in a log-log model are estimates of elasticity.5
5I also run tests with lagged explanatory variables and find qualitatively similar results.
18                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



     The between-effects estimates of Equation 1 are equivalent to estimates from regressions on the
time-series averages for each city. Thus, the year and city fixed effects are irrelevant as within-
city variation is removed, leaving only variation across cities. While the between-effects estimates
isolate cross-city variation, one concern with this approach is that other omitted variables that are
correlated with population and per capita income confound their estimated marginal effects on city
budgets. For instance, price level differences across cities is likely to be highly correlated with per
capita income. This means that the marginal effect of income on city expenses, for example, may
reflect, in part, simply variation in price levels.
     The fixed-effects estimates help address omitted cross-sectional variables, but do not reflect
variation across cities. Instead, the fixed effects estimates normalize the variables by time-invariant
traits of the city, such as geography, governance, and price levels, and isolate the variation that
occurs within the average city's time-series. The fixed effects estimates also include year fixed
effects which normalize common variation across cities per year.
     It is important to note that none of these estimates can be interpreted as causal evidence that
population and income affect city budgets. Causal inference requires exogenous variation in pop-
ulation and income. In fact, changes in population and income are potentially caused by changes
in city expenses and revenues. The Tiebout model predicts people move to a city based on the
package of public goods and taxes offered by a city. Likewise, population size and expenses on
public goods are jointly determined in the club model of Buchanan. Instead, these estimates help
to quantify the magnitude of the correlation between cross-sectional and within-city variation in
income and population with city government budgets.
     I estimate three variations on the dependent variable, consistent with the prior results of the
paper: logged values, per capita values, and per income values. As mentioned above, when the
dependent variable is in logged values, the coefficient estimates on log(population) and log(income)
reflect elasticities. For example, coefficient estimates equal to 1.0 imply that a 1% increase in
population is associated with a 1% increase in the dependent variable.
     When the dependent variable is in per capita terms, the equation is as follows:

        City budget itemct
                           = p log(Populationct ) + p log(Income per capitact ) + t + c + ct ,     (2)
           Populationct
                                      THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                           19



where the subscript p denotes per capita effects. The magnitude of the effect is the coefficient
estimate divided by 100 in per capita units of the dependent variable. Because I normalize the
dependent variable by a transformation of one of the independent variables, the coefficients in
Equation 1 and Equation 2 are mechanically related. In particular, p = (e - 1) × Dependent variable
                                                                                    Population      .
For example, in a regression on expenses, p equals the elasticity of expenses to income minus
one, scaled by expenses per capita. Thus, e > 1 corresponds to p > 0. This implies that if the
elasticity of expenses to population is greater than one (e > 1), then a 1% increase in population
leads to a greater than 1% increase in expenses, corresponding to expenses per capita increasing
with population (p > 0). Next, p = e × Dependent variable
                                          Population      . In the case that the dependent variable
is expenses per capita, p is the elasticity of expenses to income scaled by per capita expenses.
  When the dependent variables is in per income values, the equation is:

     City budget itemct
                        = i log(Populationct ) + i log(Income per capitact ) + t + c + ct ,              (3)
    Income per capitact

where the subscript i denotes per income effects. The relationships between i and e and i and
                                                                                    Dependent variable
e are analogous to coefficients in Equation 2. In particular, i = (e - 1) ×              Income          and
           Dependent variable
i = e ×         Income        .



IV.B. The Determinants of Total Expenses and Revenues

  Table V presents estimates of the regressions in Equations 1­3. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is a transformation of total city expenses. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a transfor-
mation of total city revenues. The first three columns presents between-effects regression models
and the last three columns present fixed-effects regression models, including year dummies, not
reported. In log-log specifications, asterisks indicate coefficient estimates that are statistical differ-
ent than zero. The letters a, b, and c indicate that coefficients are statistical different than unity
at levels 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. A log-log coefficient without any asterisks or letters indicates the
coefficient cannot be statistically distinguished from zero or one.
  First, between cities, a city with a population that is 1% larger than average has expenses and
revenues that are about 1.1% larger than average. These coefficients are statistically different than
zero, but statistically equal to one. A city with personal income that is 1% larger than average has
20                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



expenses and revenues that are about 1.6% larger than average, statistically larger than one. These
estimates show that variation in expenses and revenues across cities is more sensitive to income
than population. This means that holding income fixed, a city with a population that is 1% larger
than another city is expected to have a city budget that is 1% larger. However, holding population
fixed, a city with an income that is 1% larger than another city is expected to have a city budget
that is 1.6% larger.
     In column two, Table V shows that holding income fixed, cities with larger populations have
equal expenses per capita as cities with smaller populations. This is consistent with an elasticity
of expenses with respect to population equal to one. However, holding population fixed, cities
with greater income have higher expenses per capita. Column 3 shows that personal income is
not significantly related to variation across cities' expenses, consistent with an income elasticity
of expenses equal to one. Panel B shows that across cities, population and income have a nearly
identical relationship with revenues as they do with expenses. In particular, variation in total
revenues across cities is more sensitive to variation in personal income than population.
     The last three columns of Table V present the within-city estimates, holding time-invariant traits
of the cities fixed and controlling for year dummies. Controlling for omitted factors, the population
elasticity of expenses is 1.8, which is statistically higher than one. This is reflected in the large point
estimate on the relationship between population and per capita expenses, though the coefficient is
not statistically different than zero. In contrast, the income elasticity of expenses is 0.25, which is
statistically less than one. This is reflected in the negative coefficient on the per income expenses
which implies that cities with higher incomes spend less per dollar of income than cities with lower
incomes. Thus, within a city's time series, city government expenses increase at a faster rate than
population growth, but city expenses increase at a slower rate than personal income increases.
     Within-city variation in revenues is different than variation in expenses. In particular, the
population and income elasticities of revenues are both equal to one. Thus, the average city
collects the same revenues per person, regardless of the size of population, controlling for income.
Similarly, revenues per dollar of income remain constant as income increases.
     Putting these results together, the fixed effects models show that a 1% increase in population is
associated with an increase in revenues of 1%, but an increase in expenses of greater than 1%. In
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                      21



contrast, a 1% increase in personal income is associated with an increase in city revenues of 1%,
but an increase in city expenses of less than 1%. Thus, cities where population growth is high,
but income growth is low will see expenses grow faster than revenues. In contrast, cities with low
population growth, but high income growth will see revenues grow faster than expenses. Figure IX
presents evidence consistent with this prediction. On the horizontal axis is the growth rate of a
city's personal income from 2003 to 2018 minus the growth rate of its population. On the vertical
axis is the growth rate in city revenues minus the growth rate in city expenses. The figure reveals a
strong positive relationship between these two variables. Cities that have higher growth in income
than population, like San Francisco and San Jose, tend to have higher growth in city revenues than
city expenses. On the opposite extreme, Fort Worth and Charlotte have higher population growth
than income growth and also higher growth in city expenses than revenues.
  Given the path dependency of city population and income growth demonstrated in Figure III,
the growth rate of city revenues and city expenses are also likely to have path dependence. We can
observe this in Figure IX. Large cities with high incomes in 2003, such as New York, Los Angeles,
Chicago, and San Francisco, had high income growth but relatively low population growth from 2003
to 2018. These same cities also had larger growth in city revenues than expenses. In contrast, small
cities with low income in 2003, such as Albuquerque, Mesa, and Louisville experienced relatively
high population growth but low income growth. These cities also experience larger growth in
expenses than revenues.
  These results are inconsistent with Wagner's Law because city expenditures do not grow at a
faster rate than income growth. We do not see that a more productive, complex economy demands
higher levels of services. In contrast, the results suggest that higher income cities actually demand
lower levels of service. The results do not provide support to Buchanan's club model, either. We
would expect the largest cities to have larger congestion costs, leading to a decrease in public
services as their incomes' increase. Instead, the results are more consistent with Baumol's cost
disease hypothesis. If services are provided on a per capita basis and the public sector does not
enjoy productivity gains from technology, then increasing populations lead to the provision of larger
amounts of public services by a public-sector that pays inefficiently high wages.
22                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



IV.C. The Determinants of Functional Expenses


     The above results show that the demand and supply of city expenses depend both on popu-
lation and income, where expenditures are more sensitive to income than population. To better
understand these findings, in Table VI, I run identical tests as before using the expenses of each
functional unit as dependent variables, rather than aggregates. The largest functional area, public
safety, has population and income elasticities both equal to 1.1. Thus, across cities, public safety
expenditures rise in direct proportion to population and income. In contrast, the elasticities of
health spending are not significantly different than zero, though the point estimates are large, with
higher elasticity on income. Using expenses per income as the dependent variable shows that cities
with higher incomes spend more on health per dollar of income than do cities with lower incomes.
This is consistent with the notion that public sector health expenditures are a luxury demanded by
wealthier populations. Administration expenses also have elasticities of one with respect to income
and population, with higher sensitivity on income.
     The city functions with large infrastructure components display a different pattern. Utilities
and ports both have positive population elasticity of expenses, but negative point estimates of the
income elasticity of expenses. In particular, though the coefficient on log(income) is not statistically
different than zero, it is statistically less than one. This means that cities with higher incomes spend
less per dollar of income on utilities. This is reasonable because the demand for utilities is expected
to have a low elasticity with respect to income, though increases proportionally with population.
Finally, public works has a large point estimate of income elasticity, and significant coefficient when
the dependent variable is expenses per income. Thus, like health expenses, higher income cities
spend more per dollar on public works than do lower income cities.
     Table VII presents within-effects models controlling for city and year fixed effects. These results
help to identify which city functions drive the high population elasticity and low income elasticity
of expenses. The results show that public safety expenses have a population elasticity of 1, but
an income elasticity of 0.4, statistically less than one. Likewise, administration expenses have a
population elasticity of 1.5, but income elasticity statistically equal to zero. Public works expenses
are also highly sensitive to population, but not income. Thus, as a city becomes wealthier, holding
its population fixed, the per income spending on public safety, health, public works, culture and
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                        23



recreation, and neighborhood services decline. This is consistent with Buchanan's club model,
where wealthier populations substitute private sector goods for public goods. In contrast, as a
city's population grows, holding its income fixed, spending per person increases for health, public
works, and development.
  These results show that the high population elasticity and low income elasticity of total city
expenses are driven by high population elasticity of public works and administration expenses and
low income elasticity of public safety, health, public works, culture, and neighborhoods.



IV.D. The Determinants of City Revenues

  The results presented above shed light on the value of public sector services. However, as shown
before, city revenues and expenses are not always equal. Moreover, the results above show that
across cities, the income elasticity of revenues is higher than the population elasticity. Table VIII
presents estimates of the between-effect model of different forms of city revenues. These results
show that taxation, particularly property taxes, drive this result with an income elasticity of 1.8,
significantly larger than one. Thus, in cities with higher incomes, property taxes, as a fraction of
income are higher than in cities with lower incomes. Though not statistically significant, the point
estimate on the population elasticity of income taxes is large, while the income elasticity is low. This
means that larger cities tend to collect more income tax per person, controlling for income levels.
In contrast, charges for services has equal elasticity with respect to income and population. Finally,
the level of operating grants across cities is more sensitive to income differences than population
differences, while capital grants have a population elasticity significantly smaller than one. This
means that larger cities receive smaller capital grants per capita than do smaller cities.
  Table IX presents estimates of the within-city fixed effects regressions. The results show that
the population elasticity of total taxes, and of property taxes is 1.8, significantly larger than one.
However, the population elasticity of income taxes is 0.15, significantly less than one. In contrast,
the population elasticity of charges for services is 0.8, statistically equal to one. These result imply
that when a city's population increase by 1%, total taxes and property taxes increase by 1.8%,
though income taxes only increase by 0.15, and service charges increase by 0.8. In response to
a 1% increases in income, total taxes increase by 0.8, though property taxes are unchanged and
24                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



income taxes respond by 0.1, significantly less than one. Charges for services are unrelated to
income changes. Finally, operating grants are positively related to population, while capital grants
are related to income.
     In comparison to expenses, these results show that tax revenues and charges for services are
positively related to population and income. Thus, taxes increase faster than populations, though
charges for services increase in proportion to population. In a club model, we would expect greater
reliance on charges as populations increase to offset congestion charges. However, the results
show that taxes are more sensitive to population than charges for services. However, the small
relationship between charges for services and income could reflect a substitution between public
sector and private sector goods as a population becomes more wealthy.



      V. Growth Rates of City Finances Controlling for Population and Income


     The growth rates discussed previously in this paper do not control for income and population
simultaneously. Therefore, Figure X presents the point estimates of the year effects from the within-
city panel regressions. Population, income, and city fixed effects explain much of the variation in
revenues and expenses, so the point estimates are not always statistically significant. However,
these point estimates reflect general trends in city revenues and expenses, controlling for population,
income, and time-invariant traits of a city.
     First, Panel A show that revenues and expenses declined following the Great Recession through
the end of the sample. Thus, relative to population and income, the average city's budget has
decreased from its peak in 2009. Panel B shows that public safety expenses increased from 2003 to
2009, but by 2018, they were nearly the same as in 2003. Health care cost declined substantially
from 2006 to 2013, but by 2018 were at higher levels than in 2003. Administration costs also
declined during the Great Recession. These results show that though expenses overall declined
during the Great Recession, the change in expenses varied by functional areas.
     Panel C and D show the four main forms of revenues over time. Panel C shows cities' increasing
reliance on charges for services and their decreasing reliance on tax revenues. Between 2009 and
2012, tax revenues fell every year and then were stable from 2012 to 2018. In contrast charges for
services increased from 2003 to 2010, and then remained stable from 2012 to 2018. Panel D shows
                                      THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                    25



that both operating and capital grants fell substantially from 2009 and 2010. This reflects a trend
that local governments receive less assistance from Federal resources.
  Overall, these results provide new evidence on the growth rates of city governments. Holding
constant a city's population and income, we see that city governments have been shrinking since
the Great Recession. Increases in direct user fees have made up for decreases in taxes and grants.
Meanwhile, the largest functional area of a city, public safety, has expenditures that are relatively
unchanged since 2003. These results shed new light on important policy issues about the allocation
of public funds to different service areas of large cities.




                         VI. Robustness to Excluding City-Counties


  As mentioned previously, nine of the city governments in the sample overlap with a higher
government level: Denver, Indianapolis, Jacksonville, Louisville, Nashville, New York, Philadelphia,
San Francisco, and Washington D.C. These city-county governments are likely to collect greater
revenues and provide more services than would a city government. Therefore, to test how the results
of this paper are influenced by the inclusion of these city-counties, I re-run all of the analysis
excluding these nine city-counties, leaving a sample of 441 observations, which I denote as the
city-only sample.
  The city-counties tend to be more populous, which makes the average population of the city-only
sample smaller, though the median is only reduced by 1%. Likewise, the median personal income in
the city-only sample is only smaller by 2%. As expected, the median city-only government expenses
are 26% smaller, though median revenues per income are only 8% smaller. Of the services provided,
city-only governments provide much smaller health services, though most other services are roughly
unchanged. In terms of revenues, city-only governments rely less on income tax than city-counties.
  Excluding city-counties also has an effect on the unconditional time-series of taxes and charges
for services. Internet Appendix Figure I shows that in the city-only sample, charges for services
are larger than tax revenues in absolute terms and have increased at a considerable rate, relative
to tax revenues. In addition, normalizing by personal income, charges for services are larger than
taxes.
26                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



     In the between-effects regressions without city-counties, the elasticity of personal income on
expenses and revenues is reduced to roughly unit elasticity, as opposed to 1.5 for the full sample.
This implies city-counties's budgets are much more sensitive to income than city only governments.
Controlling for city fixed effects, the within-city estimates are nearly identical in the city-only
sample as in the full sample. Even in the smaller sample, a one percent increase in population still
leads to a larger than 1% increase in expenses, whereas a one percent increase in personal income
leads to a smaller than 1% increase in expenses. Likewise, the elastcities on revenues are equal
to one in both the full sample and the city-only sample. Finally, the time trends controlling for
city fixed effects, population, and income are nearly identical in the city only sample as in the full
sample.
     Therefore, by and large, the main results are not influenced by the inclusion of the city-counties
in the sample. The larger effect appears to be driven by city size, given that some of the larger
cities are also counties, such as New York. These tests also help address concerns that some cities
provide a different set of services than others. Moreover, these are strong results given that the
city-only sample is considerably smaller than the full sample.



                                           VII. Conclusion


     Based on either their sheer scale or the myriad services provided by city governments, such as
policing, public roadways, and water services, city governments influence the daily lives of millions of
people. Using newly assembled data that overcomes the opaqueness and inconsistency of prior data
sources, this paper presents new stylized facts about the expenses and revenues of the governments
of the 39 largest US cities from 2003 to 2018.
     First, these governments are large, with average revenues equal to the 78th percentile of publicly-
traded revenues. Revenues grow faster than inflation and population growth, but slower than
the personal income growth of the people who live in the cities. Second, though taxes are the
primary source of revenue, direct user fees paid to city governments account for a significant and
growing fraction of city revenue. Third, cities allocate resources primarily to public safety, utilities,
and health services. The fraction of total expenses allocated to each of these functions is highly
persistent over the entire 16 year sample period.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                      27



  The paper then estimates the elasticity of city revenues and expenses with respect to population
and personal income. The elasticity of expenses to population is greater than one, but the elasticity
of expenses to income is less than one. In contrast, the elasticity of revenues to population and
income is statistically equivalent to one. Given these elasticities, the paper shows that cities with
higher population growth than income growth experience faster growth in city expenses than rev-
enues. In contrast, cities with higher growth in income than population experience faster growth
in city revenues than expenses. At the same time, the paper shows that the population of large
cities grows slower than small cities, but the personal income per capita of wealthier cities grows
faster than than poorer cities. Therefore, cities that were larger and wealthier in 2003, such as San
Francisco, had faster growth in city revenues than expenses. In contrast, smaller and poorer cities
in 2003, such as Fort Worth, had higher growth in city expenses than revenues.
  The basic facts presented in this paper lay a foundation for addressing many important, but
unanswered questions. How do cities finance their long-term investments? How do political systems
of governance influence cities' economic operations? Why do some large cities have jurisdiction over
education, but most do not? Why do some cities rely more on direct user fees than others? Answers
to these and other questions will help explain the overarching question of what is the role of the
city government in society?
28                                 THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



                                           References



Albouy, D., Ehrlich, G., Shin, M., 2018. Metropolitan land values. Review of Economics and
Statistics 100, 454­466.

Banzhaf, H. S., Walsh, R. P., 2008. Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test of Tiebout's
mechanism. American Economic Review 98, 843­863.

Barro, R. J., Sala-i-Martin, X., 1992. Convergence. Journal of Political Economy 100, 223­251.

Baumol, W. J., 1967. Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: The anatomy of the urban crisis.
American Economic Review 57, 415­426.

Berglas, E., 1976. On the theory of clubs. American Economic Review 66, 116­121.

Boustan, L., Ferreira, F., Winkler, H., Zolt, E. M., 2013. The effect of rising income inequality on
taxation and public expenditures: Evidence from U.S. municipalities and school districts, 1970­
2000. Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 1291­1302.

Buchanan, J. M., 1965. An economic theory of clubs. Economica 32, 1­14.

Buetnner, T., Wildasin, D. E., 2006. The dynamics of municipal fiscal adjustment. Journal of
Public Economics 90, 1115­1132.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019. Local Area Personal Income Methodology.

Campbell, R. J., 2004. Leviathan and fiscal illusion in local government overlapping jurisdictions.
Public Choice 120, 301­329.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., 2018. The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility II:
County-level estimates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1163­1228.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E., 2014. Where is the land of opportunity? The
geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129,
1553­1623.

Clemens, J., Miran, S., 2012. Fiscal policy multipliers on subnational government spending. Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4, 46­68.

Dilorenzo, T. J., 1981. An empirical assessment of the factor-supplier pressure group hypothesis.
Public Choice 37, 559­568.

Feler, L., Senses, M. Z., 2017. Trade shocks and the provision of local public goods. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9, 101­143.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., 2014. Does gender matter for political leadership? The case of U.S.
mayors. Journal of Public Economics 112, 24­39.
                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                     29



Forbes, K. F., Zampelli, E. M., 1989. Is Leviathan a mythical beast? American Economic Review
79, 568­577.

Fujita, M., Thisse, J.-F., 1996. Economics of agglomeration. Journal of the Japanese and Interna-
tional Economies 10, 339­378.

Gabaix, X., 2011. The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79, 733­772.

Gadenne, L., 2017. Tax me, but spend wisely? Sources of public finance and government account-
ability. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9, 274­314.

Glaeser, E. L., Gottlieb, J. D., 2009. The wealth of cities: Agglomeration economies and spatial
equilibrium in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature 47, 983­1028.

Glaeser, E. L., Scheinkman, J., Shleifer, A., 1995. Economic growth in a cross-section of cities.
Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 117­143.

Green, D., Loualiche, E., 2021. State and local government employment in the COVID-19 crisis.
Journal of Public Economics 193, 1­10.

Handbury, J., Weinstein, D. E., 2015. Goods prices and availability in cities. Review of Economic
Studies 82, 258­296.

Haughwout, A., Inman, R., Craig, S., Luce, T., 2004. Local revenue hills: Evidence from four U.S.
cities. Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 570­585.

Hochman, O., Pines, D., Thisse, J.-F., 1995. On the optimal structure of local governments.
American Economic Review 85, 1224­1240.

Lafortune, J., Thostein, J., Schanzenbach, D. W., 2018. School finance reform and the distribution
of student achievement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10, 1­26.

MacDonald, L., 2008. The impact of government structure on local public expenditures. Public
Choice 136, 457­473.

Mieszkowski, P., Zodrow, G. R., 1989. Taxation and the Tiebout model: The differential effects of
head taxes, taxes on land rents, and property taxes. Journal of Economic Literature 27, 1098­1146.

Moretti, E., Wilson, D. J., 2017. The effect of state taxes on the geographical location of top
earners: Evidence from star scientists. American Economic Review 107, 1858­1903.

Rivenbark, W. C., Afonso, W., Roenigk, D. J., 2018. Capital spending in local government:
Providing context through the lens of government-wide financial statements. Journal of Public
Budgeting, Accounting & Financial Management 30, 402­414.

Ross, J., Yan, W., Johnson, C., 2015. The public financing of America's largest cities: A study of
city financial records in the wake of the Great Recession. Journal of Regional Science 55, 113­138.
30                                  THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



Shoag, D., 2013. Using state pension shocks to estimate fiscal multipliers since the Great Recession.
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103, 121­124.

Stiglitz, J. E., 1977. In: Feldstein, M. S., Inman, R. P. (Eds.), The Theory of Local Public Goods
Macmillan.

Tiebout, C. M., 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64, 416­
424.

Wallace, W. A., 2000. GASB Statement No. 34: Research opportunities. Financial Accountability
& Management 16, 179­199.

Zax, J. S., 1989. Is there a Leviathan in your neighborhood? American Economic Review 79,
560­567.
           Seattle



       Portland




                                                                                                                                            Boston

                                                                                       Milwaukee
                                                                                                      Detroit                      New York
                                                                                         Chicago
                                                                                                                                 Philadelphia
   Sacramento
                                                                                                      Columbus             Baltimore
San Francisco                                                                              Indianapolis
                                              Denver                                                                   Washington DC
   San Jose
       Fresno
                                                                        Kansas City
                                                                                                Louisville                    Virginia Beach
                  Las Vegas

      Los Angeles                                                                               Nashville
                                                                                                                  Charlotte
        Long Beach                     Albuquerque
                                                           Oklahoma City              Memphis
                         Phoenix
         San Diego         Mesa                                                                         Atlanta

                              Tucson
                                        El Paso                Dallas
                                                          Fort Worth
                                                                                                                                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




                                                                                                                  Jacksonville
                                                           Austin
                                                                     Houston
                                                       San Antonio




                                                                      Figure I
                                                      Largest 40 U.S. Cities by Population
                                  Note: Milwaukee is dropped from the sample because its financial data is incomplete.
                                                                                                                                                     31
32                                       THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




     1170                                              700

     1145                                              678

     1120                                              655

     1095                                              633

     1070                                              610
            2004       2008       2012       2016            2004       2008       2012        2016

                   (a) Population (1000s)                           (b) Population (1000s)
                        Average City                                     Median City




     60.0                                             54.0
     57.5
                                                      51.8
     55.0
                                                      49.5
     52.5
     50.0                                             47.3

                                                      45.0
            2004       2008       2012       2016            2004       2008       2012        2016

              (c) Personal income ($1000s)                      (d) Personal income ($1000s)
                      Average City                                      Median City

                                              Figure II
                                    Population and Personal Income
              Personal income is income from all sources in 2018 inflation-adjusted dollars.
                                             THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                33




                                                                            Large, high income
                              0.25                                          Large, low income
                                                                            Small, high income
                                                                            Small, low income

                              0.20
     Personal income growth




                              0.15



                              0.10



                              0.05




                                     0.00   0.05             0.10        0.15
                                                   Population growth

                                             Figure III
        Population and Income Growth 2003­2018 Based on Population and Income in 2003
Cities are placed into categories by double-sorting on 2003 values of population, then income. High
indicates larger than median values. Lines begin at the origin with 2003 values normalized to zero.
    34                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




               40%
                                                                                         20


               30%
                                                                                         15
 Percent of                                                                                  Number of
public firms                                                                                sample cities
               20%
 (red line)                                                                              10 (blue bars)


               10%                                                                        5




                     10-3 10-2 10-1      100   101    102   103   104    105   106   $ millions


                                                     Figure IV
                                 Revenues of Publicly Traded Firms vs. Large Cities
         Data include 3,817 U.S.-based firms traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ in 2018 and 39 largest U.S.
         cities.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                         35


               Revenues                                       Expenses

                                                   2700
6000
                                                   2550
5750
5500                                               2400

5250                                               2250
5000
                                                   2100
        2004       2008      2012       2016               2004      2008       2012       2016

 (a) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars    (b) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars
                  Average City                                       Median City




4500                                               3750

4325                                               3438

4150                                               3125

3975                                               2813

3800                                               2500
        2004       2008      2012       2016               2004      2008       2012       2016

  (c) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars    (d) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars
                   Average City                                      Median City




9.00                                               7.00

8.50                                               6.50
8.00
                                                   6.00
7.50
                                                   5.50
7.00
                                                   5.00
        2004       2008      2012       2016               2004      2008       2012       2016

       (e) Per dollar of personal income (%)              (f) Per dollar of personal income (%)
                   Average City                                        Median City

                                             Figure V
                                    Total Revenues and Expenses
36                                             THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL

Public Safety                                  Health                         Administration

                                                              900
  1300

  1075                                                        750

     850                                                      600

     625                                                      450

     400                                                      300
               2004         2008        2012         2016              2004         2008        2012        2016

            (a) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars         (b) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars




     2.00                                                      30
     1.75                                                      25
     1.50
                                                               20
     1.25
                                                               15
     1.00
                                                               10
     0.75

               2004         2008        2012         2016              2004         2008        2012        2016

                (c) Per dollar of personal income (%)                   (d) Fraction of Total Expenses (%)

                                                     Figure VI
                      Expenses on Public Safety, Health, and Administration in the Average City
                                           THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                              37

Utilities                                 Public works                             Ports


800                                                        800


650                                                        650

500                                                        500

350                                                        350

200                                                        200
            2004       2008        2012         2016                2004        2008         2012        2016

       (a) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars           (b) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars




2.00
                                                           20
1.50
                                                           15

1.00                                                       10

0.50                                                        5

0.00                                                        0
            2004       2008        2012         2016                2004        2008         2012        2016

            (c) Per dollar of personal income (%)                    (d) Fraction of Total Expenses (%)

                                                  Figure VII
                      Expenses on Utilities, Public Works, and Ports in the Average City
38                                       THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL


                    Taxes                                       Charges for services

     3000
                                                         1000
     2500                                                 925

     2000                                                 850

                                                          775
     1500
                                                          700
     1000
             2004      2008       2012       2016                 2004      2008       2012       2016

      (a) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars      (b) Inflation-adjusted millions of 2018 dollars
                       Average City                                         Median City




     1800                                                1100

     1650                                                1025

     1500                                                 950

     1350                                                 875

     1200                                                 800
             2004      2008       2012       2016                 2004      2008       2012       2016

       (c) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars      (d) Inflation-adjusted per capita 2018 dollars
                        Average City                                        Median City




                                                         2.30
     3.10
                                                         2.20
     2.95
                                                         2.10
     2.80
                                                         2.00
     2.65
                                                         1.90
     2.50
             2004      2008       2012       2016                 2004      2008       2012       2016

            (e) Per dollar of personal income (%)               (f) Per dollar of personal income (%)
                        Average City                                         Median City

                                                 Figure VIII
                                         Taxes and Charges for Services
                                                                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                    39


                                                                           DEN
                                                0.3

                                                                                                                                         SJC
City Revenue Growth Minus City Expense Growth




                                                0.2                                                      IND                               SF

                                                                                   FRS
                                                                                            SEA
                                                                                            TUC                        LA
                                                0.1                         OKC JAX             ELP                                PHL
                                                                                                               BAL                       DET
                                                                                                                       NYC CHI
                                                                         SAT DC        LVL KC
                                                                                                                 BOS          LB
                                                                                           MEM
                                                0.0                                         VB
                                                                                     SD
                                                                 LAS                        DAL
                                                                             COL SCT HOU
                                                                  CLT                        NSV
                                                -0.1
                                                                       AUS ABQ
                                                          FTW                MSA

                                                -0.2
                                                                          ATL PHX


                                                                -0.2      -0.1        0.0          0.1          0.2     0.3         0.4

                                                                   Personal Per Capita Income Growth Minus Population Growth
                                                                                          Figure IX
                                                       The Relationship Between Growth in City Revenues, Expenses, Population, and Income
                                                                               Growth rates are from 2003 to 2018.
40                                       THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




     0.05                                                                                  Public Safety
                                                           0.10
     0.00                                                  0.00

     -0.05                                                 -0.10
                                                                                       Admin.
                                          Revenues         -0.20
     -0.10                                                                   Health
                              Expenses                     -0.30
     -0.15
             2004      2008       2012      2016                   2004       2008         2012      2016

             (a) Total Revenues and Expenses                                 (b) Expenses:
                                                              Public Safety, Health, and Administration




                                    Charges for services
     0.12
                                                           0.00
                                                                                            Operating Grants
     0.06                                                  -0.10
                                                           -0.20
     0.00
                                                           -0.30
     -0.06                                                                Capital Grants
                                                           -0.40
                                             Taxes         -0.50
     -0.12
             2004      2008       2012      2016                   2004       2008         2012      2016

             (c) Taxes and Charges for Services                    (d) Operating and Capital Grants

                                                Figure X
         Year Fixed Effects Controlling for Population, Personal Income, and City Fixed Effects
       Values are logged 2018 inflation adjusted dollars, in relation to the benchmark year of 2003.
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                              41




                                                  Table I
                             Functional Areas and General Revenues
       Panel A provides a non-exhaustive list of the types of services, operations, and departments
   assigned to each of 11 functional areas, plus interest paid. Panel B provides a non-exhaustive list of
                            the types of taxes assigned to each of 9 tax types.
Panel A: Functional areas
Administration                    Public works                              Utilities
General administrative support Transportation department                    Electricity
City attorneys                    Mass transit services                     Gas
City elected officials            Parking facilities                        Water service
Courts                            Streets, roads, highways                  Storm water drainage
Judicial services                 Street lighting                           Sewage system
Legislative bodies                                                          Solid waste removal
Finance and budgeting             Neighborhood                              Sanitation
                                  Neighborhood support                      Recycling
Public safety                     Community enrichment
Police department                 Low-income housing                        Ports
Fire department                   Public housing                            Airports
Correctional facilities and jails Community planning                        Seaports
Animal control                    Strategic planning                        Harbors
                                  Building permits and inspections          Marinas
Education                         Building code enforcement                 River authorities
Pre-school
Primary school                    Culture and recreation                    Development
Higher education                  Cultural centers                          Economic development
Adult learning centers            Community centers                         Community development
                                  Convention centers                        Land development
Health                            Performing arts centers                   Housing development
Public health department          City-operated hotels
Human services                    Libraries                                 Miscellaneous
Social services                   Museums                                   All other
Hospitals                         Zoos
Emergency medical response        Tourism bureaus                           Interest paid
42                              THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL



 Panel B: Taxes
 Property tax                   Entertainment tax           Shared tax
 Ad valorem tax                 Alcohol tax                 Consolidated tax
 Personal property              Beverage tax                State shared taxes
 Real estate taxes              Cigarette tax               State shared revenues
                                Excise tax
 Income tax                     Admission tax               Automobile tax
 Income tax                     Gambling tax                Automobile tax
 Wage and earnings tax          Hotel tax                   Wheel tax
                                Occupancy tax               Transportation tax
 Sales tax                      Meals tax                   Motor vehicle fuel tax
 Local option sales tax         Prepared foods tax          Gasoline inspection tax
 Use tax                        Hospitality tax             Parking tax
 Transaction tax                Room tax                    Motor vehicle ownership fee
                                Liquor tax                  Petroleum products tax
 Business tax
 Business license fee           Utility tax                 Miscellaneous tax
 Franchise fee                  Emergency telephone         Tax on deeds and documents
 Residential construction tax   Phone tax                   Interest on taxes
 Earnings and profit tax        Utility users tax           Other taxes
 Gross receipts tax             Public utility tax          Access to care tax
 Business privilege tax         Electric and gas tax        Redevelopment tax
                                     THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                 43




                                        Table II
          Average Population, Income, Expenses, and Revenues by City, 2003­2018

                                                              City     City     City     City
                    Pop-     Personal      City    City     Expenses Revenues Expenses Revenues
                  -ulation   Income      Expenses Revenue     Per      Per       Per      Per
                                                             Capita   Capita   Income   Income
Units             thous.     thous.       mill.    mill.    thous.   thous.     %        %
New York           8,234      64.7       78,376   75,763     9.51     9.19    14.73    14.21
Los Angeles        3,849      54.0       13,385   14,479     3.48     3.76     6.48     6.99
Chicago            2,726      53.7        9,748    8,371     3.58     3.07     6.63     5.71
Houston            2,142      53.7        4,990    4,796     2.32     2.23     4.34     4.16
Philadelphia       1,533      49.1       12,996   12,991     8.48     8.48    17.55    17.49
Phoenix            1,498      43.7        3,522    3,856     2.35     2.58     5.39     5.92
San Antonio        1,352      42.7        4,834    4,780     3.56     3.53     8.36     8.27
San Diego          1,325      56.1        3,161    3,484     2.39     2.63     4.27     4.70
Dallas             1,236      52.0        2,436    2,447     1.96     1.98     3.76     3.81
San Jose             962      80.6        2,299    2,093     2.40     2.18     3.07     2.75
Jacksonville         831      46.3        3,864    4,041     4.67     4.87    10.11    10.55
Indianapolis         826      48.1        1,090    1,061     1.32     1.29     2.79     2.70
Austin               822      50.1        3,192    3,220     3.88     3.92     7.77     7.86
San Francisco        817     103.2        8,627    9,086    10.54    11.08    10.32    10.79
Columbus             795      45.8        1,687    1,824     2.12     2.29     4.64     5.02
Fort Worth           750      46.6        1,332    1,430     1.76     1.91     3.78     4.10
Charlotte            746      48.0        1,516    1,997     2.03     2.69     4.25     5.62
Detroit              742      38.5        3,398    3,698     4.48     4.94    11.83    12.86
Memphis              654      44.0        3,894    3,969     5.96     6.07    13.64    13.88
El Paso              646      32.1          880      920     1.36     1.42     4.26     4.45
Seattle              634      69.1        3,223    3,581     5.09     5.65     7.42     8.22
Nashville            633      51.6        2,696    2,537     4.26     4.01     8.29     7.80
Boston               632      70.0        3,472    3,553     5.49     5.62     7.89     8.09
Washington DC        622      64.7       11,804   12,161    18.95    19.53    29.29    30.18
Baltimore            620      57.5        4,066    4,255     6.56     6.87    11.44    11.96
Denver               620      58.4        2,778    3,112     4.50     5.03     7.74     8.63
Portland             606      51.2        1,926    1,915     3.17     3.15     6.22     6.16
Louisville           596      45.5        1,315    1,356     2.21     2.27     4.85     5.00
Las Vegas            589      45.8          874    1,030     1.49     1.76     3.26     3.84
Oklahoma City        587      45.5        1,135    1,324     1.93     2.25     4.24     4.95
Albuquerque          537      41.5        1,037    1,111     1.94     2.08     4.67     5.01
Tucson               524      41.6          997    1,090     1.90     2.08     4.58     5.00
Fresno               495      39.3          695      787     1.41     1.59     3.61     4.07
Sacramento           471      51.6          987    1,085     2.11     2.32     4.11     4.52
Long Beach           466      54.0        1,924    2,122     4.13     4.55     7.72     8.52
Kansas City          463      48.9        1,505    1,708     3.25     3.69     6.67     7.56
Mesa                 455      43.7          882      894     1.94     1.97     4.45     4.51
Virginia Beach       442      47.2        2,255    2,399     5.10     5.43    10.82    11.51
Atlanta              440      48.0        1,880    2,264     4.25     5.15     8.87    10.76
Average            1,100      52.0        5,402    5,451     4.05     4.23     7.54     7.90
Median               646      48.9        2,436    2,447     3.25     3.15     6.48     6.16
44                               THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




                                         Table III
          City Revenues and Expenses: Millions of 2018 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars

                                        Charges       Operating       Capital         Net
 Function                 Expenses        for         grants and    grants and     (expense)
                                        Services     contributions contributions    revenues
 Public safety              1,183.3         68.5             61.4         2.2      -1,051.2
                              538.9         37.0             17.2         0.0       -482.0
 Education                    998.9         13.9          398.4           7.5        -579.2
                                0.0          0.0            0.0           0.0           0.0
 Health                       795.0         50.0          346.1           2.7        -396.2
                               65.7          3.7           21.7           0.0         -22.1
 Utilities                    754.6        718.8              6.6        31.8           2.7
                              358.3        378.3              0.2        14.8          37.2
 Administration               443.6        108.4             72.2         3.5        -259.4
                              154.0         50.2              9.3         0.1         -85.9
 Public works                 357.1        103.9             52.8        66.5        -133.9
                              209.5         45.8             22.0        36.7         -87.5
 Ports                        208.2        198.7              2.9        31.2          24.6
                               31.1         25.5              0.0         5.3           0.0
 Culture and recreation       190.6         38.1             10.9        10.8        -130.8
                              127.5         23.5              4.1         2.3         -81.4
 Neighborhood                 142.6         25.5             56.0         7.3         -53.9
                               38.7          2.7             11.7         0.0          -2.7
 Development                  108.2         29.5             40.4         8.0         -30.3
                               39.5          9.2              8.2         0.0          -3.7
 Miscellaneous                112.3         89.4              4.9         3.9         -14.1
                                0.0          0.0              0.0         0.0           0.0
 Interest paid                167.3           0.0             0.7         0.1        -166.4
                               57.0           0.0             0.0         0.0         -57.0
 Total                      5,462.6       1,444.9       1,053.9         175.6      -2,788.2
                            2,369.0         910.2         199.5         115.2       -878.3
 The upper number in each cell is the average and the lower number is the median. All numbers
 are in 2018 inflation-adjusted thousands of dollars.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                     45




                                           Table IV
                                     City General Revenue

                                 Inflation-adjusted                  Per personal     Per total
Revenue Source                                        Per capita
                                     $1,000,000s                     income (%)     revenue (%)
Taxes
   Property                          1,064.1             711.54           1.262         37.0
                                       413.6             485.53           0.991         37.5
   Income                              405.1             201.31           0.358          5.8
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
   Sales                               399.4             276.57           0.511         16.2
                                       167.1             204.94           0.395         16.3
   Business                            130.7             156.01           0.294         10.3
                                        49.8              74.11           0.150          5.8
   Entertainment                        90.2              80.46           0.152          4.8
                                        22.6              31.28           0.069          3.1
   Utility                              53.8              39.46           0.074          2.6
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
   Shared                               41.3              66.63           0.150          4.8
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
   Automobile                           18.6              11.69           0.020          0.7
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
   Miscellaneous                       321.6             121.81           0.208          4.4
                                         9.3              13.10           0.029          1.0
   Total taxes                       2,506.6           1,647.73           2.990         84.6
                                       872.8           1,023.46           2.068         88.7
Grants                                 129.5             115.87           0.231          5.4
                                         1.3               1.76           0.004          0.1
Investment income                       53.1              51.38           0.098          3.3
                                        28.2              33.03           0.063          2.1
Miscellaneous revenue                  105.6              84.70           0.146          3.3
                                        22.8              31.26           0.063          2.5
Special items                           13.4              19.20           0.038          0.4
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
Transfers                               30.4              52.32           0.104          3.0
                                         0.0               0.00           0.000          0.0
Total general revenues               2,838.6           1,971.19           3.606        100.0
                                     1,000.7           1,138.00           2.382        100.0
Change in net position                  50.4             190.05           0.367         12.8
                                       104.2             140.10           0.311         10.3
The upper number in each cell is the average and the lower number is the median.
46                                  THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




                                           Table V
                     Population, Personal Income, Expenses, and Revenues

                                    Between Cities                           Within Cities
                                          per                                     per
                                                       per                                      per
                            log          capita                      log         capita
                                                     income                                   income
                                       ($1,000s)                               ($1,000s)
 Panel A: Dependent Variable: Total City Expenses
 log(population)           1.070        0.172         0.005       1.840a        3.195         0.098
                        (< 0.001)      (0.823)       (0.700)   (< 0.001)       (0.124)       (0.049)
 log(personal income)      1.614        7.994         0.058        0.245c       1.674        -0.045
                        (< 0.001)      (0.001)       (0.145)      (0.279)      (0.118)       (0.067)
 Within R2                0.151         0.001        0.201         0.431        0.171         0.391
 Between R2               0.731         0.271        0.071         0.631        0.051         0.011
 Panel B: Dependent Variable: Total City Revenues
 log(population)           1.022      -0.066          0.001       1.270         1.131         0.049
                        (< 0.001)      (0.933)       (0.950)   (< 0.001)       (0.336)       (0.081)
 log(personal income)      1.544        8.240         0.058       0.704         3.378        -0.018
                        (< 0.001)      (0.001)       (0.153)   (< 0.001)       (0.011)       (0.445)
 Within R2                0.271         0.051        0.161         0.401        0.141         0.261
 Between R2               0.701         0.261        0.061         0.661        0.151         0.001


 This table presents regression coefficients from between-effects models (cross-sectional variation
 across cities' time-series averages) and within-effects models (time-series variation within cities'
 time-series using city fixed effects and year dummies). The standard errors for within cities regres-
 sion estimates are clustered by city. Column heading `log' indicates that the dependent variable
 is log-transformed; `per capita' indicates the dependent variable is normalized by population; and
 `per income' indicates the dependent variable is normalized by average personal income. p-values
 from tests on equality to zero are in parentheses. a, b, and c, indicates significance in tests on
 equality to one in log-log tests.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                      47




                                          Table VI
                 Population, Income, and Functional Expenses Between Cities

Dependent variable:          log(Expenses)         Expenses per capita      Expenses per income
Independent variables:   Population     Income    Population     Income    Population     Income
Public safety             1.122        1.107        0.132        1.117       0.002        0.004
                         (<.001)      (<.001)      (0.176)      (<.001)     (0.155)      (0.417)
Health                    2.227         3.752       0.092        2.161       0.002        0.026
                         (0.120)       (0.378)     (0.759)      (0.020)     (0.630)      (0.075)
Utilities                 1.608       -2.829b       0.045        0.113       0.001      -0.011
                         (0.016)       (0.150)     (0.796)      (0.828)     (0.708)     (0.291)
Administration            1.174         1.525       0.062        0.471       0.001        0.004
                         (<.001)       (0.015)     (0.429)      (0.049)     (0.398)      (0.401)
Public works              1.456         3.509     -0.104         1.010     -0.001         0.007
                         (0.044)       (0.104)     (0.140)      (<.001)     (0.239)      (0.052)
Ports                     1.989       -3.056      -0.058         0.621     -0.001         0.006
                         (0.202)       (0.512)     (0.520)      (0.027)     (0.645)      (0.258)
Culture and recreation    0.875       -1.468      -0.059         0.305     -0.001         0.002
                         (0.118)       (0.377)     (0.028)      (<.001)     (0.034)      (0.166)
Neighborhood              0.188         3.915     -0.040         0.639       0.000        0.005
                         (0.893)       (0.354)     (0.448)      (<.001)     (0.534)      (0.016)
Development              -1.528b      -0.175      -0.049         0.223     -0.001         0.001
                          (0.219)      (0.962)     (0.281)      (0.104)     (0.429)      (0.630)


This table presents regression coefficients from between-effects models (cross-sectional variation
across cities' time-series averages). At the top of each column is indicated the dependent variable
and the the two independent variables (log(population)) and log(personal income)). The dependent
variable correspond to the expenses of each city function listed on the rows. Expenses per capita
are in $1,000s. p-values are in parentheses.
48                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




                                          Table VII
                  Population, Income, and Functional Expenses Within Cities

 Dependent variable:          log(Expenses)          Expenses per capita      Expenses per income
 Independent variables:   Population     Income    Population     Income     Population     Income
 Public safety             1.074         0.447c      0.084        0.465       0.007       -0.008
                          (<.001)       (0.014)     (0.842)      (0.005)     (0.418)      (0.012)
 Health                     0.513      -1.025        0.368        0.068       0.009       -0.010
                           (0.826)      (0.405)     (0.088)      (0.725)     (0.006)      (0.066)
 Utilities                -0.647         2.610     -0.017         0.243      -0.001       -0.008
                           (0.854)      (0.439)     (0.973)      (0.453)      (0.931)     (0.276)
 Administration             1.506        0.227       0.153        0.156       0.006       -0.002
                           (0.002)      (0.693)     (0.497)      (0.390)     (0.109)      (0.498)
 Public works              2.468c -0.032b            0.513       -0.114       0.013       -0.009
                          (<.001)  (0.946)          (0.034)       (0.654)    (0.043)      (0.018)
 Ports                     1.588         0.540     -0.085         0.026      -0.001       -0.005
                          (<.001)       (0.076)     (0.632)      (0.832)      (0.747)     (0.104)
 Culture and recreation     1.357      -0.817c       0.150       -0.063       0.004       -0.004
                           (0.160)      (0.085)     (0.087)       (0.270)    (0.080)      (0.007)
 Neighborhood             -3.890         1.195     -0.030        -0.120       0.000       -0.009
                           (0.413)      (0.531)     (0.819)       (0.667)    (0.881)      (0.078)
 Development                2.927        0.581       0.347        0.052       0.009        0.001
                           (0.394)      (0.889)     (0.002)      (0.774)     (<.001)      (0.646)


 This table presents regression coefficients from within-effects models (time-series variation within
 cities' time-series using city fixed effects and year dummies). The coefficients on the year dummies
 are not presented. At the top of each column is indicated the dependent variable and the the
 two independent variables (log(population)) and log(personal income)). The dependent variable
 correspond to the expenses of each city function listed on the rows. The standard errors are
 clustered by city. Expenses per capita are in $1,000s.p-values are in parentheses.
                                    THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL                                     49




                                          Table VIII
                       Population, Income, and Revenues Between Cities

Dependent variable:          log(Revenues)         Revenues per capita      Revenues per income
Independent variables: Population       Income   Population      Income    Population    Income
Total taxes               1.061        1.823a      0.161         3.966      0.003        0.037
                         (<.001)      (<.001)     (0.700)       (0.003)    (0.669)      (0.074)
Property taxes            1.248         2.847a     0.013         2.125      0.000        0.022
                         (<.001)       (0.006)    (0.934)       (<.001)    (0.891)      (0.009)
Income taxes               2.299      -0.578       0.122         0.458      0.002        0.006
                          (0.113)     (0.893)     (0.441)       (0.339)    (0.409)      (0.467)
Sales taxes                1.827        5.671    -0.004          0.536      0.000        0.005
                          (0.238)      (0.224)   (0.969)        (0.087)    (0.870)      (0.305)
Business taxes           -0.687         1.945    -0.074          0.349    -0.001         0.002
                         (0.634)       (0.654)   (0.167)        (0.033)   (0.264)       (0.590)
Charges for services      0.921         0.878    -0.194          1.772    -0.002         0.000
                         (<.001)       (0.095)   (0.434)        (0.021)   (0.674)       (0.985)
Operating grants          1.137         2.190      0.124         1.870      0.003        0.020
                         (<.001)       (0.010)    (0.633)       (0.021)    (0.559)      (0.142)
Capital grants            0.625b        0.633    -0.076          0.155    -0.001        -0.001
                         (<.001)       (0.172)   (0.031)        (0.140)   (0.052)       (0.671)


This table presents regression coefficients from between-effects models (cross-sectional variation
across cities' time-series averages). At the top of each column is indicated the dependent variable
and the the two independent variables (log(population)) and log(personal income)). The dependent
variable correspond to the revenues type of each city listed on the rows. Revenues per capita are
in $1,000s. p-values are in parentheses.
50                                   THE BUSINESS OF CITY HALL




                                           Table IX
                        Population, Income, and Revenues Within Cities

 Dependent variable:          log(Revenues)          Revenues per capita      Revenues per income
 Independent variables: Population       Income    Population     Income     Population     Income
 Total taxes               1.792a        0.809       1.581        1.829        0.046        0.001
                          (<.001)       (0.008)     (0.174)      (0.033)      (0.097)      (0.884)
 Property taxes             1.808      -2.986        0.169        0.615        0.006      -0.004
                           (0.057)     (0.389)      (0.700)      (0.185)      (0.437)     (0.299)
 Income taxes               0.151b       0.119c    -0.013       -0.027         0.002      -0.004
                           (0.649)      (0.434)    (0.921)      (0.854)       (0.173)     (0.208)
 Sales taxes                0.033        0.249     -0.035         0.119      -0.002       -0.001
                           (0.964)      (0.661)    (0.547)       (0.077)     (0.009)      (0.326)
 Business taxes             3.204      -1.161        0.045        0.215        0.000        0.000
                           (0.279)     (0.748)      (0.307)      (0.153)      (0.748)      (0.890)
 Charges for services       0.829        0.436     -0.189         0.759      -0.005       -0.017
                           (0.012)      (0.290)    (0.591)       (0.202)     (0.587)      (0.081)
 Operating grants           2.212        0.878       1.554        0.340       0.041       -0.006
                           (0.004)      (0.316)     (0.009)      (0.349)     (<.001)      (0.603)
 Capital grants             1.345        1.614     -0.323         0.540      -0.007         0.008
                           (0.153)      (0.019)    (0.199)       (0.005)     (0.215)       (0.014)


 This table presents regression coefficients from within-effects models (time-series variation within
 cities' time-series using city fixed effects and year dummies). The coefficients on the year dummies
 are not presented. At the top of each column is indicated the dependent variable and the the
 two independent variables (log(population)) and log(personal income)). The dependent variable
 correspond to the type of revenues of each city listed on the rows. The standard errors are clustered
 by city. Revenues per capita are in $1,000s. p-values are in parentheses.
