                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE ROLE OF PAID FAMILY LEAVE IN LABOR SUPPLY RESPONSES TO A SPOUSE'S
                     DISABILITY OR HEALTH SHOCK

                                     Priyanka Anand
                                       Laura Dague
                                    Kathryn L. Wagner

                                    Working Paper 28808
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28808


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 2021




We are grateful to Manasi Deshpande, Mark Klee, Amal Harrati, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and
participants at the ASHEcon 2019, APPAM 2019, and AEA 2021 annual meetings for helpful
comments. The authors have received funding from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth
to conduct related research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Priyanka Anand, Laura Dague, and Kathryn L. Wagner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Paid Family Leave in Labor Supply Responses to a Spouse's Disability or Health
Shock
Priyanka Anand, Laura Dague, and Kathryn L. Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 28808
May 2021
JEL No. I12,I18,J12,J18,J32

                                          ABSTRACT

The onset of a disability or major health shock can affect the labor supply of not only those
experiencing the event but also their family members. Potential caregivers face a tradeoff
between time spent earning income for the family and providing care for their spouse, which
could be affected by the availability of paid leave. We examine caregiving and labor supply
decisions after a spouse's disability or health shock and the role of paid leave laws implemented
in California and New Jersey in the response using data from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). We show that labor force participation of potential caregivers decreased
after spousal work-limiting disability or chronic health condition and, to a lesser extent, work-
limiting illness. We find that paid leave reduces the likelihood that potential caregivers decrease
their work hours to provide caregiving to their spouse after a work-limiting disability or chronic
health condition, but limited evidence of effects on other employment outcomes. Our findings
demonstrate that spousal disability and health shocks have long-run effects on household labor
supply and therefore could be mediated by paid leave; we conclude by discussing possible
reasons for finding limited impact in this context.


Priyanka Anand                                        Kathryn L. Wagner
George Mason University                               Department of Economics
Department of Health Administration and Policy        Marquette University
4400 University Drive, MS1J3                          David Straz Hall #418
United States                                         P.O. Box 1881
Fairfax, VA 22030                                     Milwaukee, WI 53201
United States                                         kathryn.l.wagner@marquette.edu
panand4@gmu.edu

Laura Dague
Bush School of Government and Public Service
Texas A&M University
4220 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
dague@tamu.edu
      1.       Introduction

      The onset of a disability or a major health shock has the potential to affect the labor supply

decisions not only of those who experience the event but also of other family members.

Disabilities and health shocks can make working difficult and result in large medical expenses

which can impact the family budget. People who experience these type of conditions may also

require additional help with daily activities. Thus, family members of individuals undergoing

health events face a tradeoff between time spent earning income for the family and providing

care for their sick family member. Further complicating this decision is health insurance, which

may be necessary to help ease medical financial burdens but may also be dependent on

employment. In this study, we explore the labor force attachment and provision of informal

caregiving following the onset of a disability or a health shock for a spouse and the impact of

paid leave mandates on these decisions.

      There are costs and benefits to providing informal care after a health shock or the onset of

a spouse's disability. Survey data has shown that older adults in the U.S. tend to express a

preference for being cared for at home (Eckert et al. 2004; Wolff et al. 2008), and there are

significant cost savings from not using formal or long-term care (Van Houtven and Norton 2004,

2008). However, the opportunity cost of providing informal care can be substantial as well: for

example, the estimated opportunity cost of providing informal care after a cancer diagnosis

ranges from $14,000 to $72,000 in the first two years after the diagnosis (Van Houtven et al.

2010, Yabroff and Kim 2009). Furthermore, there is a long-term negative impact on the labor

force participation of caregivers even after the caregiving ends (Maestas and Truskinovsky 2018,

Fahle and McGarry, 2017; Van Houtven, et. al., 2013; Skira, 2015).




                                                                                                   2
      The literature shows that providing informal caregiving reduces labor market

participation, but there is limited empirical evidence on the decision to provide informal

caregiving (and the corresponding labor supply response) at the time of the spouse's health shock

or disability. U.S. evidence using the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) for older adults (Coile

2004; Lee 2019) and the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID) for working-age adults

(Meyer and Mok 2018) finds that labor supply tends to decline following a spousal health shock

or disability, although Fadlon and Nielsen (2017) find that individuals in Denmark tend not to

change their labor supply in response to a spousal health shock. Although caregiving needs are

growing because of the aging population, changing family structures (e.g. fewer children,

children living farther apart from parents, and lower likelihood of a household member not in the

workforce) means that the decision to provide spousal caregiving is likely to be increasingly

important, and policies that recognize the complex nature of caregiving needs may be necessary

(Schulz & Eden, 2016).

      Another factor that may contribute to the decision to provide informal caregiving is the

availability of job-protected leave. In the event of a disability onset or health shock of a spouse,

paid leave may reduce the conflicting incentives an employee faces between providing additional

care for their spouse themselves and continuing to maintain a steady income stream by providing

employees with the freedom to care for their spouse as well as continuing to earn their income.

Although the COVID-19 pandemic brought the issue of paid leave to the forefront, with the

Families First Coronavirus Response Act temporarily requiring employers to provide paid leave

to workers who are affected by COVID-19, employers in the U.S. are largely not required to

accommodate worker family caregiving needs. Under the Family and Medical Leave Act

(FMLA) of 1993, certain employees at firms with more than 50 employees are entitled to job



                                                                                                       3
protected leave that continues any group health insurance, but this leave is unpaid. A few states

have created state paid family leave programs for employees who experience qualifying family

or health events that provide partially or fully compensated time away from work to provide

caregiving to family members. Six states currently mandate paid family leave (California, Rhode

Island, New Jersey, New York, Washington, and Washington D.C.) with a few more state

policies taking effect in the near future (Massachusetts in 2021, Connecticut in 2022, and Oregon

in 2023) and many additional states considering adopting their own policies (Brainerd, 2017). At

the national level, the American Families Plan proposed by President Biden in April 2021 would

permanently guarantee all workers in the U.S. twelve weeks of paid family leave.

      Understanding how paid leave policies affect labor productivity is important for individual

families and for the larger economy, but labor supply responses for potential caregivers of

spouses experiencing a disability or health shock have not been examined in the U.S. in the

context of the availability of paid, job-protected leave. Saad-Lessler (2020) estimates the impact

of paid leave on the labor force participation of informal caregivers in California, but does not

examine the decision to provide informal caregiving after the health shock. Most recent work on

paid leave has focused on the effect on women's careers after childbirth, given the importance of

maternity leave on the early career paths of women. Paid leave laws are more common in OECD

countries than in the U.S., and research focused on those countries has found that paid leave of

up to one year results in an increase in women's employment following childbirth (Ruhm, 1998;

Lalive & Zweimüller, 2009). In the U.S., recent work has analyzed the impact of California's

2004 Paid Leave Act and found that women's employment and wages improved in the short run

(Rossin-Slater, Ruhm, and Waldfogel, 2013; Baum and Ruhm, 2016; Byker, 2016), but possibly

has little impact on the longer-term (Bailey et al., 2019). There is also no evidence that



                                                                                                     4
increasing the paid leave benefit amount increases leave duration or leads to adverse labor

market outcomes for women after childbirth (Rossin-Slater et al., 2020).

       In this paper, we study the caregiving and labor supply decisions after a spousal disability

or health shock and how paid leave laws influence this relationship. We employ an event study

difference-in-differences strategy to evaluate the likelihood of labor force exit, reduction in

weeks worked, earnings, and caregiving provision following a spouse's onset of a disability or

health shock in the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) for both the potential

caregiver and the spouse. We examine the effect of paid leave mandates on these relationships

overall and separately for various subgroups. Our results show that the onset of a work-limiting

chronic health condition, disability or illness of a spouse reduces the labor force attachment of

the spouse and potential caregiver, which is consistent with earlier research in the U.S. We also

find some evidence that paid leave mandates increase the likelihood that the spouse works full

time after their work-limiting chronic health condition or disability and reduce the likelihood that

their potential caregivers would decrease their work hours due to providing care; however, we

did not find evidence of an impact on other outcomes, for which we discuss several potential

explanations.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information

on paid leave laws and the specific laws we use for identification in our differences-in-

differences model. Section 3 describes the data we use in the study. Section 4 describes our

empirical methods. Section 5 presents the results of our empirical work, and Section 6 concludes.

      2.        Background on Paid and Job-protected Leave

      The 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) was the first U.S. federal law to

guarantee job-protected leave to eligible employees. At the time of its passage, the primary focus


                                                                                                    5
of FMLA was its provision of maternity leave for American women, although the law also

provided coverage for other family and medical situations and for an individual's own illness.

The law required that public sector agencies and private employers with 50 or more workers had

to cover 12 weeks of continued health insurance and a job-protected leave of absence for

qualifying employees 2 who required time off for either pregnancy, own illness, or to care for a

sick family member. Despite the possibility of leave offered by the policy, there are limitations

to FMLA coverage. Only 55 percent of employees are actually eligible for a leave of absence

under the policy (Ruhm, 1997). Also, FMLA does not require that an employer pay wages during

a leave of absence, meaning workers may lose their primary source of income if they take a leave

of absence. Perhaps as a result of these weaknesses, most studies of FMLA have found small or

insignificant effects of the policy on employment (Waldfogel 1999; Baum, 2006).

          While FMLA provides unpaid leave for qualifying employees, there are limited options

for paid leave in the U.S. To help replace wages lost due to an individual's own illness, paid sick

leave mandates allow employees to earn paid sick leave credits that can accrue from one year to

the next. These credits allow workers to take time off due to their own illness and not lose pay.

However, these mandates are not universal to all states and often exempt small firms (Maclean et

al. 2020). Offering paid parental or paid family leave as an employee benefit is not as common

as offering paid sick leave (Sawhill et al. 2019), but has become more prevalent among private

sector firms in the U.S., especially those where employees invest in more human capital prior to

a family event requiring a leave of absence. Given the larger human capital investments, firms

have an increased incentive for employees to return following leave. Employees with less human




2
    Qualifying employees had to have worked at least 1250 hours with the company in the prior year.

                                                                                                      6
capital, however, may have larger gains from paid family leave since they usually earn lower

income (Goldin et al. 2020).

        Despite its documented effects in comparable countries (Ruhm, 1998; Lalive &

Zweimüller, 2009), paid leave remains uncommon in the U.S. As of December 2020, only six

states (California, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, Washington, and the District of

Columbia,) had active programs and three states (Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Oregon) had

programs that were awaiting implementation (Donovan, 2019; Feinberg, 2019). Paid leave in the

U.S. tends to be shorter in duration and less generous than comparable countries. For example,

the wage replacement rate of the employees' full wages was 55% in California and 67% in New

Jersey, which is less generous than replacement rates in other paid leave countries. Of 34 OECD

countries, 15 provided a wage replacement rate of at least 80% to care for a sick adult family

member (Raub et al. 2018). Furthermore, both California and New Jersey mandated only 6

weeks of paid leave during the time period of our study compared to up to three months of leave

in 8 OECD countries (Raub et al. 2018). 3 Even the less generous U.S. paid leave laws, however,

have documented positive effects on women's labor market outcomes following childbirth

(Rossin-Slater et al., 2013; Baum & Ruhm, 2016; Byker, 2016).

        Even though paid leave policies tend to emphasize parental leave for birth or adoption,

there are many reasons to suspect that paid leave policies may also affect labor outcomes for

individuals caring for a spouse following a disability or health event. First, estimates of the



    3
       Note that as of 2020, California has increased the coverage length to 8 weeks, and New Jersey has increased
its coverage to 12 weeks. Please see state websites for further information.
https://www.ny.gov/sites/ny.gov/files/atoms/files/PaidFamilyLeave_BusinessOwnerFactSheet.pdf,
https://www.nj.gov/labor/forms_pdfs/tdi/WPR-119%20(1-18).pdf, https://www.edd.ca.gov/disability/about_pfl.htm,



                                                                                                                 7
opportunity cost of providing informal care to a spouse suggest that the continuation of wages

during a leave of absence could be an important factor for family caregiving decisions (Van

Houtven et al., 2010; Yabroff and Kim, 2009). Second, if couples instead choose formal care

following a diagnosis because a spouse is unable to provide care themselves, this adds to overall

medical costs. Skilled nursing care for the elderly in the U.S. was estimated to cost $642 billion

annually (Chari et al. 2015). Paid family leave in California reduced the proportion of the elderly

population in nursing homes suggesting indirectly that families increasingly cared for members

in the home and a potential for significant savings in this sector (Arora and Wolf 2018). Third,

because providing spousal care is more common amongst women (Glauber 2017), it is possible

that paid leave could have a larger effect on their labor market outcomes compared to men and

reduce gender disparities in the labor market.

       Few papers have considered the effect of paid leave policies on caring for a sick spouse,

which is likely in part due to a lack of data availability. Of active paid leave states, only two

(California in 2004 and New Jersey in 2009) adopted their policies in years that allow for an

evaluation of the policy. Both laws offered up to six weeks of paid leave at a partial wage rate to

care for a sick family member or bond with a newborn/adopted child (Byker 2016). This is less

than the 12 weeks of unpaid leave provided through FMLA, but the eligibility standards in terms

of a qualifying event were similar. Neither California's nor New Jersey's paid leave policies

protected fringe benefits such as health insurance during the leave of absence. However, health

insurance was protected under FMLA so it was expected that employees take their paid leave

concurrently with FMLA to avoid the interruption of benefits. 4



4
 During FMLA, the employee may be required to pay their usual cost in order to maintain health insurance
coverage, although they must be reinstated at the same level when they return if they do not. For example, if the

                                                                                                                    8
       3.        Conceptual Framework

       The onset of a disability or major health shock undoubtedly impacts the household budget

in several ways, including loss of income from the person experiencing the event, large medical

expenses, and the need for caregiving. A potential caregiver faces an important tradeoff when a

spousal health event occurs: reducing labor supply to provide informal caregiving for the spouse,

or staying at work and relying on formal caregiving. For example, reducing work hours,

switching to a less demanding job, or leaving the workforce altogether are potential responses if

caregiving needs are acute. Another possible response is increasing work hours in order to make

up for lost spousal income or to pay for formal care and medical expenses. Taking unpaid leave

from work is costly in that family resources are unambiguously reduced, even if one is

guaranteed the opportunity to return following the time away from work; paid family leave

reduces this cost by providing partial pay for time spent caring for a spouse that might otherwise

be unpaid.

       We next discuss a conceptual framework for how paid leave may affect time off from

work related to caregiving and net employment in the long and short run in a partial equilibrium

context. Because most paid leave laws in the U.S. do not also provide job protection, we consider

only the financial role of paid leave and not the potential effects of a job return guarantee. 5 For

clarity, we define the "potential caregiver" as the spouse whose health was unaffected and the

"spouse" as the spouse who experienced the health shock or disability. We focus on direct effects




employee usually has a premium share of $100 per month through payroll deduction, with the employer paying
$500, the employee would still need to pay their $100.
5
  Since FMLA pre-dated paid leave laws and covers a longer time for leave, many paid leave laws expect workers
take their paid leave of absence in conjunction with their FMLA leave. Thus, FMLA is meant to act as the job
protection for paid leave takers. Paid leave laws provide additional financial assistance that FMLA does not.

                                                                                                                 9
of paid leave on one's own labor supply decision, although a decline in working of one spouse

could also indirectly affect the work decisions of the other either positively because of

substitutability of non-market time in home production or negatively because of

complementarity of leisure time. Evidence suggests that spousal leisure is in general

complementary (Goux, Maurin, & Petrongolo 2014), implying a pull toward decreased work on

the part of the potential caregiver, particularly if the health shock changes preferences such that

spousal leisure becomes even more complementary (i.e., the shock increases desire to help and

spend time with their spouse).

      All else equal, we would expect increases in the number of people taking short-term leave

from work in response to receiving paid leave compensation, as the price of taking leave is

unambiguously lower as long as the time away from work is a normal good. The short-term

duration of leave from work will also be affected. From the perspective of a standard static labor

supply model, paid leave should be close to a pure income effect for workers who were already

planning time away. We therefore expect that those who would have taken leave even in the

absence of paid leave will likely increase the total duration of their leave if paid leave is

available as long as the caregiving/leisure is a normal good. However, it is possible that

caregiving leisure time is an inferior good, and the paid leave makes formal care as a substitute

more affordable, implying a worker might shorten their total leave time in response.

      The total effects on labor supply in the longer run are theoretically ambiguous. Unlike

when paid leave is used for typical parental leave following the birth of a child, health events can

sometimes require permanent caregiving. Consider the three long-run work outcomes for an

employed person following a spousal health shock: continue working, stop working temporarily,

and permanently stop working. Paid leave is unlikely to affect the long-term employment of



                                                                                                    10
those who would have otherwise continued working, as they likely have either a strong

preference for work or weak preference for caregiving, although it may increase their time away

from work in the short-term by moving them to stop working temporarily. As discussed above,

paid leave will likely encourage workers who would have otherwise temporarily stopped

working to take a longer leave of absence. This could lead to increased permanent exits from the

labor force particularly if human capital is quick to depreciate, but could also lead to decreased

exits from the labor force if the increased time and monetary resources allow the potential

caregiver to stabilize the home situation and increase their peace of mind about returning to

work. It could also lead to improvements in productivity due to higher levels of job morale and

tenure. Access to paid leave is not likely to affect the number of people who would otherwise

permanently stop working after a spousal health shock, as they likely have strong preferences for

caregiving that short-term benefits are not likely to be sufficient to shift; although for any on the

margin, we expect paid leave to decrease their probability of exiting the labor market.

      Heterogeneity in these responses is likely along several dimensions. Prior work has

established that family caregiving is gendered (Glauber 2017), whether because of gender norms

or preferences, so we present results by potential caregiver gender. The extent to which short-

term leave durations increase or decrease in response to paid leave is likely to depend on the job

protection available (such as FMLA) in the worker's labor market. For example, someone

planning to quit their job in the absence of paid leave, perhaps because they wanted to take more

time off than the job would allow and return to the labor market once their caregiving

responsibilities were less acute, might choose instead to take a shorter total leave with the

opportunity to return to their original job following the leave. We therefore consider

heterogeneity by likely access to FMLA benefits using firm size and job duration as a proxy for


                                                                                                     11
access to job protection and potentially voluntary paid leave. Whether (paid or unpaid) leave

from work improves or decreases job match quality and productivity depends on the depreciation

rate of overall human capital and the importance of firm-specific human capital (Baum & Ruhm,

2016). While we cannot observe these, we do consider heterogeneity by observed worker

education level.

      Paid sick leave may also change incentives for the spouse who experiences the shock to

return to work themselves, which can affect family income and decisions about caregiving. This

fundamentally cannot be separated from caregiver decisions if these choices are made at the

household level. We therefore also examine the dynamics of spousal return to work in the

context of paid leave and develop simple proxies for likelihood of return to work that can be

examined empirically. For example, if the spouse is not the primary earner, the spouse's work

decision may not be sensitive to availability of paid sick leave because their shock will have a

smaller impact on the family budget. Another factor that may be important is the degree of

expected permanence of the health shock or disability. For "permanent" health shocks and

disabilities, the labor supply of the spouse is unlikely to be affected by the existence of paid sick

leave because the severity of the health condition will preclude them from returning to work

regardless of their access to paid leave. For "temporary" health shocks, paid sick leave could

change the likelihood of a spouse eventually being able to return to work and consequently the

choice of the potential caregiver. We therefore examine the labor supply responses to different

types of spousal health shocks that proxy for likelihood of return to work, and also by whether

the spouse or potential caregiver earned the majority of the household's income prior to the

health event.




                                                                                                   12
         We also note the possibility of general equilibrium effects in the form of less overall

hiring if this benefit, which is financed through required payroll taxes in both California and

New Jersey, increase costs for employers. Prior work suggests that mandated sick pay benefits

do not seem to reduce employment or wage growth, even though they do increase sick leave

taken and employer benefit costs (Pichler and Ziebarth, 2020; Maclean, Pichler, and Ziebarth,

2020).

         4.      Data

         The data for our proposed study are from the SIPP, which is a household based survey of

nationally representative panels. The SIPP is a continuous series of panels, with each panel

lasting approximately four years. For our study we use the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels.

Respondents in the SIPP participate in 9 to 12 interviews (or "waves") depending on the panel;

some information, such as income, family structure, and employment status, is provided through

core questions that are asked in every wave, while other information, such as disability status and

functional limitations, is provided during topical modules that are only asked in certain waves.

Respondents provide employment information separately for each of the four months in every

wave; however, due to the well-documented issues related to seam bias in the SIPP data (Moore

2008), we create summary employment measures for each wave.

         We consider three different types of spousal disability or health shocks in the SIPP data: a

work-limiting chronic health condition or disability, a work-limiting illness, and any disability

(not necessarily work-limiting). An individual is considered to have the work-limiting chronic

health condition or disability if 1) he or she either reported having a physical, mental, or other

health condition that limits the kind or amount of work they can do or 2) reported not working at

a job at any point during the wave because of a chronic health condition or disability. A work-


                                                                                                     13
limiting illness is defined as not working at any point during the wave because of an illness. All

of the work-limitation questions are asked as part of the core questions during every wave and

every panel. A disability is defined as responding yes to one of the six-questions about having

difficulty with hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care or independent living. These

disability questions are asked three times during the 2008 panel in a topical module.

        We then examine the labor supply decisions of these individuals and of the potential

caregivers in the six waves that occurred during the two years before the onset of the health

shock and the six waves that occurred during the two years after. The outcomes we examine are

1) whether spouse/potential caregiver had a job for all weeks in the wave, 2) whether

spouse/potential caregiver had a job for at least one week in the wave, 3) among those working,

the percent of months in the wave the spouse/potential caregiver was working full time (35+

hours), 4) whether the potential caregiver did not have a job at any point during the wave

because he or she was taking care of children or other persons, 5) whether the potential caregiver

was working less than 35 hours in some weeks during the wave because he or she was taking

care of children or other persons, and 6) the spouse/potential caregiver's total earnings during the

wave.

        One thing to note is that a spouse or potential caregiver who takes paid leave is considered

in the SIPP data as having a job even though he or she is not working. In contrast, a spouse or

potential caregiver who takes time off to recover or provide caregiving but does not have access

to paid leave either leaves his or her job or takes unpaid leave, both of which are considered as

not having a job in the SIPP. As a result, we use the SIPP to measure the extent to which people

are less likely to leave their job (overall and specifically to provide caregiving) or take unpaid

leave, but not the extent to which they use paid leave. In other words, the measures of working



                                                                                                     14
include paid leave in them, so someone who took paid leave rather than unpaid would be

observed as having higher workforce participation (assuming correct reporting). We are unable

to use the SIPP topical module on caregiving because respondents are only asked about whether

they provided caregiving within the last month, which does not address caregiving decisions for

the health shocks that occur at other times in the panel.

      For the paid leave analysis, we limited our sample to respondents with spouses

experiencing the onset of a disability or health shock during one of the waves of the SIPP, who

are between the ages of 18 and 64, and who reported living in a state that either has a paid leave

policy during our analysis period (California or New Jersey) or a state that will be implementing

a paid leave policy in the near future (Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Washington, Washington

D.C., Connecticut, and Oregon). We also dropped potential caregivers who had never worked in

the two years prior to the health shock. This identifies 3,244 potential caregivers of spouses who

experienced a work-limiting chronic health condition or disability, 1,663 potential caregivers of

spouses who experienced a work-limiting illness, and 412 potential caregivers of spouses who

experienced any disability.

      Table 1 shows the summary statistics for the potential caregivers of spouses who

experienced a health shock in the wave before the event occurred in the set of states that

eventually passed a paid leave policy. Among the 3,244 individuals whose spouse experienced a

work-limiting chronic health condition or disability, the average age is 46, 46 percent are female,

and 41 percent have a high school education or less. Approximately 81 percent are white, 8

percent are Black, and 11 percent are other; 9 percent identify as Hispanic. Forty-two percent are

from California, 11 percent are from New Jersey, and 48 percent come from the other states.

Almost all (92 percent) worked at least one week in the wave before the event. There are few



                                                                                                  15
major differences in the characteristics of potential caregivers when we consider those whose

health event was a work-limiting illness rather than a work-limiting chronic health condition or

disability (except that they are a few years younger, on average), suggesting that the types of

families experiencing these events may be similar. Those whose spouse experienced any

disability are also similar, but are slightly older, have fewer children and are less likely to have

worked in the wave before the health event. They are also more likely to have access to paid

leave, but this is because this question was only asked in the 2008 panel when both California

and New Jersey had implemented their paid leave policies. Employment prior to the health

events is also largely similar, with 80 percent of those whose spouse experiences a work-limiting

chronic health condition or disability reporting that they had a job all weeks, 82 percent of those

whose spouse experiences a work-limiting illness, and 74 percent of those whose spouse

experiences any disability. Average reported monthly earnings are quite similar as well, ranging

from roughly $3200-$3500 across the types of shocks.

      Spouses experiencing a work-limiting chronic health condition or disability, also

summarized in Table 1, are generally similar in age to the potential caregivers, but are more

likely to be male (54 percent). Education levels are largely similar, as is the distribution of race

and ethnicity, and the number of children and geographic location are mechanically the same. In

the wave prior to the reported event, just 56 percent reported having a job in all weeks in the

wave with average monthly earnings of approximately $2000. Although similar for those

experiencing any disability, this differs somewhat for those experiencing a work-limiting illness

who were more likely to be working (66 percent) and had higher reported earnings ($2800)

      5.       Methods




                                                                                                       16
       The first step of our analysis is to present the mean adjusted trends in labor supply

decisions of the spouses and potential caregivers in the 6 interview waves (which represents a 24

month period) before the spousal disability or health shock and in the 6 interview waves (or 24

months) after for respondents in all 50 states and DC. This analysis shows how spouses and

potential caregivers change their labor supply and/or caregiving behavior after the health shock,

regardless of the availability of paid leave. To do this we estimate Equation 1 below.

                                                           -2             7

           =  +  +   +  +                                             +    +                              (1)
                                                         =-7             =0




where  is a labor market or caregiving outcome for the potential caregiver i, during year t,

living in state s. The specification allows for individual fixed effects  , calendar year fixed

effects  (recall that there are multiple waves per calendar year), state fixed effects 

(subsumed into the individual fixed effect, with state of residence defined at the time of the

health event), and the number of children the person has at time t, numkidsits.  is a series of

dummy variables indicating the waves before and after the onset of the health event of the

spouse, where the 7th (or -7th ) "wave" bins together 7 or more (less) waves and the omitted

period is the wave before the health event. In all analyses, we use the SIPP survey weights to

compensate for the SIPP's differential sampling rates and oversampling of certain populations. 6

This analysis can be interpreted descriptively or could be interpreted as the causal effect of the




6
 We use the person-level sampling weight assigned to each individual in the last wave of the panel where they were
observed.

                                                                                                                17
disability or health shock under the assumption that the timing of the reported disability or health

shock is unrelated to the outcome conditional on the controls in the model.

      We then use an event study difference-in-differences strategy similar to Byker (2016) to

estimate the causal impact of paid family leave on these caregiving and labor supply decisions.

Specifically, we include those who live in California after 2004 and in New Jersey after 2009 as

a treatment group because these states adopted paid leave policies in years that are observed in

our study period. Those who live in California before 2004, in New Jersey before 2009, or in

Rhode Island, New York, Washington D.C., Washington, Massachusetts, Connecticut and

Oregon are used as a control group. These states are a useful control group since they have since

adopted paid leave policies that are not active during our study period. Our model is of the

following form:

                                              7             7

    =  +  +   +  +                                      +      +                               (2)
                                             =-7           =-7




where  equals one if a state has an active paid leave policy (that is, California after 2004

and New Jersey after 2009) and zero otherwise. All other variables are defined similar as our

earlier equation; we again omit the period prior to the disability or heath shock as the reference.

 are the coefficients of interest that measure the effect of paid leave laws pre- and post- onset.

Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We estimate this model separately for each

of the outcomes defined above.

        This model is somewhat similar to a triple differences estimator in that it compares

people before and after a spousal health event, across states that did and did not have a paid leave



                                                                                                     18
policy in place, before and after the paid leave policy. 7 It can be interpreted causally under two

main assumptions. First, we assume that the timing of the spousal health event is unrelated to the

existence of paid leave in a state; this is a form of strict exogeneity. Second, we assume a form of

parallel trends, which means that conditional on the covariates included in the model, event time

trends in the comparison groups (different states and same-state prior time periods) would have

evolved similarly to the treated groups in the absence of the paid leave policies.

          The final step of the analysis is to examine heterogeneity and summarize the event study

findings by estimating a simpler version akin to a difference-in-differences model that compares

the spouse's and potential caregiver's labor supply and caregiving decisions before and after the

health event across those who have access to paid leave versus those who do not have access to

paid leave. We estimate the following model:

     =  +  +   +  +  + (   )
                                                                                                               (3)
                    + 

          In equation (3), event time is effectively compressed into two periods, before and after

the health event. For this model,  is the coefficient of interest. We estimate this model

separately by gender, highest education level (spouse or potential caregiver had high school

degree or less versus more than a high school degree), primary earner status before the spousal

health shock (spouse or potential caregiver earned at least half of the household earnings versus

less than half), and FMLA eligibility. We considered a spouse or potential caregiver eligible for

FMLA if they had been working for at least a year at a firm with more than 99 employees and

not eligible for FMLA if they had been working for a firm for less than a year or the firm had



7
  Because of the structure of the SIPP panel, which limits the years in which health events can be defined, we cannot
include all of the second order interactions between event time and calendar time or event time and state.

                                                                                                                  19
less than 24 employees. We do not include individuals in the FMLA analysis if the respondent

categorizes the firm as having between 24 and 99 employees. 8

       6.        Results

            a. Employment and Caregiving Outcomes following a Spousal Disability or Health

                 Shock

        The estimates of the mean adjusted impacts of a spousal disability or health shock on the

labor supply and caregiving decisions for all spouses and potential caregivers regardless of paid

leave status (Equation 1) are presented in Figures 1-4 and Figures A.1-A.2. Each figure

illustrates the event study coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for the relevant labor

supply outcomes based on the three types of spousal events: a work-limiting disability/chronic

health condition (Figures 1-2), a work-limiting illness (Figures 3-4), and any disability (Figures

A.1-A.2). The coefficients themselves are reported in Tables A.1-A.6.

        Figure 1 demonstrates that following a work-limiting disability or chronic health

condition, labor supply of the individual experiencing the health shock (i.e. the "spouse")

decreases across all labor supply outcomes throughout the observation period. Spouses are 7 to

10 percentage points less likely to report working all weeks in waves after the shock relative to

the wave before, 8 to 10 percentage points less likely to report working some weeks, and 5 to 7

percentage points less likely to report working full time, with a decline in net monthly earnings

of $200-400 (Table A.1). Since for many outcomes, the average was even higher prior to the

health event, the total impacts are even larger. These impacts appear to be persistent, with the

coefficients at 6 waves after very similar to those immediately following the shock.



8
 We eliminate this group because FMLA eligibility is based on whether an employer has 50 or more employees,
and this group potentially contains both FMLA eligible and ineligible employees.

                                                                                                              20
       Potential caregivers also respond to the spousal work-limiting disability or health shock

(Figure 2, Table A.2) by decreasing their labor supply, as they are 2 to 7 percentage points less

likely to be working all or some weeks during the waves after the shock relative to the wave

before; there is some evidence that they are increasingly less likely to work over time. There is

some evidence that this is due to caregiving behavior; the fraction of potential caregivers who

did not work because of caregiving increased after the spousal work-limiting disability or health

shock, although these impacts are imprecisely measured (the effect is only statistically

significant in the wave immediately after the shock). We do not see much evidence of reduced

hours because of caregiving, which is consistent with there not being an overall reduction in full

time work. Somewhat anomalously, there is some evidence of higher earnings although it may

reflect an overall upward trend.

       Figure 3 shows that the spousal decrease in labor supply after a work-limiting illness is

smaller and more likely to be on the intensive margin compared to the response to a work-

limiting disability or chronic health condition. Specifically, spouses are 2 to 5 percentage points

less likely to work full time, although these effects are not statistically significant (Table A.3).

These results suggest that health events qualifying as work-limiting illnesses may be more short-

term compared to other types of health events and possibly have a reduced need for caregiving or

income support. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we see a smaller response from potential caregivers of

spouses with work-limiting illnesses as well: there is a 3 to 7 percentage point decrease in the

probability of working at least one week during the wave, with no noticeable change in other

outcomes (Figure 4, Table A.4).

       For the onset of any disability, measured only in the 2008 panel, there is limited evidence

of a negative labor supply impact for the spouse experiencing the shock (Figure A.1, Table A.5).



                                                                                                       21
We find evidence that working at least one week during the wave declined for the spouse, but

there was a downward trend leading up to the disability onset in addition to a small number of

observed onsets. We also see no evidence that the labor supply of the potential caregiver

responds to the onset of any disability (Figure A.2, Table A.6). Given that these disabilities are

not defined to be work-limiting, it is possible that they may require fewer caregiving resources.

        Overall, the results suggest that both the spouse and potential caregiver reduce their

labor supply following the spouse experiencing a work-limiting disability or chronic health

condition, and to a lesser extent, a work-limiting illness, and that these effects persist over time.

There was no clear effect, however, on labor supply when a spouse experienced any disability.

The evidence also suggests that the potential caregiver's decrease in labor supply may be due to

caregiving for those whose spouse has a work-limiting disability or chronic health condition,

although these results are imprecisely measured. These results establish changes in spousal work

following a work-limiting disability/chronic health condition, or work-limiting illness and

support the hypothesis that potential caregivers experience a weakening of their labor force

attachment as well.

           b. Impact of Paid Leave Laws following a Spousal Disability or Health Shock

       We next consider whether paid leave laws shifts the labor supply responses to disability

or health shocks using estimates derived from the model described in Equation 2. The event

study coefficients are graphically displayed in Figures 5-8 for work-limiting shocks and Figures

A.3-A.4 for any disability. These results are summarized using the Equation 3 difference-in-

differences method in the first rows of Table 2, 4, and A.7 for spouses and Table 3, 5, and A.8

for potential caregivers; however, we rely on the event studies to guide interpretation given that

the difference-in-differences estimates do not reveal any potential pre-trends and also use



                                                                                                     22
weights that sometimes produce estimates that do not capture the trends observed in the event

study graphs (Goodman-Bacon 2018).

         For spouses experiencing a disability or health shock, the only effect we find of paid

leave policy on their labor supply is a small increase in the probability of working full time after

a work-limiting disability or chronic health condition, although this effect is not statistically

significant (Figure 5). 9 This limited impact may be because paid sick leave is more commonly

provided by employers than paid family leave (Sawhill et al. 2019), so mandating paid leave may

have a smaller impact on spouses experiencing the disability or health shock than their potential

caregivers.

         For potential caregivers, we find evidence that paid leave mandates reduce the likelihood

that they decrease their work hours because of caregiving after their spouse experiences a work-

limiting disability or chronic health condition, with a statistically significant difference-in-

differences estimate of a 1.5 percentage point decline (Figure 6, Table 3). Among potential

caregivers of spouses experiencing a work-limiting illness, the point estimate for the reduced

hours because of caregiving outcome in the difference-in-differences is positive and statistically

different from zero, but the event study suggests this may be driven by an upward trend (Figure

8, Table 5). We do not find evidence of an impact of paid leave mandates on our other labor

force or caregiving outcome measures for potential caregivers. In the conclusion section, we

discuss possible explanations for these findings of limited impact of paid leave mandates on

labor force attachment of potential caregivers.

              c. Estimates of Paid Leave Effects by Subgroups



9
  The decline in working at least one week after a work-limiting disability or chronic health condition is statistically
different from zero in the difference-in-differences model (Table 2), but the event study shows this is driven by
trends in the pre-period.

                                                                                                                      23
       The difference-in-differences coefficients that estimate the effect of paid leave laws on

the labor supply decisions for spouses experiencing a health shock or disability and their

potential caregiver (Equation 3), overall and by subgroup, are shown in Table 2-5 for work-

limiting shocks and Tables A.7-A.8 for any disability. Our discussion focuses on identifying

whether there are particular subgroups that drive the main event study results discussed in the

previous section: namely, that paid leave mandates 1) increase the probability of working full

time for spouses who experience a work-limiting disability/chronic health condition and 2)

reduce the likelihood that potential caregivers decrease their work hours because of caregiving

after their spouse experiences a work-limiting disability/chronic health condition. We also

discuss any heterogeneous results among subgroups that are masked in the overall results. We

will not discuss subgroup results that have already been determined to have a strong pre-trend or

that correspond to null results (that are not masked by heterogeneous effects) in the overall event

study analysis.

          i.      Gender

       We do not see a gender difference in the impact of a paid leave mandate on the

probability of full-time work for spouses experiencing a work-limiting disability/chronic health

condition (Table 2), but some differences by gender are evident in the results for potential

caregivers (Table 3). Female potential caregivers with spouses who experience a work-limiting

disability/chronic health condition and had a paid leave mandate were less likely (2.7 percentage

points) to reduce work hours because they were providing care than those without a paid leave

mandate. We do not see a similar impact of paid leave laws for male potential caregivers on their

likelihood of reducing hours due to care, suggesting that paid leave laws may have a bigger

positive impact on the labor supply of female potential caregivers than male potential caregivers.



                                                                                                   24
       We also observe some heterogeneous effects of paid leave laws by gender that were

masked in the overall results. For example, Table 4 shows that female spouses who experience a

work-limiting illness are more likely (4.5 percentage points) to work full-time after their health

shock if there is a paid leave mandate while men are only 1.2 percentage points more likely to

work full time afterwards. However, these same men are more likely (6 percentage points) to

work all or some weeks after their health shock if there is a paid leave mandate, which is not

seen for women. These findings suggest that in the case of a short-term illness, paid leave laws

improve labor force attachment on the intensive margin for women experiencing the shock and

on the extensive margin for men.

         ii.   Education

       Given that it is more likely that firms with higher human capital investment offer paid

leave options in the absence of mandates, we also divide potential caregivers based on whether

they had more than a high school education (higher educated) or a high school diploma or less

(lower educated). The results in Table 2 show that lower-educated spouses who experience a

work-limiting disability/chronic health condition are more likely (2.6 percentage points) to work

full time if there is a paid leave mandate, but we do not find an effect for higher-educated

spouses. We also find that lower-educated potential caregivers are less likely (2.4 percentage

points) to report reduced work hours because of caregiving after a spouse's work-limiting

disability/chronic health condition if there is a paid leave mandate, although higher-educated

potential caregivers are not (Table 3). These larger impacts among the lower educated group are

supportive of a hypothesis that human capital levels may play a role in labor supply decisions

following a spousal work-limiting disability or chronic health condition.




                                                                                                     25
       While the overall results did not show an impact of paid leave laws on the labor supply of

spouses after a work-limiting illness, the subgroup analysis reveals that higher-educated spouses

are more likely to work all or some weeks (2.4 percentage points) or work full time (5.5

percentage points) after a work-limiting illness if there is a paid leave mandate, but there is no

corresponding impact for lower-educated spouses (Table 4). This suggests that while paid leave

laws are more beneficial for lower-educated spouses and their potential caregivers after a long-

term disability or health shock, higher-educated spouses benefit more from paid leave laws after

a short-term shock.

        iii.   Earnings and Likely FMLA status

       Finally, we performed subgroup analysis based on whether the spouse or potential

caregiver earned more than 50 percent of the family household income prior to the spouse's

disability or health shock and if they worked at a firm that would result in them being more

likely to be eligible for FMLA. For spouses with a work-limiting disability/chronic health

condition (Table 2), there is evidence that paid leave mandates increased the likelihood of full-

time work among those who were the primary earner (4.5 percentage points) or who likely had

access to FMLA (3 percentage points). Among potential caregivers whose spouse had a work-

limiting disability/chronic health condition, we found that those who were not primary earners

and had access to FMLA were less likely (1.2 and 2.2 percentage points, respectively) to reduce

work hours due to caregiving if they had a paid leave mandate compared to a smaller estimated

effect for those who were primary earners or probably did not have access to FMLA (Table 3).

These findings suggest that having a paid leave mandate together with job protection under

FMLA is most likely to increase labor force attachment for spouses and their potential




                                                                                                     26
caregivers, particularly those whose family budget is more impacted by the spouse's work-

limiting disability or chronic health condition.

       We also observe some heterogeneous effects among the FMLA subgroups that were

masked in the overall results. For example, Table 3 shows that potential caregivers who likely

have access to FMLA were also more likely (4 percentage points) to have worked all weeks and

have higher earnings ($452) after their spouse's work-limiting disability/chronic health

condition, while those who do not have FMLA access were less likely to work all weeks (6.4

percentage points) and have lower earnings ($163). We also see that spouses with likely access

to FMLA are more likely to work all weeks or work full time after a work-limiting illness. These

findings further support the hypothesis that paid leave mandates increase labor market outcomes

for spouses and potential caregivers who are likely to have access to FMLA.

      7.       Conclusions

      In this paper, we examine labor market and caregiving decisions of potential caregivers

and their spouses before and after the onset of different types of spousal disability and health

shocks. We find clear evidence of long-term declines in the labor supply of potential caregivers

and their spouses after a work-limiting disability or chronic health condition and smaller effects

after a work-limiting illness. This evidence suggests that there may be a role for paid leave to

provide transitional assistance to families at the time of onset.

      In order to examine whether policy can reduce these labor market declines of potential

caregivers, we evaluate the impact of paid leave mandates in California and New Jersey on the

labor supply decisions of spouses and their potential caregivers following a spousal disability or

health shock. For the individuals who themselves experienced a work-limiting disability or

chronic health condition, we find that paid leave laws may slightly increase their probability of



                                                                                                    27
returning to full-time work after the shock. For the potential caregivers, we find that paid leave

laws reduce the probability of decreasing working hours to provide care after a spouse's work-

limiting disability or chronic health condition. We generally do not find evidence of an impact of

paid leave mandates on our other employment and caregiving measures. We also find that paid

leave mandates tend to be associated with the largest increase in labor force attachment for

female or lower-educated potential caregivers whose spouse experiences a work-limiting

disability or chronic health condition, as well as those who likely have access to FMLA.

      There are some limitations of our work that may hinder our ability to detect the impacts of

paid leave mandates on the labor supply after a spouse's disability or health shock. One

limitation is the small number of states that have paid leave mandates, which limits the number

of people who have been exposed and hence the sample size for measuring effects. It is possible

that the small sample size is an explanation for why many of our findings are not particularly

precise, and that with broader adoption more families experiencing the policies could provide

stronger evidence. Another limitation is that we are unable to directly observe whether

individuals had prior access to paid leave through an employer, which could dilute our results.

Finally, the measures of labor force attachment available in the SIPP simply may not capture

increases in short-run durations of leave taking and so any impacts may be occurring on

unmeasured margins with limited long-run effects.

      In addition to the study limitations above, it is possible that the paid leave mandates in

California and New Jersey did not have a large impact on labor supply decisions after a spouse's

disability or health shock compared to the impact after childbirth that has been well documented

in the literature. One potential reason may be related to lack of awareness of coverage for

spousal care, since the policies are heavily focused on caring for a newborn child or maternity



                                                                                                     28
leave. Surveys conducted in the first three states to mandate paid leave (California, New Jersey,

and Rhode Island) consistently find that workers are not aware that paid leave also applies for

spousal care in addition to childcare (Feinberg 2018). Broader implementation at the national

level could increase awareness, as well as additional outreach or marketing within these states.

Another reason paid leave mandates may have had a limited impact could be the nature of the

disability and health shocks, which may be too severe and long-term for six weeks of paid leave

at 55 to 67 percent wage replacement to be a significant factor in family decision-making. Paid

leave is not intended to be a long-term support for potential caregivers, but it is possible these

benefits would be more useful as short-term stabilizers after a disability or health shock if the

wage replacement rate were higher and/or the duration were longer. Finally, it could be the case

that unobservable heterogeneous effects cancelled each other out to cause a null net result; for

example, if one's alternative to having paid leave were quitting a job or being fired, we would

expect paid leave to result in more hours and higher earnings and employment, but if the

alternative were continuing the job under increased pressure, we would expect paid leave to

result in fewer hours and lower earnings but similar income as a result of paid leave. It is

difficult to proxy for these potential counterfactuals in the available data.

      A small impact of paid leave mandates on measured labor market outcomes does not

necessarily mean small welfare effects because, as demonstrated by other work on social

insurance, people may be undertaking costly unmeasured strategies to mitigate the effects of the

shock (Chetty & Looney 2007). For example, if in the absence of paid leave, a potential

caregiver were holding on to a job at the expense of their physical and mental well-being, and

paid leave allowed them to keep the job while smoothing their income and relieving a potential

stressor, there would be positive welfare effects even without an employment effect. Future work



                                                                                                     29
should consider the impact of paid leave mandates on additional outcomes that include well-

being measures, in addition to using data from the states with newly passed laws to increase the

likelihood of detecting labor supply effects. This will help inform policy on paid leave laws for

potential caregivers.




                                                                                                    30
                                             References

Arora, K., & Wolf, D. A. (2018). Does paid family leave reduce nursing home use? The
        California experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 37(1), 38-62.
Bailey, M., Byker, T., Patel, E., and Ramnath, S. "The Long-Term Effects of California's 2004
        Paid Family Leave Act on Women's Careers: Evidence from U.S. Tax Data." Working
        Paper. October 23, 2019.
Baum, Charles L. "The effects of governmentmandated family leave on employer family leave
        policies." Contemporary Economic Policy 24, no. 3 (2006): 432-445.
Baum, C. L., & Ruhm, C. J. (2016). The effects of paid family leave in California on labor
        market outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 35(2), 333-356.
Brainerd, J. (2017). Paid family leave in the states. National Conference of State Legislatures.
        Legis Brief, 25(31).
Byker, T. S. (2016). Paid parental leave laws in the United States: does short-duration leave
        affect women's labor-force attachment?. American Economic Review, 106(5), 242-46.
Chari, A. V., Engberg, J., Ray, K. N., & Mehrotra, A. (2015). The opportunity costs of informal
        eldercare in the United States: new estimates from the American time use survey. Health
        services research, 50(3), 871-882.
Coile, C. C. (2004). Health shocks and couples' labor supply decisions (No. w10810). National
        Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R., & Looney, A. (2007). Income risk and the benefits of social insurance: Evidence
        from Indonesia and the United States. In Fiscal Policy and Management in East Asia (pp.
        99-121). University of Chicago Press.
Donovan, S.A. (2019). "Paid Family Leave in the United States." Congressional Research
        Service Report.
Eckert, J. K., Morgan, L. A., & Swamy, N. (2004). Preferences for receipt of care among
        community-dwelling adults. Journal of aging & social policy, 16(2), 49-65.
Fadlon, I., & Nielsen, T. H. (2017). "Family Labor Supply Responses to Severe Health Shocks"
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21352.
Fahle, S. P. and McGarry, K. M. (2017). "Caregiving and Work: The Relationship between
        Labor Market Attachment and Parental Caregiving."
Feinberg, L. F. (2018). Breaking new ground: supporting employed family caregivers with
        workplace leave policies. Institute APP, editor. Washington, DC: AARP.
Feinberg, L. F. (2019). Paid family leave: an emerging benefit for employed family caregivers of
        older adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 67(7), 1336-1341.
Glauber, Rebecca. "Gender differences in spousal care across the later life course." Research on
        aging 39, no. 8 (2017): 934-959.
Goldin, C., Kerr, S. P., & Olivetti, C. (2020). Why Firms Offer Paid Parental Leave: An
        Exploratory Study (No. w26617). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing (No.
        w25018). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goux, Dominique, Eric Maurin, and Barbara Petrongolo. "Worktime regulations and spousal
        labor supply." American Economic Review 104, no. 1 (2014): 252-76.
Katz, S. J., Kabeto, M., & Langa, K. M. (2000). Gender disparities in the receipt of home care
        for elderly people with disability in the United States. Journal of the American Medical
        Association, 284(23), 3022­3027.


                                                                                              31
Lalive, R., & Zweimüller, J. (2009). How does parental leave affect fertility and return to work?
        Evidence from two natural experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3),
        1363-1402.
Lee, Siha. (2019) "Household Responses to Disability Shocks: Spousal Labor Supply,
        Caregiving, and Disability Insurance." Working paper.
Maclean, J. C., Pichler, S., & Ziebarth, N. R. (2020). Mandated sick pay: Coverage, utilization,
        and welfare effects (No. w26832). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Maestas, N., & Truskinovsky, Y. 2018, June 12. "Caregiving and Labor Force Participation:
        New Evidence from the American Time Use Survey." Presentation of work in progress
        given at the American Society of Health Economists.
Meyer, B. D., & Mok, W. K. (2019). Disability, earnings, income and consumption. Journal of
        Public Economics, 171, 51-69.
Moore, Jeffrey C. (2008). "Seam Bias in the 2004 SIPP Panel: Much Improved, but Much Bias Still
        Remains" Working paper. Available at: https://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/rsm2008-
        03.pdf.
Raub, A., Earle, A., Chung, P., Batra, P., Schickedanz, A., Bose, B., ... & Heymann, J. (2018).
        Paid Leave for Family Illness: A Detailed Look at Approaches Across OECD Countries.
        WORLD Policy Analysis Center. https://www. worldpolicycenter.
        org/sites/default/files/WORLD% 20Report.
RossinSlater, M., Ruhm, C. J., & Waldfogel, J. (2013). The effects of California's paid family
        leave program on mothers' leavetaking and subsequent labor market outcomes. Journal
        of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(2), 224-245.
Rossin-Slater, M., & Uniat, L. (2019). Paid Family Leave Policies And Population Health.
        Health Affairs Health Policy Brief.
Ruhm, C. J. (1997). Policy watch: the family and medical leave act. Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 11(3), 175-186.
Ruhm, C. J. (1998). The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: Lessons from
        Europe. The quarterly journal of economics, 113(1), 285-317.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Parental leave and child health. Journal of health economics, 19(6), 931-
        960.
Saad-Lessler, J. (2020). How does paid family leave affect unpaid care providers?. The Journal
        of the Economics of Ageing, 17, 100265.
Sawhill, I.V., Nzau, S., & Guyot, K. (2019) A primer on access to and use of paid family leave.
        Washington, D.C. The Brookings Institute.
Schulz, R., & Eden, J. (Eds.). (2016). Families caring for an aging America. Washington, DC:
        National Academies Press.
Siegel, Michele J. "Measuring the effect of husband's health on wife's labor supply." Health
        Economics 15, no. 6 (2006): 579-601.
Skira, M. M. (2015). "Dynamic wage and employment effects of elder parent care."
        International Economic Review, 56(1), 63­93.
Van Houtven, C. H., Coe, N. B., and Skira, M. M. (2013). `The effect of informal care on work
        and wages.' Journal of Health Economics, 32(1), 240­252.
Van Houtven, C. H., & Norton, E. C. (2008). Informal care and Medicare expenditures: testing
        for heterogeneous treatment effects. Journal of health economics, 27(1), 134-156.
Van Houtven, C. H., & Norton, E. C. (2004). Informal care and health care use of older adults.
        Journal of health economics, 23(6), 1159-1180.


                                                                                                32
Van Houtven, C. H., Ramsey, S. D., Hornbrook, M. C., Atienza, A. A., & van Ryn, M. (2010).
       Economic burden for informal caregivers of lung and colorectal cancer patients. The
       oncologist, 15(8), 883-893.
Wolff, J. L., Kasper, J. D., & Shore, A. D. (2008). Long-term care preferences among older
       adults: a moving target?. Journal of aging & social policy, 20(2), 182-200.
Yabroff, K. R., & Kim, Y. (2009). Time costs associated with informal caregiving for cancer
       survivors. Cancer, 115(S18), 4362-4373.




                                                                                              33
 Table 1: Average characteristics of potential caregivers and spouses by spousal disability or
 health shock
                                Work-limiting                              Work-limiting
                                                    Work-                                    Work-
                                chronic health                   Any       chronic health                 Any
                                                   limiting                                 limiting
                                 condition or                 disability    condition or               disability
                                                    illness                                  illness
                                  disability                                 disability
                                                 Caregivers                                Spouses
 Sample size                           3244           1663          412          3244          1663         412
 Age in the wave before
 event                                 46.06          43.89        48.59         46.54        43.99        49.66
 Female                                 0.46           0.45         0.49          0.54         0.55         0.51
 Education
    Less than high school               0.15           0.11         0.11          0.17         0.11         0.13
    High school                         0.26           0.26         0.24          0.27         0.24         0.25
    Some college                        0.16           0.18         0.12          0.16         0.17         0.11
    Technical degree                    0.17           0.17         0.24          0.17         0.18         0.25
    College degree                      0.16           0.18         0.17          0.15         0.20         0.17
    Graduate degree                     0.10           0.10         0.13          0.08         0.09         0.09
 Race
    White                               0.81           0.81         0.84          0.81         0.80         0.82
    Black                               0.08           0.07         0.04          0.08         0.08         0.04
    Other                               0.11           0.12         0.12          0.11         0.12         0.14
 Hispanic                               0.09           0.07         0.16          0.09         0.06         0.17
 Number of kids                         0.98           0.94         0.83          0.98         0.94         0.83
 Access to paid leave                   0.19           0.16         0.48          0.19         0.16         0.48
 State
    California                          0.42           0.36         0.33          0.42         0.36         0.33
    New Jersey                          0.11           0.10         0.15          0.11         0.10         0.15
    Other                               0.48           0.54         0.52          0.48         0.54         0.52
 Employment outcomes in
 the wave before event
    Had a job all weeks in the
    wave                                0.80           0.82         0.74          0.56         0.66         0.56
    Average monthly
    earnings                          3155.79        3496.27      3392.81       1984.82      2784.72      1971.40
 Caregiving outcomes in the
 wave before the event
    Not working because of
    caregiving                          0.02           0.03         0.03
    Working less than 35
    hours a week because of
    caregiving                          0.02           0.03         0.02
Data source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008
panels. Includes only states that eventually implement a paid leave policy. Outcomes are measured in the wave
before the spouse's health shock or disability occurred.




                                                                                                               34
Figure 1: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Spouse Before
and After Spouse Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 1 in
text).




                                                                                                       35
Figure 2: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Potential
Caregiver Before and After Spouse Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported spousal health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted
(Equation 1 in text).




                                                                                                       36
Figure 3: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Spouse Before
and After Spouse Work-Limiting Illness




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 1 in
text).




                                                                                                       37
Figure 4: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Potential
Caregiver Before and After Spouse Work-Limiting Illness




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported spousal health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted
(Equation 1 in text).




                                                                                                       38
Figure 5: Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decision and Earnings Before and
After Spousal Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition.




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       39
Figure 6: Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregiver Labor Supply Decision and Earnings
Before and After Spousal Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition.




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       40
Figure 7: Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decision and Earnings Before and
After Spousal Work-Limiting Illness




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       41
Figure 8: Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregiver Labor Supply Decision and Earnings
Before and After Spousal Work-Limiting Illness




Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       42
    Table 2: The Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decisions and
    Earnings After a Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition, by
                                   Subgroup
                         (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)

                      Worked All      Worked                         Working Full
Sample of Spouses                                     Earnings
                       Weeks        Some Weeks                          Time

        All            -0.0193        -0.0473*        -186.7            0.0102
                       (0.0221)       (0.0215)        (139.4)          (0.0215)

      Female            0.0149        -0.0242         -20.81            0.0116
                       (0.0286)       (0.0286)        (115.8)          (0.0305)

       Male            -0.0625        -0.0765*        -412.6            0.0138
                       (0.0341)       (0.0320)        (279.5)          (0.0299)

   Higher Educ.        -0.0364        -0.0436         -225.6           0.00418
                       (0.0278)       (0.0262)        (229.2)          (0.0266)

   Lower Educ.        -0.000123       -0.0502         -137.7            0.0257
                       (0.0360)       (0.0358)        (119.3)          (0.0377)

  Primary Earner       -0.0139        -0.0692*        -95.15            0.0454
                       (0.0350)       (0.0269)        (238.5)          (0.0256)

Not Primary Earner     -0.00647       -0.0202         -179.7           -0.00301
                       (0.0246)       (0.0244)        (142.8)          (0.0267)

      FMLA              0.0173        -0.0655         -417.9            0.0326
                       (0.0547)       (0.0496)        (418.5)          (0.0374)

    No FMLA               -0.0408        -0.0517*        -79.19           -0.0115
                         (0.0249)        (0.0243)        (99.51)          (0.0295)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation,
1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard
errors clustered at state level in parentheses. Table shows coefficient of interest
from estimates of Equation 3 for relevant outcome and subgroup.




                                                                                      43
  Table 3: The Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregivers' Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings
  After a Work-Limiting Disability or Chronic Health Condition, by Potential Caregiver's Subgroup
                         (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                   Reduced
                                                    Did Not
Sample of Potential                  Worked                          Work
                      Worked                         Work                                  Working
   Caregivers                         Some                          Hours      Earnings
                    All Weeks                     Because of                               Full Time
                                     Weeks                       Because of
                                                  Caregiving
                                                                 Caregiving
        All           -0.0261       -0.00226        0.00955        -0.0153*      28.81      -0.0134
                      (0.0180)      (0.0150)       (0.00751)      (0.00686)     (123.9)     (0.0159)

      Female            -0.0122       -0.0119          0.0230         -0.0270       -223.7       0.0154
                        (0.0252)      (0.0236)        (0.0167)        (0.0152)      (114.4)     (0.0252)

       Male             -0.0361       0.00768         0.000322         -0.00543      246.6      -0.0323
                        (0.0250)      (0.0194)        (0.00178)       (0.00341)     (196.8)     (0.0204)

   Higher Educ.         -0.0421       0.000587         0.00918         -0.00989      99.46      -0.00303
                        (0.0220)      (0.0175)        (0.00964)       (0.00706)     (185.2)     (0.0197)

   Lower Educ.         -0.00370       -0.0109          0.0126         -0.0240       -90.95      -0.0307
                       (0.0305)       (0.0270)        (0.0123)        (0.0139)      (115.9)     (0.0264)

  Primary Earner        0.00876        0.0168         0.000784         -0.00148      271.4      -0.00261
                        (0.0193)      (0.0125)        (0.00509)       (0.00521)     (212.3)     (0.0188)

Not Primary Earner      -0.0343       0.00396         0.00282         -0.0124       -128.6      -0.0371
                        (0.0241)      (0.0227)        (0.0163)        (0.0114)      (101.2)     (0.0259)

      FMLA               0.0397        0.0357          -0.00390       -0.0222       452.6*       0.0408
                        (0.0277)      (0.0231)        (0.00849)       (0.0169)      (228.0)     (0.0242)

    No FMLA              -0.0641*      -0.0290           0.0154         -0.0133      -162.6      -0.0350
                         (0.0263)     (0.0221)          (0.0118)       (0.00814)    (172.0)      (0.0239)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004,
and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses. Table shows coefficient of interest from estimates of Equation 3 for relevant
outcome and subgroup.




                                                                                                        44
    Table 4: The Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decisions and
              Earnings After a Work-Limiting Illness, by Subgroup
                           (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)

                         Worked        Worked Some                        Working
 Sample of Spouses                                         Earnings
                        All Weeks        Weeks                            Full Time

         All              0.0179           0.0116           -204.8         0.0331
                         (0.0285)         (0.0233)          (232.7)       (0.0261)

      Female             -0.00543         -0.0192           -140.6         0.0451
                         (0.0367)         (0.0318)          (161.6)       (0.0382)

        Male              0.0563           0.0572           -256.1         0.0119
                         (0.0445)         (0.0340)          (468.2)       (0.0330)

   Higher Educ.           0.0237           0.0187           -268.8         0.0551
                         (0.0357)         (0.0298)          (338.9)       (0.0291)

    Lower Educ.          0.00905          0.00362           -50.82        -0.0251
                         (0.0454)         (0.0355)          (181.8)       (0.0557)

  Primary Earner          0.0311           0.0106           -94.30        0.0528*
                         (0.0384)         (0.0207)          (217.1)       (0.0265)

Not Primary Earner       0.00465           0.0210           -235.1         0.0177
                         (0.0331)         (0.0285)          (297.4)       (0.0357)

       FMLA               0.0608          -0.00126          -328.4        0.0797**
                         (0.0433)         (0.0474)          (315.1)       (0.0308)

     No FMLA              -0.000423          0.0105           89.84          -0.0145
                           (0.0382)         (0.0296)         (169.5)        (0.0400)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation,
1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard
errors clustered at state level in parentheses. Table shows coefficient of interest
from estimates of Equation 3 for relevant outcome and subgroup.




                                                                                       45
  Table 5: The Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregivers' Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings
                  After a Work-Limiting Illness, by Potential Caregiver Subgroup
                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                                      Reduced
                                                        Did Not
    Sample of                            Worked                        Work
                      Worked All                         Work                                  Working
     Potential                            Some                         Hours    Earnings
                       Weeks                           Because of                              Full Time
    Caregivers                           Weeks                       Because of
                                                       Caregiving
                                                                     Caregiving
        All             -0.0241         -0.0163         0.00218        0.0233*      -93.87      -0.00134
                        (0.0245)        (0.0198)       (0.00993)      (0.00951)     (252.8)     (0.0234)

     Female             -0.0276         -0.0148         -0.00221       0.0446*      -58.31      0.00483
                        (0.0386)        (0.0348)        (0.0228)       (0.0205)     (255.1)     (0.0417)

       Male             -0.0284         -0.0178         0.00448        0.00388      -143.0      -0.00701
                        (0.0322)        (0.0238)       (0.00339)      (0.00552)     (401.2)     (0.0270)

  Higher Educ.         -0.000108        0.00874          0.0129        0.0267*       27.60      -0.0315
                        (0.0295)        (0.0252)        (0.0118)       (0.0121)     (393.3)     (0.0302)

   Lower Educ.          -0.0704         -0.0748*        -0.0137         0.0161      -332.0*      0.0531
                        (0.0409)        (0.0304)        (0.0172)       (0.0158)     (150.0)     (0.0356)

 Primary Earner         -0.00317         0.0136         0.00352        0.0113       -138.6      0.00545
                        (0.0252)        (0.0141)       (0.00422)      (0.00830)     (261.7)     (0.0196)

   Not Primary
     Earner             -0.0510         -0.0684*         0.0161        0.0291*      -90.79      0.00126
                        (0.0335)        (0.0294)        (0.0198)       (0.0147)     (350.7)     (0.0460)

      FMLA              -0.0268         -0.0206         0.00569         0.0114       115.5      -0.0322
                        (0.0449)        (0.0333)        (0.0133)       (0.0114)     (405.4)     (0.0308)

    No FMLA               -0.0132        -0.0182         -0.00260       0.0345*      -148.6       0.0332
                         (0.0328)        (0.0284)        (0.0147)       (0.0150)    (379.5)      (0.0379)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004,
and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses. Table shows coefficient of interest from estimates of Equation 3 for relevant
outcome and subgroup.




                                                                                                        46
Appendix Tables and Figures
   Table A.1: Spouse's Labor Supply following Spousal Work-Limiting Disability/Chronic Health
                                           Condition
                                         Worked Some                             Working Full
                   Worked all Weeks                           Earnings
                                             Weeks                                   Time
   Time to Evt.           (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)

 7+ Waves Before          0.1363***            0.0901***            287.86**               0.0358
                           (0.0238)             (0.0208)            (110.09)             (0.0230)
  6 Waves Before          0.1162***            0.0803***            283.82**               0.0311
                           (0.0199)             (0.0167)             (89.84)             (0.0203)
  5 Waves Before          0.0838***            0.0496***            231.56**               0.0300
                           (0.0168)             (0.0148)             (79.92)             (0.0167)
  4 Waves Before          0.0665***            0.0473***             194.26*               0.0210
                           (0.0141)             (0.0117)             (83.49)             (0.0144)
  3 Waves Before          0.0764***            0.0437***           269.64***              0.0260*
                           (0.0115)             (0.0095)             (61.25)             (0.0121)
  2 Waves Before          0.0499***             0.0205**             119.30*              0.0251*
                           (0.0091)             (0.0074)             (46.86)             (0.0103)
     Wave of             -0.1044***           -0.0393***          -283.14***           -0.0678***
                           (0.0090)             (0.0066)             (36.15)             (0.0102)
   1 Wave After          -0.0979***           -0.0802***          -387.83***           -0.0719***
                           (0.0110)             (0.0098)             (49.54)             (0.0123)
  2 Waves After          -0.0816***           -0.0922***          -317.23***           -0.0569***
                           (0.0126)             (0.0119)             (58.26)             (0.0142)
  3 Waves After          -0.0757***           -0.0966***          -228.82***           -0.0557***
                           (0.0143)             (0.0137)             (66.85)             (0.0159)
  4 Waves After          -0.0738***           -0.0849***           -228.86**             -0.0384*
                           (0.0169)             (0.0157)             (81.93)             (0.0177)
  5 Waves After          -0.0748***           -0.0853***            -226.86*            -0.0581**
                           (0.0191)             (0.0179)             (93.52)             (0.0211)
  6 Waves After          -0.0854***           -0.0877***            -299.93*             -0.0540*
                           (0.0219)             (0.0204)            (117.10)             (0.0229)
  7+ Waves After         -0.0870***           -0.0888***             -100.70              -0.0294
                           (0.0241)             (0.0224)            (127.97)             (0.0261)

         Obs.                32487              32487               32487                 21240
      R-squared              0.5888            0.6701                0.67                 0.6070
 Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004,
 and 2008 panels.
 Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
 state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                      47
  Table A.2: Potential Caregiver Labor Supply following Spousal Work-Limiting Disability/Chronic
                                          Health Condition
                                     Worked
                     Worked all                    No work      Red. Hrs                 Working
                                       Some                                Earnings
                       Weeks                        for Care    for Care                Full Time
                                      Weeks
  Time to Evt.           (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)

7+ Waves Before         0.0356          0.0063       0.0099      0.0040        -41.53      0.0196
                      (0.0210)        (0.0179)      (0.0079)    (0.0074)     (149.67)     (0.0167)
6 Waves Before          0.0180         -0.0074      0.0220*      0.0055        -74.06      0.0116
                      (0.0191)        (0.0155)      (0.0086)    (0.0059)     (116.28)     (0.0151)
5 Waves Before         0.0351*         -0.0012       0.0072     0.0119*        -27.10      0.0052
                      (0.0158)        (0.0130)      (0.0065)    (0.0060)      (92.74)     (0.0128)
4 Waves Before         -0.0102         -0.0060       0.0064      0.0007        -33.18     -0.0124
                      (0.0130)        (0.0102)      (0.0053)    (0.0043)      (82.90)     (0.0108)
3 Waves Before         -0.0060         -0.0092       0.0021      0.0083        -65.61     -0.0050
                      (0.0108)        (0.0082)      (0.0047)    (0.0047)      (62.66)     (0.0092)
2 Waves Before         -0.0104         -0.0077      -0.0043      0.0007        -72.03      0.0062
                      (0.0092)        (0.0063)      (0.0036)    (0.0034)      (45.45)     (0.0080)
    Wave of           -0.0197*      -0.0243***       0.0016      0.0026         84.03     -0.0042
                      (0.0077)        (0.0053 )     (0.0031)    (0.0036)      (42.01)     (0.0072)
 1 Wave After        -0.0274**      -0.0363***      0.0082*     -0.0022     172.51***     -0.0111
                      (0.0096)        (0.0072)      (0.0040)    (0.0039)      (65.35)     (0.0086)
 2 Waves After      -0.0382 ***     -0.0438***       0.0079     -0.0035        118.00     -0.0120
                      (0.0112)        (0.0090)      (0.0045)    (0.0040)      (69.18)     (0.0098)
 3 Waves After      -0.0445 ***     -0.0505***       0.0084     -0.0045        124.27     -0.0118
                      (0.0132)        (0.0107)      (0.0055)    (0.0042)      (84.52)     (0.0110)
 4 Waves After      -0.0677***      -0.0700***       0.0111     -0.0056       275.71*     -0.0184
                      (0.0154)        (0.0131)      (0.0064)    (0.0051)     (110.17)     (0.0130)
 5 Waves After       -0.0556**      -0.0666***       0.0140     -0.0047      339.64**     -0.0148
                      (0.0180)        (0.0146)      (0.0074)    (0.0055)     (127.33)     (0.0148)
 6 Waves After        -0.0473*      -0.0660 ***      0.0111     -0.0090       409.17*     -0.0051
                      (0.0205)        (0.0168)      (0.0080)    (0.0063)     (169.99)     (0.0171)
7+ Waves After       -0.0625**      -0.0777***       0.0159     -0.0134       345.70*     -0.0215
                      (0.0222)        (0.0182)      (0.0094)    (0.0073)     (153.16)     (0.0191)

        Obs.             32487         32487         32487        32487        32487          28559
    R-squared            0.4903       0.4957         0.4340       0.2966        0.76          0.6091
Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                     48
           Table A.3: Spouse's Labor Supply following Spousal Work-Limiting Illness
                                        Worked Some                             Working Full
                  Worked all Weeks                            Earnings
                                           Weeks                                    Time
  Time to Evt.           (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)

7+ Waves Before           0.0445                0.0084               14.98               0.0366
                         (0.0291)             (0.0242)             (146.87)             (0.0254)
 6 Waves Before           0.0420                0.0012               38.86               0.0286
                         (0.0246)             (0.0197)             (129.45)             (0.0206)
 5 Waves Before           0.0303                0.0114              -68.22               0.0138
                         (0.0217)             (0.0170)             (104.79)             (0.0181)
 4 Waves Before          0.0412*                0.0222              -11.71               0.0070
                         (0.0194)             (0.0160)             (106.42)             (0.0167)
 3 Waves Before           0.0226                0.0073               67.79              -0.0065
                         (0.0153)             (0.0121)             (103.26)             (0.0133)
 2 Waves Before          0.0253*                0.0020              -30.65               0.0081
                         (0.0128)             (0.0081)              (53.93)             (0.0110)
    Wave of              -0.0024              -0.0132*              -74.99               0.0140
                         (0.0111)             (0.0061)              (43.99)             (0.0103)
  1 Wave After           -0.0055               -0.0078              -28.41              -0.0165
                         (0.0138)             (0.0093)              (73.81)             (0.0136)
 2 Waves After           -0.0025               -0.0078              -25.56              -0.0214
                         (0.0169)             (0.0117)              (77.84)             (0.0148)
 3 Waves After            0.0072              -0.0309*              -15.99              -0.0153
                         (0.0190)             (0.0145)              (99.26)             (0.0186)
 4 Waves After           -0.0097               -0.0290             -151.45              -0.0410
                         (0.0226)             (0.0181)             (119.23)             (0.0211)
 5 Waves After           -0.0196               -0.0290              -74.00              -0.0439
                         (0.0268)             (0.0215)             (136.27)             (0.0234)
 6 Waves After           -0.0106               -0.0253             -104.23              -0.0473
                         (0.0304)             (0.0247)             (169.06)             (0.0262)
 7+ Waves After          -0.0349               -0.0253               69.49             -0.0873**
                         (0.0327)             (0.0253)             (203.21)             (0.0319)

        Obs.                16967              16967               16967                 12830
     R-squared              0.6169            0.7207               0.7316                0.5651
Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004,
and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                     49
      Table A.4: Potential Caregiver Labor Supply following Spousal Work-Limiting Illness
                  Worked         Worked      No work Red. Hrs for                      Working
                                                                       Earnings
                 all Weeks Some Weeks for Care              Care                      Full Time
 Wave to Evt.        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)

   7+ Waves
                    -0.0310       -0.0118      -0.0044      -0.0111        -91.11        -0.0021
    Before
                   (0.0300)       (0.0234)     (0.0119)     (0.0121)      (180.76)       (0.0248)
6 Waves Before      -0.0187       -0.0206       0.0041       0.0040        -46.86         0.0028
                   (0.0280)       (0.0214)     (0.0103)     (0.0124)      (151.93)       (0.0223)
5 Waves Before     -0.0542*       -0.0312       0.0061      -0.0129          0.33         0.0175
                   (0.0226)       (0.0166)     (0.0090)     (0.0096)      (133.07)       (0.0171)
4 Waves Before      -0.0220       -0.0165       0.0092       0.0184        -56.72         0.0079
                   (0.0186)       (0.0139)     (0.0083)     (0.0096)      (118.73)       (0.0162)
3 Waves Before     -0.0328*       -0.0025       0.0020      -0.0043        -23.87         0.0042
                   (0.0160)       (0.0112)     (0.0069)     (0.0071)       (79.01)       (0.0125)
2 Waves Before     -0.0265*       -0.0039      -0.0020       0.0016       -114.39         0.0105
                   (0.0111)       (0.0079)     (0.0050)     (0.0059)       (74.57)       (0.0091)
   Wave of          -0.0059      -0.0189**      0.0051       0.0074         40.55        -0.0103
                   (0.0102)       (0.0066)     (0.0034)     (0.0064)       (75.39)       (0.0089)
 1 Wave After       -0.0203      -0.0317**      0.0001       0.0039         57.97        -0.0097
                   (0.0134)       (0.0099)     (0.0049)     (0.0074)      (107.96)       (0.0117)
 2 Waves After      -0.0134      -0.0370**      0.0015       0.0017        -54.38        -0.0049
                   (0.0160)       (0.0121)     (0.0064)     (0.0074)      (117.33)       (0.0136)
 3 Waves After     -0.0390*      -0.0406**      0.0102       0.0020        -23.00        -0.0107
                   (0.0192)       (0.0138)     (0.0079)     (0.0086)      (142.89)       (0.0151)
 4 Waves After      -0.0380      -0.0478**      0.0072      -0.0068          3.91        -0.0089
                   (0.0226)       (0.0162)     (0.0086)     (0.0088)      (185.37)       (0.0189)
 5 Waves After      -0.0323      -0.0520**      0.0054      -0.0098        105.00         0.0067
                   (0.0257)       (0.0187)     (0.0097)     (0.0109)      (220.17)       (0.0201)
 6 Waves After      -0.0387     -0.0738***      0.0147      -0.0066         87.18         0.0101
                   (0.0280)       (0.0222)     (0.0107)     (0.0117)      (224.31)       (0.0219)
7+ Waves After      -0.0395     -0.0818***      0.0156      -0.0145         15.94         0.0129
                   (0.0301)       (0.0240)     (0.0131)     (0.0136)      (252.44)       (0.0259)

       Obs.            16968       16968        16968         16968          16968           15174
    R-squared         0.4931       0.5008       0.4249       0.3133          0.8062          0.6289
Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                    50
               Table A.5: Spouse's Labor Supply following Any Spousal Disability
                                         Worked Some                             Working Full
                  Worked all Weeks                            Earnings
                                            Weeks                                   Time
  Time to Evt.            (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)

7+ Waves Before           0.0893               0.1377*             649.83*               0.0389
                         (0.0837)             (0.0672)             (295.89)             (0.0901)
 6 Waves Before           0.0711               0.1218*              426.74               0.0557
                         (0.0709)             (0.0566)             (248.28)             (0.0753)
 5 Waves Before           0.0688                0.1056              384.17               0.0409
                         (0.0702)             (0.0552)             (247.71)             (0.0773)
 4 Waves Before           0.0436               0.0880*             385.67*               0.0459
                         (0.0421)             (0.0370)             (150.86)             (0.0501)
 3 Waves Before           0.0490              0.0946**             304.09*               0.0343
                         (0.0447)             (0.0360)             (139.78)             (0.0508)
 2 Waves Before           0.0203               0.0669*              271.53               0.0188
                         (0.0423)             (0.0327)             (138.95)             (0.0464)
    Wave of              -0.0190               -0.0226              -57.55               0.0127
                         (0.0190)             (0.0135)              (83.74)             (0.0263)
  1 Wave After           -0.0408               -0.0200              -33.95               0.0149
                         (0.0221)             (0.0145)              (83.38)             (0.0279)
 2 Waves After           -0.0635              -0.0793*             -237.57               0.0554
                         (0.0394)             (0.0343)             (183.32)             (0.0502)
 3 Waves After           -0.0567               -0.0639             -235.85               0.0135
                         (0.0392)             (0.0353)             (192.56)             (0.0493)
 4 Waves After           -0.0630             -0.0979**             -298.38               0.0415
                         (0.0414)             (0.0367)             (197.18)             (0.0499)
 5 Waves After           -0.0642               -0.0804             -322.21               0.0856
                         (0.0653)             (0.0561)             (291.13)             (0.0796)
 6 Waves After           -0.0573               -0.0963             -474.20               0.0959
                         (0.0665)             (0.0585)             (320.25)             (0.0797)
 7+ Waves After          -0.0901               -0.1057             -356.92               0.0521
                         (0.0835)             (0.0703)             (349.22)             (0.0982)

        Obs.                 5493              5493                 5493                  3493
     R-squared              0.6472            0.7252               0.8790                0.5846
Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004,
and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                     51
          Table A.6: Potential Caregiver Labor Supply following Any Spousal Disability
                  Worked         Worked       No work Red. Hrs for                     Working
                                                                        Earnings
                 all Weeks Some Weeks for Care              Care                       Full Time
 Wave to Evt.        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)

   7+ Waves
    Before         -0.0350       -0.0086       -0.0274      -0.0114        261.17        -0.0074
                   (0.0744)      (0.0747)      (0.0341)     (0.0287)      (378.67)       (0.0703)
6 Waves Before     -0.0416       -0.0146       -0.0180       0.0072        138.31        -0.0080
                   (0.0622)      (0.0642)      (0.0284)     (0.0281)      (367.37)       (0.0619)
5 Waves Before     -0.0245       -0.0185       -0.0253      -0.0154         39.89        -0.0104
                   (0.0615)      (0.0630)      (0.0299)     (0.0221)      (332.81)       (0.0602)
4 Waves Before     -0.0017       -0.0011       -0.0134      -0.0007         88.49         0.0143
                   (0.0386)      (0.0393)      (0.0167)     (0.0157)      (244.07)       (0.0412)
3 Waves Before     -0.0330       -0.0364       -0.0016      -0.0015        -84.07         0.0211
                   (0.0402)      (0.0389)      (0.0178)     (0.0167)      (229.05)       (0.0380)
2 Waves Before     -0.0442       -0.0474       -0.0047      -0.0075       -140.67         0.0187
                   (0.0381)      (0.0393)      (0.0200)     (0.0154)      (240.17)       (0.0368)
   Wave of          0.0046       -0.0025       -0.0045      -0.0011       -156.70         0.0276
                   (0.0208)      (0.0138)      (0.0095)     (0.0059)      (118.65)       (0.0200)
 1 Wave After       0.0174       -0.0044       -0.0079      -0.0027       -182.14         0.0153
                   (0.0237)      (0.0178)      (0.0105)     (0.0089)      (132.27)       (0.0204)
 2 Waves After      0.0446        0.0352       -0.0028      -0.0124       -116.15        0.0795*
                   (0.0419)      (0.0357)      (0.0184)     (0.0144)      (243.40)       (0.0393)
 3 Waves After      0.0338        0.0331        0.0010      -0.0046       -174.34         0.0716
                   (0.0442)      (0.0360)      (0.0205)     (0.0161)      (233.40)       (0.0405)
 4 Waves After      0.0153       -0.0068        0.0083       0.0057       -213.92         0.0124
                   (0.0437)      (0.0395)      (0.0215)     (0.0158)      (235.94)       (0.0431)
 5 Waves After      0.0782        0.0450       -0.0019      -0.0090       -183.11         0.0974
                   (0.0700)      (0.0632)      (0.0369)     (0.0285)      (375.74)       (0.0662)
 6 Waves After      0.0849        0.0638        0.0092      -0.0123       -111.05         0.0765
                   (0.0750)      (0.0627)      (0.0418)     (0.0261)      (391.38)       (0.0666)
7+ Waves After      0.0925        0.0658       -0.0048      -0.0043       -143.86         0.1216
                   (0.0895)      (0.0711)      (0.0389)     (0.0331)      (455.72)       (0.0778)

       Obs.            5493         5493         5493         5493            5493            4617
    R-squared         0.4851       0.4898       0.3409       0.1636          0.8068          0.6113
Source: Author estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors clustered at
state level in parentheses.




                                                                                                    52
   Table A.7: The Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decisions and
         Earnings After Any Disability, by Potential Caregiver Subgroup
                         (1)               (2)              (3)         (4)

                     Worked All     Worked Some                     Working
Sample of Spouses                                     Earnings
                      Weeks           Weeks                         Full Time

       All             0.0215         -0.0103           283.5        0.0616
                      (0.0379)        (0.0296)         (177.3)      (0.0468)

     Female            0.0599          0.0420          291.8*        0.0937
                      (0.0539)        (0.0387)         (147.7)      (0.0742)

      Male            -0.0207         -0.0706           232.5        0.0164
                      (0.0528)        (0.0450)         (325.9)      (0.0536)

  Higher Educ.        -0.0249         -0.0112           372.8        0.0582
                      (0.0478)        (0.0361)         (255.4)      (0.0467)

   Lower Educ.         0.0574         -0.0214           48.20        0.0684
                      (0.0545)        (0.0473)         (154.5)       (0.108)

  Primary Earner       0.0698          0.0155           435.7       -0.0208
                      (0.0679)        (0.0339)         (355.8)      (0.0601)

Not Primary Earner    -0.0292         -0.0359          -52.15        0.0750
                      (0.0424)        (0.0343)         (170.3)      (0.0621)

     FMLA             -0.0707         -0.0548           431.3        0.0166
                      (0.0783)        (0.0552)         (536.7)      (0.0590)

    No FMLA           0.0960*          0.0264           247.5        0.0884
                      (0.0436)        (0.0353)         (132.3)      (0.0797)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively.
Standard errors clustered at state level in parentheses. Table shows
coefficient of interest from estimates of Equation 3 for relevant outcome
and subgroup.




                                                                                53
Table A.8: The Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregivers' Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings After
                                     Any Disability, by Subgroup
                        (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                                   Reduced
                                                  Did Not Work
Sample of Potential    Worked     Worked Some                     Work Hours                Working
                                                   Because of                    Earnings
   Caregivers         All Weeks     Weeks                         Because of                Full Time
                                                   Caregiving
                                                                  Caregiving
       All            0.00230       -0.0193          0.0193          0.0101       -179.8     -0.0230
                      (0.0410)      (0.0322)        (0.0186)        (0.0131)      (300.7)    (0.0340)

     Female           -0.0149       -0.0227          0.0500          0.0260       -248.9     -0.0755
                      (0.0591)      (0.0516)        (0.0356)        (0.0257)      (326.2)    (0.0489)

       Male            0.0195       -0.0154         -0.00954       -0.00559       -91.03      0.0311
                      (0.0574)      (0.0388)        (0.0109)       (0.00677)      (488.5)    (0.0460)

   Higher Educ.        0.0208       0.00830         -0.00762         0.0164       -9.092     -0.0606
                      (0.0508)      (0.0320)        (0.0173)        (0.0140)      (397.2)    (0.0396)

   Lower Educ.        -0.0606       -0.0851          0.0566         0.00826       -659.6      0.0401
                      (0.0700)      (0.0744)        (0.0367)        (0.0268)      (401.0)    (0.0590)

  Primary Earner       0.0274       -0.0216          0.00492        0.00393       -114.7      0.0143
                      (0.0446)      (0.0170)        (0.00619)      (0.00806)      (463.7)    (0.0322)

Not Primary Earner    -0.0148       -0.0162         -0.0111          0.0201        3.375     -0.0414
                      (0.0544)      (0.0499)        (0.0405)        (0.0187)      (206.9)    (0.0704)

      FMLA             0.0292       -0.0288          -0.00828       -0.00643     -1026.4      0.0190
                      (0.0543)      (0.0320)        (0.00740)       (0.0232)     (648.7)     (0.0366)

    No FMLA           -0.00424      -0.0308          0.0317          0.0247        235.5     -0.0332
                      (0.0611)      (0.0536)        (0.0296)        (0.0197)      (396.9)    (0.0561)
Source: Authors' estimates from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001,
2004, and 2008 panels.
Notes: *, **, *** indicates 10%, 5% and 1% significance respectively. Standard errors
clustered at state level in parentheses. Table shows coefficient of interest from estimates of
Equation 3 for relevant outcome and subgroup.




                                                                                                     54
Figure A.1: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Spouse
Before and After Any Spouse Disability




Source: Authors' estimates from Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 1 in
text).




                                                                                                       55
Figure A.2: Mean Adjusted Outcomes for Labor Supply Decisions and Earnings of Potential
Caregiver Before and After Any Spouse Disability




Source: Authors' estimates from Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported spousal health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted
(Equation 1 in text).




                                                                                                       56
Figure A.3: Impact of Paid Leave on Spousal Labor Supply Decision and Earnings Before and
After Spousal Any Disability




Source: Authors' estimates from Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       57
Figure A.4: Impact of Paid Leave on Potential Caregiver Labor Supply Decision and Earnings
Before and After Spousal Any Disability




Source: Authors' estimates from Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels.
Notes: Figure shows point estimates (solid lines) and 95 percent confidence intervals (dashed lines) from
event study of reported health shock onset between period -1 and 0, with period -1 omitted (Equation 2 in
text).




                                                                                                       58
