                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE LIMITS OF REOPENING POLICY TO ALTER ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR:
                        NEW EVIDENCE FROM TEXAS

                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                        Joseph J. Sabia
                                        Samuel Safford

                                      Working Paper 28804
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28804


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2021, Revised June 2021




Previously circulated "Statewide Reopening During Mass Vaccination: Evidence on Mobility,
Public Health and Economic Activity from Texas." Sabia acknowledges research support from
the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS) at San Diego State University,
including grant support received from the Charles Koch Foundation and the Troesh Family
Foundation. We thank Drew McNichols and Kyutaro Matsuzawa for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dhaval M. Dave, Joseph J. Sabia, and Samuel Safford. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Limits of Reopening Policy to Alter Economic Behavior: New Evidence from Texas
Dhaval M. Dave, Joseph J. Sabia, and Samuel Safford
NBER Working Paper No. 28804
May 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. H75,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

In the midst of mass COVID-19 vaccination distribution efforts in the U.S., Texas became the
first state to abolish its mask mandate and fully lift capacity constraints for all businesses, taking
effect on March 10, 2021. The policy announcement elicited passionate reaction. Proponents
claimed that the reopening would generate short-run employment growth and signal a return to
normal while opponents argued that it would cause a resurgence of COVID-19 and kill Texans.
This study finds that each side was largely incorrect. First, using daily anonymized smartphone
data -- and synthetic control and difference-in-differences approaches -- we find no evidence
that the Texas reopening led to substantial changes in mobility, including foot traffic at a wide set
of business establishments. Second, we find no evidence that the Texas reopening affected the
rate of new COVID-19 cases during the five weeks following the reopening. Our null results
persist across more urbanized and less urbanized counties, as well as across counties that
supported Donald Trump and Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election. Finally, we find no
evidence that the Texas reopening impacted short-run employment, including in industries most
affected by the reopening. Together, these findings underscore the persistence of late-pandemic
era private behavior and stickiness in individuals' risk-related beliefs, and suggest that reopening
policies may have impacts that are more muted than policymakers expect.

Dhaval M. Dave                                    Samuel Safford
Bentley University                                Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
Department of Economics                           San Diego, CA
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                        safford.samuel@gmail.com
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu
                                                   1. Introduction

         "With the medical advancements of vaccines and antibody therapeutic drugs, Texas now
         has the tools to protect Texans from the virus.... Too many Texans have been sidelined
         from employment opportunities. Too many small business owners have struggled to pay
         their bills. This must end. It is now time to open Texas 100%"

                                    -    Texas Governor Greg Abbott, March 3, 2021

         " I think it's a big mistake...The last thing -- the last thing we need is Neanderthal
         thinking that in the meantime, everything's fine, take off your mask, forget it. It still
         matters."
                                  - U.S. President Joseph R. Biden, March 3, 2021


         As of May 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic had claimed over 590,000 U.S. lives (Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention 2021a). Non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) such as

stay-at-home orders (SIPOs), non-essential business closures, emergency declarations, mask

mandates, and limits on in-person gatherings -- including capacity constraints at business

venues -- have been among the most common policy tools used to combat COVID-19

(Courtemanche et al. 2020a,b; Cronin and Evans 2020; Dave et al. 2020a; Dave et al. 2021a,b;

Friedson et al. 2021; Gupta et al. 2020; Lyu and Wehby 2020). Many of these policies, while

enacted to generate public health benefits through curbing the spread of the pandemic, may also

impose economic costs in the short and longer runs due to mobility restrictions and business

closures (Viscusi 2020). 1 Consequently, the mass distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations by

Moderna, Pfizer, and Johnson & Johnson -- along with declines in COVID-19 hospitalizations

and mortality -- created intense pressure on state and local policymakers to begin lifting NPIs,




1
  See Viscusi (2020) and Kniesner and Sullivan (2020) for an excellent accounting and discussion on valuing the
economic losses associated with fatal and non-fatal COVID-19 cases, as a metric of the health risk reductions from
NPIs, which need to be balanced against the costs of the adverse economic repercussions. See also Goolsbee and
Syverson (2021) for a discussion of the role of policy versus private responses in explaining total variation in foot
traffic at businesses at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.

                                                          1
with the goals of improving local labor market conditions and permitting in-person gatherings

that would signal a return to pre-COVID normality (Hammer 2021).

        At the same time, public health experts have warned that lifting mask mandates or

repealing capacity restrictions "too early" relative to the distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations

(or progress toward herd immunity) could reverse COVID-19-related health gains. In this vein,

Anthony Fauci, Director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, argued that

repealing COVID-19 mitigation policies -- including mask mandates and limitations on in-

person gatherings -- would be premature if the rate of decline in a state's COVID-19 cases had

plateaued (Porterfield 2021). 2

        On the other hand, the effects of enacting or repealing NPIs may be more limited than

policymakers or public health officials expect. While there is evidence that particular NPIs --

notably, SIPOs and statewide mask mandates -- were effective in curbing COVID-19 spread

early in the U.S. pandemic (Courtemanche et al. 2020a,b; Friedson et al. 2021; Dave et al.

2021a,b; Lyu and Wehby 2020), a number of studies have documented that NPIs account for a

relatively small share of the total variation in individuals' COVID-19 mitigation behaviors (see,

for example, Gupta et al. 2020; Cronin and Evans 2020). In contrast, most of the variation can

be attributed to voluntary (non-policy-related) private demand-side responses, likely due to (i)

new or updated information on the novel coronavirus, or (ii) changes in individuals' assessments

of contagion risk and developing serious COVID-19 symptoms. Along the same lines, there is

evidence that much of the variation in local unemployment during the pandemic is not




2
  During a Town Hall Meeting on March 3, 2021, Dr. Fauci indicated that repealing mask mandates "is really quite
risky... [Plateauing new cases] is a dangerous sign because when that has happened in the past, when you pull back
on measures of public health, invariably you've seen a surge back up." (Porterfield 2021)

                                                        2
attributable to lockdown policies, but rather to voluntary demand-side responses (Goolsbee and

Syverson 2021).

       In addition, the enactment (or repeal) of NPIs could also be accompanied by risk

compensating behaviors that may offset expected policy impacts (Yan et al. 2021; Dave et al.

2020a,b,c). Moreover, COVID-19 restrictions (and reopenings) may have very different effects

at different phases of the pandemic, in part because the mechanisms through which early policies

might have affected behavior (i.e., through information) are less salient late in the pandemic. For

instance, a recent study showed that while an initial statewide lockdown in Wisconsin (enacted

in late March 2020) increased stay-at-home behavior and curbed the growth of COVID-19 in the

state, an unexpected reopening less than two months layer had little effect on social mobility or

COVID-19-related health (Dave et al. 2020c). The authors attribute this asymmetry, in part, to

(i) a smaller role for information shocks in the period following the initial wave of the U.S.

pandemic (March-April), and (ii) the elasticity of demand for mitigation behaviors (i.e., mask-

wearing, social distancing) with respect to policy becoming smaller (more inelastic) in absolute

value over time.

       With these points in mind, the impacts of a full statewide reopening late in the U.S.

pandemic -- enacted during a period of mass vaccination -- on social mobility, COVID-19

cases (and mortality), and economic activity are not prima facie clear. On the one hand, a

reopening may increase population mobility, reduce social distancing, and perhaps even shift

individuals' risk perceptions downward, thereby reducing individuals' vigilance in engaging in

COVID-19 precautionary behaviors. While this may increase economic activity in the short run,

effects on COVID-19 spread depend on the extent to which these activities translate into a higher

infection risk. As more individuals get vaccinated, for instance, this risk would be moderated,



                                                 3
though its degree of moderation could, in theory, be offset by moral hazard effects of

vaccinations.

       Alternatively, it is also possible that the state's reopening may have much smaller effects

on social distancing, COVID-19 cases, and unemployment. If social distancing behavior and

economic activity are more a function of the demand shocks caused by the pandemic or more a

reflection of voluntary private responses to COVID-related risk assessment rather than a

consequence of the mitigation policies per se, then the state's reopening may do little to change

the underlying drivers of individual behavior. This could affect consumers' willingness to make

in-person visits to business establishments and employees' willingness to work.

       Furthermore, the generosity of unemployment compensation benefits available to

workers -- which were expanded as part of President Biden's March 2021 coronavirus relief bill

to a maximum of $300 per week and were extended through September 6, 2021 -- could create

disincentives for low-wage employment, particularly in industries where the risk of contagion is

relatively higher (i.e., indoor bars and restaurants). In addition, if pre-reopening capacity

constraints and mask wearing policies were not well-enforced by the state, then the impact of the

reopening itself may be muted. Moreover, even if the initial mitigation policies were binding and

effective, Bayesian updating of coronavirus risk perceptions mean that if these policies are later

lifted, individual behaviors may remain sticky and not respond straightaway (Dave et al. 2020c).

       The lifting of restrictions may also have little to no effect on population-level social

distancing or COVID-19 cases if there are offsetting behaviors among different segments of the

population. For instance, while the reopening might cause some residents to increase their

mobility and activities outside the home, others may respond by readjusting their perceived

infection risk upwards and engaging in greater mitigation behaviors. Support for such



                                                  4
compensating responses is found in empirical analyses of Black Lives Matter protests in the

summer of 2020 (Dave et al. 2020b), President Trump's May 2020 campaign rally in Tulsa,

Oklahoma (Dave et al. 2020a), and the January 6, 2021 U.S. Capitol Riot (Dave et al. 2021c).

Associated with each of these events, there is evidence that local residents increased stay-at-

home behavior and reduced their visits to restaurants and bars in response to perceived higher

risk of violence and infection (Dave et al. 2020a,b; Dave et al. 2021c). 3 The net effect on

COVID-19 spread, therefore, is unclear. 4

         Finally, the effects of a statewide reopening on population-level health depends on who is

nudged by the reopening into altering their social distancing and economic behaviors. While the

reopening policy effect we will estimate is an intention-to-treat (ITT) effect (an average

population effect), the ITT is identified off a "local" margin, based on those individuals who are

actually impacted by the reopening. Effects on community-level COVID-19 spread would then

depend on whether these marginal individuals are higher or lower risk for COVID-19 contagion

relative to the average individual in the community.

         This study explores a unique policy shock in Texas to identify the causal impacts of a

statewide reopening on public health and economic activity. In many respects, Texas provides

an ideal laboratory to help shed light on important questions relating to how private risk-taking

behavior responds to the removal of restrictions, during a phase of the pandemic when vaccines

are widely available and individuals' risk-related beliefs may have already been "baked in" and

potentially less malleable to public policy actions. Texas was the first state in the United States

to enact a "100% reopening". Executive Order GA-34, issued by Governor Greg Abbott, (i)


3
  There is also evidence that local mask mandates may induce less stay-at-home behavior because individuals are
more willing to mix with non-household members wearing masks (Yan et al. 2021).
4
  In addition, the presence of such offsetting behaviors does not preclude compositional shifts in infections across
subgroups, only that effects on the net may be small because of these compositional shifts.

                                                           5
eliminated statewide capacity constraints on all businesses, and (ii) abolished the statewide mask

mandate (Abbott 2021). Texas' "first mover" position makes the state's reopening plausibly

exogenous relative to other later-reopening states that followed suit and eased restrictions.

Under Governor Greg Abbott's order, local businesses were free to impose their own voluntary

restrictions. Furthermore, unlike the imposition of local shelter-in-place orders which were

permitted and widely adopted (Dave et al. 2020a), Governor Abbott advanced the legal position

that no local order can supersede the state's reopening order and legally impose COVID-related

capacity constraints on local businesses or fine local residents for not wearing masks. 5 At the

time the reopening was announced, the state of Texas had administered 5.7 million vaccine shots

to its residents, fully vaccinating 11 percent of its adult (ages 16 and older) population (Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention 2021b). By March 29, all adults 16 and older were eligible

to obtain a vaccine (Harper 2021) and by April 13, 15.2 million vaccines had been distributed in

Texas (Johns Hopkins University 2021), with 26 percent of the adult population completely

vaccinated. 6 This share had reached nearly 40 percent by mid-May 2021.

         This study is the first to examine the impact of a statewide reopening in the midst of a

mass statewide vaccination effort. 7 We document three key findings. First, using anonymized

smartphone data from SafeGraph, Inc. and a synthetic control approach, we find that the Texas

reopening had little impact on stay-at-home behavior or on foot traffic at numerous business

locations, including restaurants, bars, entertainment venues, retail establishments, business

services, personal care services, and grocery stores. Second, using COVID-19 case and



5
  The City of Austin and Travis County (of which Austin is a substantial part) challenged this legal position, which
we discuss below.
6
  The proportion of the adult population fully vaccinated was calculated using JHU daily vaccination data (2021)
and the 2019 SEER population estimates available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html
7
  A small handful of studies have examined the effects of school reopening measures on COVID-19 cases and
mortality (see Bravata et al. 2021; Courtemanche et al. 2021; and Harris et al. 2021).

                                                          6
mortality data from the New York Times, we find no evidence that the reopening affected the rate

of new COVID-19 cases in the five-week period following the reopening. 8 In addition, we find

that state-level COVID-19 mortality rates were unaffected by the March 10 reopening. These

null results persist when we explore heterogeneity in the state reopening by urbanicity and

political ideology of Texas counties. 9 We find no evidence of social distancing or COVID-19

effects of the reopening across more urban versus less urban Texas counties as well as across

counties where the majority of residents supported Donald Trump or Joe Biden in the 2020

presidential election.

         Finally, we explore whether Governor Abbott's reopening order generated short-run

economic growth in Texas. Using weekly state-level data on UI claims per 1,000 covered jobs

from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), synthetic control and difference-in-differences

estimates show that neither continued UI claims filed nor new UI claims filed (per 1,000 UI

covered job) fell in the five-week period following the March 10 reopening. Moreover, using

state-level data from the St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), we find no evidence

that the Texas reopening reduced the unemployment rate or employment-to-population ratio in

the months following the reopening. Supplemental analysis of microdata from the Current

Population Basic Monthly Survey (CPS-BMS) show no evidence that that the reopening affected

employment-to-population ratios at bars, restaurants, or entertainment venues. Taken together,

our findings underscore the persistence of individuals' risk-related beliefs and behavior, and

consequently the limits of late-pandemic era COVID-19 reopening policies to alter such behavior

and elicit large responses from the private sector.


8
  Moreover, when we extend the analysis sample to up to six weeks following enactment (with a smaller donor
pool), we continue to find no evidence that the Texas reopening increased new COVID-19 cases.
9
  It is well-established in the literature that risk perceptions and preferences for mitigating risk vary by political
inclinations (see for instance, de Bruin, Saw and Goldman, 2020)

                                                             7
                                                   2. Background

         Similar to other states, Texas had imposed common mitigation strategies and restrictions

to limit the spread of COVID-19 infections. This included the imposition of a shelter-in-place

order (SIPO), which was adopted statewide on April 2, 2020 and allowed to expire on April 30,

2020. 10 The state also enacted a mask mandate on July 3, 2020, along with various capacity

constraints on businesses. Texas eased restrictions and phased into reopening over the summer of

2020, but then reinstituted some of the restrictions over the second wave of the pandemic during

the fall of 2020.

         Prior to the statewide reopening order made effective on March 10, 2021 (and announced

one week prior), restaurants were required to operate at no more than 75 percent capacity, and

bars were required to operate at or below 50 percent capacity. Professional sports (indoors and

outdoors) were permitted but spectators were capped at 50 percent venue capacity. Additional

restrictions, ranging from 50 to 75 percent capacity limits, applied to retail establishments,

personal services (i.e. salons, barber shops, gyms), parks and beaches, and other public and

private facilities and events (i.e. amusement parks, museums, movie theaters, zoos, libraries,

performance venues). Failure to comply with capacity constraints could result in fines (up to

$1000), business license restrictions, and even arrest, with enforcement varying considerably at

the local level (Beauvais et al. 2020). 11 Texas's July 2020 statewide mask mandate imposed




10
   However, 85 of Texas' 254 counties had enacted their own county-level SIPOs prior to the statewide order,
covering almost two-thirds of the state population. While some localities extended their SIPO beyond the state's
expiration on April 30, 2020, all local orders had expired by the end of 2020.
11
   Governor Abbott eventually limited local law enforcement's ability to arrest and criminally prosecute residents for
violating some of these restrictions (Beauvais et al. 2020).

                                                          8
fines of up to $250 for failing to wear a mask in public locations, though fines were most

common for repeat offenders, as first offenders received a warning (Svitek 2020).

        Governor Greg Abbott's Executive Order GA-34, effective on March 10, 2021, lifted the

state mask mandate and increased capacity of all businesses and facilities in the state to 100

percent. Only if COVID-19 hospital bed capacity constraints exceed 15 percent over a

consecutive seven-day period in one of Texas's 22 hospital regions, can the County Judge in that

region issue a local mitigation order. 12 In announcing the order, the Governor noted the progress

that Texas had made, including the rapid deployment of vaccines and the subsequent increase in

the state's vaccination rates along with expansions in the state's COVID-19 testing capacity.

        While private businesses, at their discretion, could limit capacity or impose safety

protocols, the Governor asserted that no local jurisdiction was permitted to issue any orders that

could supersede the state-ordered reopening, including the imposition of legal penalties for

failing to comply with mask mandates or capacity constraints. However, officials from the City

of Austin and Travis County (of which Austin is a part) asserted the legal position that their local

mask mandates could be extended beyond March 10. 13 Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton

filed a lawsuit to block the Austin and Travis County mask mandates, but on March 26, District

Judge Lora Livingston ruled that these local mask requirements could remain in place pending

future legal proceedings (Oxner 2021). 14




12
   The Executive Order specified that no order from a County Judge could impose maximum capacity constraints of
less than 50 percent for any business. In the period between the March 10 order and the writing of this paper, no
region exceeded 15 percent hospital bed capacity.
13
   The City of Austin and Travis County did proceed with business re-openings along with continued
recommendations for 3 to 6 feet of social distancing per CDC recommendations.
14
   By May 4, Austin public health guidelines were updated such that fully vaccinated people were permitted to
attend private indoor events while wearing masks and private outdoor events without wearing masks (Chaudhury
2021).


                                                        9
           The reopening order made Texas the first state in the nation to essentially end all

pandemic-related restrictions at this post-vaccine phase of the pandemic. It allowed all

businesses to operate "as usual" without any mandated restrictions while lifting the statewide

mask mandate. It is important to note, however, that bars had already reopened in the state (with

a 50 percent capacity limit), and most businesses were allowed to operate at up to 75 percent

capacity. Moreover, while the mask mandate was lifted, anecdotal evidence suggests that many

businesses continued to require masks for entry (Sullum 2021), and physicians, public health

officials, and (left-of-center) politicians urged residents to continue wearing masks. As a result of

these voluntary actions -- as well as uncertainty surrounding the elasticity of risk-related beliefs

and behavioral responses with respect to the lifting of restrictions during a period of mass

vaccinations -- the impact of this full reopening is an empirical question. This is the focus of

our empirical analyses described below.


                                                      3. Data

           The empirical analyses that follow use (i) anonymized smartphone data on social

mobility from SafeGraph, Inc., (ii) COVID-19 case and mortality data from the New York Times,

and (iii) unemployment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to estimate the social

mobility, health, and economic impacts of the March 10, 2021 Texas reopening/mask mandate

repeal. Below we discuss the datasets, outcomes, and empirical strategies we employ.



3.1 SafeGraph Anonymized Smartphone Data

           We begin by drawing daily anonymized smartphone data from SafeGraph, Inc. to

measure social distancing behavior. 15 Over 45 million anonymized smartphone devices are


15
     These data are available at: https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium

                                                         10
included in these data, aggregated to the census block group, county, and state levels. We use

these data to measure stay-at-home behavior and time spent away from one's residence. These

data have been used widely by researchers estimating the impacts of COVID-19 mitigation

policies (i.e., shelter-in-place orders, emergency declarations, non-essential business closures,

school reopening policy) and large in-person gatherings (i.e., political rallies, sporting events,

motorcycle rallies, in-person voting) on stay-at-home behavior (Andersen et al. 2020; Cotti et al.

2020; Courtemanche et al. 2021; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c; Dave et al. 2021a,b,c; Friedson et al.

2021; Abouk and Heydari 2020). These data have also been used by the Centers for Disease

Control and Prevention to study social distancing behavior.

       The SafeGraph social distancing data defines a person's "home" as the 153-by-153-meter

area that receives the largest number of GPS pings between the hours of 6PM and 7AM.

Mobility is measured when a smartphone is observed pinging outside of the home. Our analysis

period for social distancing span February 27, 2021 through April 6, 2021, which includes 11

days prior to the Texas reopening and four weeks following the policy change. We choose to

begin our panel in late February because Texas experienced weather and electricity grid-related

problems due to a large winter storm that began hitting the area on February 13, 2021. As

temperatures dropped and roads across the state froze, the power grid collapsed, forcing the

Electric Reliability Council of Texas to initiate rolling blackouts (del Rio 2021). This left many

Texans trapped in their own homes from February 15, the initial blackout date, until power was

restored to all but 350,000 residents on February 18 (Neuman and Romo 2021). Subsequently,

reporting of coronavirus cases dropped significantly during this period, leading to a sharp dip

and ensuing peak in daily reported cases in the middle of February (del Rio 2021). The outage

also resulted in COVID-19 vaccination delays (Traynor 2021).



                                                 11
           We generate two measures of state-by-day mobility data that capture both the extensive

and intensive margins of stay-at-home behavior. First, Percent at Home Full-Time measures the

mean percent of individuals who spent the full day at home. This captures stay-at-home

behavior on the extensive margin. We find that 24.3 percent of Texas smartphones remained at

home full-time prior to the March 10th reopening. Following the reopening 22.4 percent

remained at home full-time. Second, Median Hours at Home measures the median number of

hours that smartphones ping at home on a given day. 16 This measure captures, in part, the

intensive margin of stay-at-home behavior. We find that Texas smartphones pinged at home for

a median of 12.8 hours prior to the March 10th reopening and 11.7 hours following the

reopening.

           Given substantial day-over-day cyclical variation in stay-at-home behavior (particularly

during the weekday versus weekend), results from our main synthetic control analyses presented

below use 7-day-moving averages of these measures. However, we also conduct analyses using

unsmoothed day-over-day variation, shown in the appendix, with a qualitatively similar pattern

of findings. We also explore whether our statewide findings in Texas are sensitive to the

exclusion of Travis County (including most of the City of Austin), which permitted a local mask-

wearing ordinance. As discussed below, the results are unchanged with the exclusion of Travis

County.

           Next, we make use of a second SafeGraph dataset -- where smartphone ping information

is unconnected to information on a smartphone's "home" -- that measures industry-specific foot

traffic. These data identify millions of "points of interest" across the United States, which are

classified based on the industry-specific five-digit National American Industry Classification



16
     For the minutes when smartphones are powered down or pinging outside of the home, hours are coded as 0.

                                                         12
System (NAICS) codes. The data measure hourly smartphone pings at each of these points of

interest to measure specific mobility outside of one's home and to track particular types of

economic and social activity.

       We begin by using NAICS codes to categorize visits to restaurants and bars from

February 27 through April 6 in Texas and anchor these pings to the state population.

Specifically, Foot Traffic at Restaurants and Foot Traffic at Bars measure the number of

smartphone pings at each type of establishment per 100,000 state residents. The smartphone data

record 2,866.8 pings per 100,000 population at restaurants and bars prior to the March 10

reopening. Following the reopening, this number rose to 3,115.1 pings per 100,000 population.

As with the stay-at-home measures, our main (synthetic) analyses use 7-day moving averages of

foot traffic to smooth day-over-day trends, with a similar pattern of findings using individual

day-over-day foot traffic data.

        In addition, we also explore foot traffic at other major industries in Texas, including

retail establishments, entertainment venues, which include sporting arenas, personal care

services, and grocery stores. Among these locations, the highest level of pre-treatment foot

traffic was found at retail establishments (3,817.5 per 100,000 population) with the lowest levels

at personal care services (62.5 per 100,000 population).

       Together, our anonymized smartphone data will provide important insights on how the

Texas reopening affected state-level social mobility. Additionally, in analyses that assess

heterogeneous impacts of the reopening on sub-state jurisdictions, we utilized data on county-

level stay-at-home behavior and foot traffic. These local data are important in assessing

heterogeneity in the effects of the Texas state policy based on characteristics that have been

documented to have important interactive effects with mitigation policies, in particular,



                                                13
political/ideological preferences (Barrios and Hochberg 2020; Dave et al. 2021c) and urbanicity

(Dave et al. 2020c; Dave et al. 2021a).



3.2 COVID-19 Case and Mortality Data

           We measure confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths using state- and county-level data

collected from the New York Times. 17 Our analysis sample spans the period from February 27,

2021 through April 13, 2021, a period that envelops the March 10 Texas reopening and also

includes a window of five weeks following the reopening. Such a post-treatment window has

been used to identify important effects of COVID-19 mitigation policies, in-person gatherings,

and holiday-related travel on COVID-19-related health outcomes (Courtemanche et al. 2020a,

2020b; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c; Dave et al. 2021a,b,c; Friedson et al. 2021, Sears et al. 2020; Lyu

and Wehby 2020; Ahammer et al. 2020; Carlin et al. 2020).

           We generate two measures of daily COVID-19-related health. First, we construct the

COVID-19 New Case Rate, the ratio of the newly confirmed COVID-19 cases on a given day to

the state population. In the pre-treatment period in Texas, the average rate of COVID-19 cases

per 100,000 population was 23.3. In the post-treatment period, the daily case rate fell to 13.2.

As above, our main (synthetic) analysis smooths daily COVID-19 case growth by examining 7-

day moving averages. In addition, as a supplementary outcome, we measure the rate of growth

in the new COVID-19 case rate (COVID-19 Case Growth), calculated as ln (COVID-19 New

Case Ratet) - ln (COVID-19 New Case Ratet-1), where t is the 7-day moving average of the daily

COVID-19 case rate ending on day t.




17
     These data are available at: https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data

                                                           14
       Second, we measure COVID-19 mortality in an analogous manner using the measure

COVID-19 New Death Rate. In the pre-treatment period in Texas, the daily COVID-19 death

rate in Texas was 0.767. This number fell to 0.396 in the post-March 10 period. Our

supplementary measure, (COVID-19 Death Growth), calculated as ln (COVID-19 New Death

Ratet) - ln (COVID-19 New Death Ratet-1), also falls following the March 10 reopening. While

much of our primary analyses focus on state-level COVID-19 health outcomes, auxiliary

analyses also examine county-level daily COVID-19 growth.

       Finally, we note that in contrast to prior studies written earlier in the U.S. COVID-19

pandemic (see, for example, Courtemanche et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c; Friedson et al.

2021), we focus on new COVID-19 case (death) rates as compared to cumulative measures.

These alternative measures capture a different margin of COVID-19 growth. This is because

historical levels of COVID-19 cases (reflected in cumulative cases) may not accurately capture

recent pre-treatment COVID-19 trends, which are better captured in trends in new cases.

Specifically, given the high volume of cumulative cases at this stage of the pandemic, empirical

analyses would be hard-pressed to detect shifting trends in new infections through changes in the

trajectory of cumulative cases. However, we note that auxiliary analyses using the cumulative

COVID-19 case (or death) rates as the outcome of interest produce a qualitatively similar pattern

of findings as we obtain from our preferred dependent variables.



3.3 Unemployment Data

       To capture the short-run economic impacts of the Texas reopening, we turn to

unemployment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. First, we measure state-by-week

continued Unemployment Insurance (UI) claims filed per 1,000 covered jobs, UI Claims Rate.



                                               15
Changes in continued UI claims pick up flows in leaving unemployment by finding work, and

help us assess whether the reopening increased economic activity to the extent reflected in a

higher job finding rate. 18 The analysis period covers the weeks from January 31-February 6

through April 4-April 10. In the 6 weeks of the pre-treatment period in Texas, there were, on

average, 27.5 claims per 1,000 covered jobs. In the post-March 10 period, there were, on

average, 24.6 UI claims per covered job. We also measure new (initial) filings of UI claims, to

pick up flows in the job separation rate, which follow a similar trajectory.

        Next, we turn to measures of the state-by-month unemployment rate and the

employment-to-population ratio (EPR) from January 2021 through April 2021, obtained from the

St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). These measures capture changes to overall

worker engagement in the labor market. We find little change in either the overall

unemployment rate or the EPR pre-post Texas reopening. In January 2021, the Texas

unemployment rate and employment-to-population ratio were 6.8 percent and 57.8 percent,

respectively. By April 2021, those numbers were 6.7 percent and 58.0 percent. We also

construct measures of state-by-month, industry-specific employment-to-population ratios --

specifically, we construct the restaurant and bar (beverage) EPR and the entertainment industry

EPR -- using microdata from the Current Population Survey Basic Monthly Surveys (CPS-

BMS). This industry-specific information will capture employment shifts in industries hard hit

by the COVID-19 pandemic.



                                            4. Empirical Strategies

4.1 Synthetic Control Approach


18
  A reduction in continued UI claims could also reflect transitions from being unemployed to leaving the labor force
or expiration of UI benefits.

                                                        16
         Our primary estimation strategy to explore the effect of the Texas reopening on social

distancing, foot traffic, and COVID-19-related health is a synthetic control approach. This

strategy, introduced by Abadie et al. (2010), relies on data from pre-treatment outcomes and

observable characteristics of states that may influence social mobility, COVID-19-related health,

and economic activity to generate a counterfactual for Texas.

         To generate our estimate of how our outcomes would have evolved in Texas had the state

not reopened, we draw on a donor pool of states with COVID-19-related reopening policies and

mask mandate rules that did not change over the period from February 1 through April 6. 19 This

donor pool includes 23 states. 20 Our pre-treatment window includes the period from February 27

through March 9, and the post-treatment window includes the period from March 10 through

April 13, 21 spanning five weeks of post-reopening data, a window sufficiently long enough to

capture any substantial effects on COVID-19 infections. We also explore the sensitivity of our

estimates to the inclusion of over six weeks of post-treatment COVID-19 case data, which

requires a smaller donor pool given that a number of states started to change their reopening

policies by mid-April 2021 and would contaminate the donor pool. The findings from these

supplemental analyses are, in the main, consistent with the results we present below.




19
   Only one state in our donor pool changed their reopening policies between April 7 and April 13. The inclusion of
this state is permitted in our COVID-19 analyses given that its reopening would not be expected to have any major
effects on COVID cases until after our post-policy window; based on median incubation period of the virus of about
5 days, and with 97.5 percent of infected individuals who develop symptoms found to do so within 11-12 days post
infection (Lauer et al. 2020).
20
   A total of nine of these states had policies that were identical to Texas's pre-treatment policies over the entire 46-
day window of our analysis sample. An additional 10 states included weaker COVID-19 restrictions (i.e, no bar,
restaurant, or personal care services capacity restrictions, and/or no state-wide mask mandates), but whose policies
did not change from February 1 through April 6 (excluding a five-day median incubation window of COVID-19).
Finally, two states had stricter policies for bars, and two included restrictions for personal care services, though
again, neither set of states had their policy change from February 1 through April 13.
21
   For social distancing and foot traffic outcomes, our post-treatment period ends on April 6, the last day on which
no state changed their reopening policies.

                                                           17
         Synthetic control estimates of the impact of the reopening depend critically on the

credibility of the counterfactuals we construct. Given the importance of our selection of (i) states

to be included in the donor pool, and (ii) observable characteristics on which to closely match

Texas to its synthetic counterpart, we explore the sensitivity of our estimates to these choices

(Ferman 2019).

         We take two main approaches to construct our counterfactual of Texas. First, we match

on the outcome (stay-at-home behavior, foot traffic, daily COVID-19 case and mortality rates)

on each of pre-treatment days on which we observe them (February 27 through March 9), a

strategy that requires pre-treatment growth in each of these outcomes to be identical between

Texas and its synthetic control. 22 This approach eliminates some concerns of `p-hacking'

(Botosaru and Ferman 2019). On the other hand, it effectively eliminates the role of other

observables that could be correlated with social distancing or the spread of COVID-19 (Klößner

et al. 2018). 23

         Our second approach, therefore, is to construct our synthetic counterfactual by matching

on the dependent variable in only one-half of all pre-treatment days and, in addition, matching on

the: (i) cumulative mean COVID-19 vaccination rates in the pre- and post-treatment periods

(using data obtained from Johns Hopkins University), (ii) COVID-19 daily testing rates, which

may play an important role in coronavirus detection (using data obtained from Johns Hopkins

University), (iii) urbanicity and population density, which have been found to impact COVID-19

spread (Dave et al. 2020c; Dave et al. 2021a), and (iv) other COVID-19-related policies (i.e. bar,




22
   For the outcomes of unemployment insurance claims filed per 1,000 covered claims that covered the period when
Texas was reopened (March 14-20).
23
  As shown by Kaul et al. (2018), matching on all periods of pre-treatment outcomes renders all covariates irrelevant
in the prediction of the outcome.

                                                         18
restaurant, and personal care services capacity restrictions and closures; shelter-in-place orders

and advisories, and state-level mask mandates). 24 For each of the two matching strategies

discussed above, we conduct placebo tests on each of the donor states following the method

suggested by Abadie et al. (2010) to generate permutation-based p-values for statistical

inference.

         Our estimated treatment effect will be unbiased if our constructed counterfactual

accurately captures the trend in outcomes that would have been observed in the absence of

treatment. The various matching strategies we employ help in this regard, at least to the extent

that our observable matching variables help to generate a credible counterfactual. Moreover,

given that Texas was the first restricted state to repeal a statewide mask mandate and mandate a

statewide reopening, this "first mover" act by Governor Abbott may be viewed as plausibly

exogenous relative to other jurisdictions that were experiencing similar pre-treatment trends in

social distancing, COVID-19 cases (mortality), and vaccination efforts.



4.2 Difference-in-Differences Approach

         Following our synthetic control analyses, we explore heterogeneity in the effects of the

Texas reopening policy, by exploring differences in Texas county characteristics. Before doing

so, we pool a sample of counties from Texas and each of the donor states identified in the

synthetic control model and use county-by-individual day outcome data to estimate the following

difference-in-differences specifications:



                  Ycst = 0 + 1*TexasReopcst + c + t + cst                                                   (1a)

24
  These policies were collected using data obtained by the authors from multiple sources, including individual state
Departments of Public Health, the New York Times, and Husch Blackwell. Note that these policies did not change
for either Texas or the donor states over the period February 1 through April 6.

                                                         19
                  Ycst = 0 + 1*TexasReopcst + Zst* + c + t + cst                                              (1b)


where Ycst denotes an outcome described above (stay-at-home behavior, foot traffic at restaurants

or bars per 100,000 population, and new COVID-19 cases) in county c in state s on day t, Zst is a

vector of state-by-day controls for (i) daily COVID-19 testing rates, and (ii) the daily cumulative

COVID-19 vaccination rate. 25 We estimate two models, our more parsimonious model (1a) and

our more saturated model (1b) to allow one to explore the degree to which endogenous COVID-

19 testing or vaccinations may be mechanisms through which the reopening affects the outcomes

under study. Regressions are weighted using the product of the synthetic control weight and the

ratio of the county to state population. 26 To conduct statistical inference with a single treated

state, we generate permutation-based p-values generated by a "placebo reopening policy"

assigned to each of the donor states (Buchmueller et al. 2011; Cunningham and Shah 2018).

         To explore heterogeneity in the effects of the Texas reopening on urban versus rural, and

Trump-voting versus Biden-voting counties in Texas, we next estimate the following

regressions:



                  Ycst = 0 + 1*TexasReopcst*Urbanc + Zst* + c + t + cst                                       (2a)
                  Ycst = 0 + 1*TexasReopcst*Trumpc + Zst* + c + t + cst                                       (2b)


where Urbanc is an indicator for whether the county has an urbanicity rate of 50 percent or more and

Trumpc is an indicator for whether a majority of the county's voters supported President Trump's re-

election in 2020. This allows us to explore whether the Texas reopening differentially affected urban,

rural, Republican leaning, and Democratic leaning counties ­ margins that have been found to be


25
  No reopening policies changed over this the time period under study.
26
  For donor states that received zero weight in our synthetic control analysis, the state was assigned a weight of
0.0001 and the remaining synthetic weights adjusted to sum to 1 (equivalent to the weight given Texas).

                                                          20
important in explaining variation in social distancing behaviors and the effectiveness of mitigation

policies (Barrios and Hochberg 2020; Dave et al. 2020c; Dave et al. 2021a). In sensitivity analyses

that appear in the appendix, we explore different cutoffs for each of these measures, including (i) a 75

percent urbanicity rate, (ii) a 40 percent or lower urbanicity rate (to capture the most rural counties),

and (ii) a county where President Trump garnered 60 percent or more of the vote (to capture the most

conservative counties).

         Finally, to estimate the employment effects of the Texas reopening, we use both synthetic

control and difference-in-differences approaches. To analyze the effects of the reopening on weekly

UI claims, we first use synthetic control analysis, matching on pre-treatment UI claims rates in the six

weeks prior to the reopening, and then estimate two-way fixed effects models comparable to

equations (2a) and (2b), including state and weeks fixed effects. 27


                                                     5. Results

         Our main empirical findings are shown in Tables 1 through 8 and Figures 1 through 4.

Supplementary analyses in the appendix (Appendix Figures 1-8 and Appendix Tables 1-3)

provide additional analyses that explore the sensitivity of our main findings to alternative

definitions of our dependent variable or treated units, as well as alternate tests of heterogeneous

policy impacts.



5.1 Social Distancing and Foot Traffic




27
   With respect to our FRED-based analyses using the January 2021-April 2021 state-by-month data we estimate
unweighted difference-in-differences models using all 50 states plus the District of Columbia, and control for state
fixed effects, month fixed effects, and the share of the month statewide mitigation policies were in effect. The
treatment effect is identified from the interaction of a dummy variable for Texas and the March and April 2021
surveys. Permutation-based p-values generated from placebo tests are used to conduct statistical inference.

                                                         21
       In Figure 1, we depict synthetic control estimates of the effect of the Texas reopening on

stay-at-home behavior. Panels (a) and (b) explore full-time stay-at-home behavior. In both of

our matching strategies (all pre-treatment days in panel a; half of all pre-treatment days in panel

b plus matching on observables), pre-March 10 trends in full-time stay-at-home behavior were

well-matched between Texas and its synthetic control. This is true even though the composition

of the synthetic control was quite different in each case. Matching on all pre-treatment days

yielded a synthetic control with the largest weight shares for South Dakota (20.3%), North

Dakota (19.0%), Vermont (17.7%), Tennessee (16.4%), and Louisiana (11.7%). Matching on

half of pre-treatment days and observable controls yields a match dominated by Kentucky (33.6

percent), Tennessee (27.9%), and Georgia (26.7%). In panel (a), we find some evidence that the

Texas reopening was associated with a small decline in full-time stay-at-home behavior,

particularly in the first 10 days following the reopening. This differential tightens in panel (b)

using our alternate matching strategy, with a smaller decline in stay-at-home behavior.

       Turning to median hours spent at home (Figure 1, panels c and d), which also captures

the intensive margin of stay-at-home behavior, we find no evidence of substantial declines in

stay-at-home behavior. This is true in both the shorter and longer-runs.

       The estimates shown in Table 1 confirm the visual inspection of the synthetic control

panels of Figure 1. In Panel I of column (1), we find that the Texas reopening is associated with

a 0.496 percentage point decline in full-time stay-at-home behavior, an effect that is marginally

significant at the 10 percent level only when using a one-sided (post-treatment) permutation-

based p-value. This represents a 2.1 percent decline relative to the pre-treatment Texas mean.

As shown in Panel II, the effect is twice as large in the immediate post-treatment period (March

10 through March 24) as compared to the longer-run (March 25 through April 6). However, this



                                                 22
result is very sensitive to the matching strategy employed. When we account for observable

differences in state characteristics, including the urbanicity and cumulative vaccination rates

(column 2), the small declines in full-time stay-at-home behavior become much smaller in

absolute magnitude and are statistically indistinguishable from zero at conventional levels.

        Columns (3) and (4) present estimates for median hours at home. Across models, we fail

to detect any evidence that the Texas reopening led to important or substantial declines in stay-

at-home behavior either overall (Panel I) or in the shorter- or longer-run (Panel I). Together,

these estimates provide little support for the hypothesis that the statewide mask mandate repeal

or full opening of restaurants and bars led to a decline in stay-at-home behavior.

        In Figures 2A (matching on all pre-treatment days of foot traffic) and 2B (matching on

half of pre-treatment days plus observables), we explore whether the Texas reopening affected

foot traffic at restaurants and bars (panels a through c), retail establishments (panel d),

entertainment venues (panel e), business services (panel f), personal care services (panel g), and

grocery stores (h). A visual inspection of these figures fails to detect any evidence that foot

traffic per capita --measured either at establishments directly affected by the March 10 state

order (lifting of capacity restrictions at bars and restaurants) or those that could be affected by

the mask mandate repeal or via general equilibrium effects -- were impacted by the reopening.

Pre-treatment trends in foot traffic are well-matched across our synthetic models and there is no

evidence that foot traffic diverged between Texas and its synthetic control across any outcome. 28

        The synthetic control estimates shown in Table 2A (matching on all pre-treatment days of

foot traffic) and Table 2B (matching on half of pre-treatment days plus observables), provide no



28
  To ensure that our 7-day moving average of stay-at-home behavior or foot traffic was not masking important
effects, in Appendix Figure 1, we present results using non-smoothed individual daily data. These results are
consistent with those shown in panel (a) of Figure 1 and panels (a) through (c) of Figure 2A.

                                                        23
evidence of statistically significant or economically important changes in industry-specific foot

traffic following the Texas reopening. While coefficients in the shorter-run are more

consistently positive than in the longer-run (Panel II), the magnitudes of the estimates are always

very small. For example, in Table 2A we find that for restaurant foot traffic, the estimated

reopening-induced increase in foot traffic in the short-run was 0.1 percent; for bars and

entertainment venues, the estimated treatment effect was 0.5 percent. All fall to near zero in the

longer-run.

        Taken together, the findings in Figures 1-2 and Tables 1-2 provide little support for the

hypothesis that the Texas reopening had economically important effects on population-level net

stay-at-home behavior or on foot traffic. Moreover, as shown in Appendix Figures 2 and 3, these

findings persist when we exclude Travis County from the "treated" portion of Texas (Austin's

city limits and population are largely contained within Travis County) to ensure that Austin's

assertion of local authority to extend the mask mandate did not bias our treatment effects

towards zero. 29 With these results in mind, we next turn to impacts of the reopening on COVID-

19-related public health.



5.2 COVID-19 Cases and Mortality

        Figure 3 and columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 show synthetic control estimates of the effect

of the reopening on the rate of new COVID-19 cases. Our results in each matching model

provide no evidence that the Texas reopening affected daily COVID-19 case rates. Daily cases

were declining in the two weeks prior to the Texas reopening and continued on a modest

downward trajectory for the five weeks following the reopening. Synthetic Texas -- comprised


29
  In panels (a) through (c) of Appendix Figure 4, we also show that our findings are robust to the additional
exclusion of Hays County and Williamson County, jurisdictions that include a (small) share of Austin's population.

                                                        24
largely of Georgia, Louisiana, South Carolina, and Kentucky -- experienced similar COVID-19

case trends both in the pre- and post-treatment periods. The estimates in columns (1) and (2) are

consistently negative, small (less than 10 percent), and nowhere near statistically distinguishable

from zero. This includes the period in the longer-run (March 25 through April 13), following the

two-week incubation period for COVID-19 symptoms (Lauer et al. 2020).

        In columns (3) and (4), we asses if the reopening altered the trajectory of new COVID-19

case growth. Using this alternative measure, we find no evidence that the Texas reopening had

an economically important or statistically significant impact on COVID-19 cases. 30

        Finally, if we use an alternative definition of our dependent variable that captures

historical accumulation of COVID-19 cases over time -- the cumulative COVID-19 case rate

and growth in the level of the cumulative COVID-19 case rate -- we continue to find no

evidence that the Texas reopening increased COVID-19 cases in the state (Appendix Figure 7).

Moreover, the strategy of matching on historic (cumulative) COVID-19 cases yielded a very

similar set of positively weighted donor states.

        Given the lack of support for the hypothesis that the Texas reopening had a positive

effect on net new COVID-19 cases, we do not expect there to be important effects on deaths.

Nevertheless, evaluating effects on deaths serves as an additional robustness check, since death

counts are an objective indicator of COVID-19 infections that is less likely to be afflicted with

measurement error or selection into testing. Indeed, our results for this outcome, shown in Table

4 and Appendix Figure 8, provide no evidence that the Texas reopening affected COVID-19-

related mortality. Moreover, the estimated effects following March 25th, which is outside of the


30
  Appendix Figure 5 shows results for COVID-19 cases when using non-smoothed individual daily data rather than
7-day moving averages. The results are consistent with our main findings in Figure 3. Moreover, the exclusion of
Travis County from the treated unit (Appendix Figure 6) as well as the exclusion of Travis, Hays, and Williamson
Counties for the treated unit (panel d of Appendix Figure 4).

                                                       25
two-week incubation period for COVID-19, is uniformly negative in sign. This is also true when

we examine the rate of growth in new COVID-19 deaths. 31

        In summary, the weight of the evidence produced in Tables 3-4, Figure 3, and Appendix

Figure 8 provide little support for the claim that there would be substantial negative COVID-19-

related population health effects of the March 10 reopening. Next, we explore whether these net

effects in Texas might be masking heterogeneous treatment effects across local jurisdictions in

the state.



5.3 Heterogeneity in Effects of Reopening

        Tables 5 and 6 present difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the Texas

reopening on (i) full-time stay-at-home behavior (Table 5, columns 1-3) (ii) foot traffic in bars

(Table 5, columns 4-6), (iii) foot traffic into restaurants (Table 6, columns 1-3), and (iv) the daily

rate of COVID-19 cases (Table 6, columns 4-6). Column (1) presents results from our most

parsimonious specification, while column (2) adds controls for the rate of daily COVID-19

testing, and column (3) adds controls for the cumulative vaccination rate. In Panel I, we examine

the pooled effect of the reopening across all counties in Texas. Consistent with our synthetic

control estimates at the state-level, we continue to find no evidence that the Texas reopening

significantly affected any of these key dependent variables. The signs on the estimated effects

are generally of the opposite sign (negative) than predicted by some public health experts.

        In Panel II of Tables 5 and 6, we explore heterogeneity in the effect of the reopening by

the county urbanicity rate. Again, we find no support for the hypothesis that stay at home



31
  The donor pool for the mortality analysis is comprised of 23 states, 17 of which have consistent mortality
reporting. Given more sporadic reporting of mortality for some states over our sample period, we recode individual
daily mortality to the state-specific mean if daily deaths exceed 2 standard deviations from the state mean.

                                                        26
behavior, foot traffic, or the rate of new COVID-19 cases was differentially affected across more

urban or less urban counties. Moreover, importantly, the reopening is associated with

comparably sized declines in new COVID-19 cases (Table 6, Panel II, columns 4-6).

         There is strong evidence that early in the pandemic, ideological/political preferences may

have played an important role in private responses to COVID-19 mitigation policies. Moreover,

risk perceptions and risk mitigation differ by political inclinations, with Democrats perceiving

higher infection risk for COVID-19 and higher mortality risk conditional on infection, reporting

more engagement in protective behaviors such as avoiding crowds and wearing a mask, and

reporting greater concern from their state lifting restrictions too quickly (de Bruin, Saw and

Goldman, 2020). These considerations may lead to heterogeneous effects of the state reopening

across political preferences. 32

         In Panel III of Tables 5 and 6, we explore whether the effect of the reopening differs by

whether the majority of county voters supported President Trump's reelection in November

2020. While there is some suggestive evidence that Trump-voting counties may be modestly

more likely to travel to bars following the reopening relative to counties where a majority

supported Joe Biden's election, there is little evidence that the Texas reopening increased the rate

of COVID-19 spread across "red" and "blue" counties, as measured by voting patterns in the

2020 presidential election. 33


32
   Moreover, given the baseline differences in risk perceptions and preferences for risk mitigation it is also possible
that individuals may not change their pre-conceived risk beliefs or related behaviors.
33
   Appendix Tables 1 and 2 explore alternate cutoffs for urbanicity and Trump voting, with a qualitatively similar
pattern of results. In Panel II of Appendix Table 2, there is some suggestive indication of an increase in the rate of
daily COVID-19 cases among counties with a large share of Trump voters ( 60%); The point estimates in models
(4) and (5) represent an increase of about 10% relative to the mean; however, the estimates are not statistically
distinguishable from zero and substantially decline in magnitude when we control for the vaccination rate. This
raises the possibility that the reopening might have affected social distancing behaviors and COVID cases for some
counties at more extreme thresholds of urban/rural or political preferences; however, on the net, our results do not
indicate any meaningful increases in infections at the state population level or across broad homogeneous swaths of
the state based on urbanicity or political ideology.

                                                          27
        In summary, our findings in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 provide no support for the hypothesis

that the Texas reopening increased COVID-19 spread across the state as a whole, more versus

less urban counties, or Trump-voting versus Biden-voting counties. There are several

hypotheses for these results. First, the February through March period was one of mass

vaccination, when the cumulative vaccination rate in Texas increased from 18,186 doses per

100,000 population on February 27, to 52,255 doses per 100,000 population on April 13. Such

enhanced vaccination may have mitigated the contagion effects of interactions between non-

household members. Second, it may be that there was limited compliance with and enforcement

of mask mandates or capacity constraint requirements prior to the March 10 reopening. If this

were the case, the impacts of the policy would be muted. Third, the margin of indoor capacity

constraints relaxed (i.e., moving from 50 to 75 percent maximum capacity at most establishments

to full capacity allowance) may have been relatively minor to affect net population-based social

mobility and statewide spread of COVID-19. Finally, it may be that the types of individuals who

were affected by the policy (which drives the local average treatment effect) were those least

likely to affect the trajectory of COVID-19 growth. Or it may be that any increase in social

mobility or COVID-19 caused by such individuals was offset by others in the community who

engaged in risk avoiding behaviors in response to the reopening.



5.4 Short-Run Economic Activity

       Next, we turn to an exploration of the impact of the Texas reopening on short-run

economic activity in Texas, proxied by several measures of unemployment and an examination

of the restaurant-and-beverage employment to population ratio. Figure 4 and Table 7 show

synthetic control estimates of the effect of the Texas reopening on weekly continued



                                                28
unemployment insurance claims filed per 1,000 covered jobs. We find that the Texas reopening

is associated with an economically small reduction in the rate of UI claims. Our synthetic

control estimates in Table 7 show that the Texas reopening is associated with a (statistically

insignificant) 0.429 to 0.512 decline in the rate of continued UI claims, which corresponds to a

1.6 to 1.9 percent decline relative to the mean. This effect is entirely driven by the very short run

(the initial week following the reopening and the next week; Panel II) and entirely disappears by

weeks beginning March 28 and April 4 (through April 10) (final row of Panel II).

        We also use a difference-in-differences strategy to estimate the impact of the Texas

reopening on continued UI claims. Using this approach, shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8,

the estimated effect of the Texas reopening on UI claims remains small in magnitude, but are

more positive, and remain statistically indistinguishable from zero.

        In columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, we examine newly filed UI claims. Again, we find no

evidence that the Texas reopening reduced the rate of new UI claims; in fact, the estimated

association is positive.

        Finally, in columns (5) through (8), we draw state-by-month data from the FRED to look

at the short-run post-treatment impacts of the Texas reopening on the overall state

unemployment rate and the EPR. These estimates are generated from two-way fixed effects

regressions on a state-by-month (50 states plus District of Columbia, observed January through

April 2021) panel. The treatment effect is identified from an interaction of a Texas dummy and

the post-treatment period, with controls in even-numbered columns including additional factors

(i.e. state vaccination rates, testing rates, and any state policy changes). Statistical inference is

conducted using permutation-based p-values from placebo tests.




                                                  29
       Our findings in columns (5) through (8) provide little support for the hypothesis that the

Texas reopening had important employment effects. The findings in Appendix Table 3, derived

from CPS Basic Monthly Survey microdata from January through April 2021, also show no

evidence of substantial increases in the restaurant/bar or entertainment or employment-to-

population ratio.



                                          6. Conclusions

       Curbing in-person gatherings, limiting business openings, and mandating mask wearing

were among the most common NPIs enacted during the U.S. COVID-19 pandemic. However,

the onset of mass vaccinations in 2021 raised hopes that there would soon be a "return to

normal" following a long period of lockdowns. However, the optimal timing of fully repealing

COVID-19 mitigation policies has been the subject of controversy, with public health experts

warning against lifting mask mandates and capacity constraints while politically conservative

politicians urging a total reopening of state economies.

       Texas became the first state to entirely repeal its central NPIs -- in-person capacity

constraints on business and a mask-wearing mandate in public spaces -- following their

implementation in 2020. Leveraging this natural experiment, we document that the reopening

had, at most, a small effect on stay-at-home behavior and had no impact on foot traffic at

restaurants, bars, retail establishments, entertainment venues, business services, personal care

services, or grocery stores. We also find no evidence of increased COVID-19 case growth

following the reopening, consistent with (i) this being a period of mass vaccination, and (ii) the

reopening having little impact on net social mobility. These null results generally persisted

among more urbanized and less urbanized counties, as well as counties that supported Donald



                                                 30
Trump or Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election. Finally, we fail to detect evidence that the

reopening affected short-run state-level employment, as measured by UI claims filed, the overall

state unemployment rate, and the employment-to-population ratio.

       Together, this study's findings suggest that the predictions of reopening advocates and

opponents failed to materialize. The policy appears to have had little impact on social mobility,

COVID-19 spread, or on short-run economic activity.

       There may be several explanations for why the Texas reopening had little effect on net

social mobility. First, if individuals' social distancing behaviors and activity patterns are more a

function of (i) their private voluntary responses to perceived risk, or (ii) private demand shocks

(job loss; uncertainty; loss in income) unrelated to policy, rather than by supply-side restrictions,

then the imposition or lifting of such restrictions may have only small effects on behavior and

population-based health outcomes. It is notable that this same consideration also explains why

social distancing increased markedly during the very early phase of the pandemic, with this

private response driven directly by the mobility restrictions and closures and also indirectly by

these restrictions reflecting a bundled information shock that led individuals to self-regulate and

constrain their mobility. Moreover, even as the initial adoption of restrictions was effective and

elicited a population response (for instance, see Dave et al. 2020c), as individuals update their

risk assessment and amass information during the early stages of the pandemic, their risk-related

beliefs can become sticky and less malleable to public policy actions. Hence, their risk-related

behaviors also likely become highly inelastic over time.

       Another reason why the reopening may not have induced a significant response in terms

of stay-at-home behaviors and visits to businesses and restaurants/bars is if Texans were not

significantly complying with the pre-March 10 restrictions to begin with. Third, while we did



                                                 31
not find any meaningful heterogeneity across margins of urbanicity or political leanings, it is

possible that there may be compositional changes at other unmeasured margins. As certain

segments of the population may be responding to the reopening by reducing social distancing

and increasing their external activities, others may be countering especially if they perceive a

higher infection risk from the reopening. In this context, a null effect at the population level

does not preclude distributional effects across differentially-responding population subgroups.

         Finally, the lack of any short-term effects on UI claims or on the unemployment and

employment rates, from the reopening, may reflect rational decision-making among unemployed

individuals weighing the costs and benefits of returning to work, which include reassessed post-

reopening infection risk in the workplace as well as displacement of UI benefits by earned

wages.

         Our findings come with the requisite caveats regarding external validity. The Texan

experience may not necessarily generalize to the average state undergoing a similar reopening

and lifting of restrictions. Nevertheless, the lack of any meaningful population-level response in

social distancing metrics, COVID cases, or short-term economic activity highlight important

channels and mechanisms at play that regulate the existence and strength of private behavioral

responses, and these mechanisms are also expected to be applicable to other states that enact late-

pandemic era reopening policies.




                                                 32
                                       7. References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. "Synthetic Control Methods for
      Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control
      Program." Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493­505.
Abbott, G. 2021. Governor Abbott Lifts Mask Mandate, Opens Texas 100 Percent. Office of the
      Texas Governor. https://gov.texas.gov/news/post/governor-abbott-lifts-mask-mandate-
      opens-texas-100-percent
Abouk, R., Heydari, B., 2020. The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social Distancing
      Behavior in the United States (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 3571421). Social Science
      Research Network, Rochester, NY. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3571421
Ahammer, A., Halla, M., and Lackner, M. 2020. Mass Gatherings Contributed to Early COVID-
      19 Mortality: Evidence from US Sports. Working Paper.
      http://www.economics.jku.at/papers/2020/wp2013.pdf
Andersen, M., Maclean, J.C., Pesko, M.F., Simon, K.I., 2020. Effect of a Federal Paid Sick
      Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device Data
      (Working Paper No. 27138), Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic
      Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27138
Barrios, J.M. and Hochberg, Y. (2020). "Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the
      Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic." NBER Working Paper No. 27008.
Beauvais, S., Churchill, L., Collier, K., Davila, V., & Larson, R. Gov. 2021. Greg Abbott is
      limiting enforcement of COVID-19 orders, but many cities already took a lax approach.
      The Texas Tribune. https://www.texastribune.org/2020/05/14/texas-coronavirus-
      enforcement/
Botosaru, Irene., & Bruno Ferman 2019. "On the Role of Covariates in the Synthetic Control
      Method." The Econometrics Journal 22(2): 117-130.
Bravata, D., Cantor, J.H., Sood, N. and Whaley, C.M., 2021. Back to School: The Effect of
      School Visits During COVID-19 on COVID-19 Transmission (No. w28645). National
      Bureau of Economic Research.
Buchmueller, T. C., DiNardo, J., & Valletta, R. G. 2011. The effect of an employer health
      insurance mandate on health insurance coverage and the demand for labor: Evidence from
      Hawaii. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4), 25-51.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021a. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) ­
      Cases & Data. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
      https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021b. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
      Data Tracker ­ COVID-19 Vaccinations in the United States. https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-
      data-tracker/#vaccinations
Carlin, P., Minard, P., Simon, D.H., and Wing, C. 2020. Effects of Large Gatherings on the
      COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence From Professional and College Sports. Working paper.
      https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3657625
Chaudhury, N. 2021. Austin Updates COVID-19 Guidelines to Include Mask Guidance for
      Vaccinated People. Austin Eater. https://austin.eater.com/2021/5/5/22421223/austin-
      health-mask-guidance-vaccinated-people-dining-restaurants-indoor




                                             33
Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., Yellowish, A., 2020a. Did Social-
      Distancing Measures in Kentucky Help to Flatten the COVID-19 Curve? Forthcoming,
      PLOSOne.
Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., Yelowitz, A., 2020b. Strong Social
      Distancing Measures in the United States Reduced the COVID-19 Growth Rate. Health
      Affairs 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608
Courtemanche, C.J., Le, A.H., Yelowitz, A. and Zimmer, R., 2021. School Reopenings,
      Mobility, and COVID-19 Spread: Evidence from Texas (No. w28753). National Bureau of
      Economic Research.
Cronin, C.J. and Evans, W.N., 2020. Private precaution and public restrictions: what drives
      social distancing and industry foot traffic in the COVID-19 era? (Working Paper No.
      27531). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cunningham, S. and Shah, M., (2018). "Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for
        Sexual Violence and Public Health." The Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), pp.1683-
        1715.
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D., Redpath, C. and Sabia, J.J., 2020a.
      Risk aversion, offsetting community effects, and covid-19: Evidence from an indoor
      political rally. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Forthcoming.
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., Safford, S., 2020b. Black Lives Matter
      Protests, Social Distancing, and COVID-19 (Working Paper No. 27408), Working Paper
      Series. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27408
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., 2020c. Are the effects of
      adoption and termination of shelter-in-place orders symmetric? Evidence from a natural
      experiment (Working Paper No. 27322). National Bureau of Economic Research.
      https://doi.org/10.3386/w27322
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., Safford, S., 2021a. Were Urban Cowboys
      Enough to Control COVID-19? Local Shelter-in-Place Orders and Coronavirus Case
      Growth. Journal of Urban Economics, Forthcoming.
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., 2021b. When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders
      Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time. Economic
      Inquiry, 59(1), pp. 29-52.
Dave, D.M., McNichols, D. and Sabia, J.J., 2021c. Political Violence, Risk Aversion, and Non-
      Localized Disease Spread: Evidence from the US Capitol Riot (No. w28410). National
      Bureau of Economic Research.
de Bruin, W.B., Saw, H.W. and Goldman, D.P., 2020. Political polarization in US residents'
      COVID-19 risk perceptions, policy preferences, and protective behaviors. Journal of Risk
      and Uncertainty, 61(2), pp.177-194.
del Rio, G. 2021. The impact of the storm in Texas could lead to more virus cases, experts. Say.
      The New York Times. February 28, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/28/us/texas-
      storms-covid-
      superspreader.html#:~:text=Coronavirus%20case%20reporting%20dropped%20precipitou
      sly,during%20the%20storm%20raised%20concerns.
Ferman, B., 2019. On the properties of the synthetic control estimator with many periods and
      many controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06665.




                                              34
Friedson, A.I., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., Dave, D., 2021. Shelter-in-Place Orders and Public
      Health: Evidence from California During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of Policy
      Analysis and Management. 41(1), pp. 258-283.
Goolsbee, A. and Syverson, C., 2021. Fear, lockdown, and diversion: Comparing drivers of
      pandemic economic decline 2020. Journal of Public Economics, 193, p.104311.
Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K.I., Wing, C.,
      2020. Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from
      State and Local Government Actions. Forthcoming, American Journal of Health
      Economics.
Hammer, J. 2021. Reopen America Now. Newsweek.com. https://www.newsweek.com/reopen-
      america-now-opinion-1573928
Harper, K.B. 2021. Texas opens COVID-19 vaccine to everyone 16 and older on March 29. The
      Texas Tribune. https://www.texastribune.org/2021/03/23/texans-eligible-covid-vaccine/
Harris, D.N., Ziedan, E. and Hassig, S., 2021. The effects of school reopenings on COVID-19
      hospitalizations. National Center for Research on Education Access and Choice. Available
      at: https://www.reachcentered.org/publications/the-effects-of-school-reopenings-on-covid-
      19-hospitalizations.
Johns Hopkins University. 2021. COVID-19 Data. https://github.com/govex/COVID-19
Klößner, S., Kaul, A., Pfeifer, G. and Schieler, M., 2018. Comparative politics and the synthetic
      control method revisited: A note on Abadie et al. (2015). Swiss Journal of Economics and
      Statistics, 154(1), pp.1-11.
Kniesner, T.J. and Sullivan, R., 2020. The forgotten numbers: A closer look at COVID-19 non-
      fatal valuations. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 61(2), pp.155-176.
Lauer, Stephen A., Kyra H. Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K. Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah R.
      Meredith, Andrew S. Azman, Nicholas G. Reich, and Justin Lessler. 2020. The Incubation
      Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) from Publicly Reported Confirmed
      Cases: Estimation and Application." Annals of Internal Medicine. Available at:
      https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7081172/
Lyu, W. and Wehby, G.L., 2020. Community Use Of Face Masks And COVID-19: Evidence
      From A Natural Experiment Of State Mandates In The US: Study examines impact on
      COVID-19 growth rates associated with state government mandates requiring face mask
      use in public. Health Affairs, pp.10-1377.
Neuman, S., & Romo, V. 2021. As Texans recover power, `it's life or death' for many bracing
      for more frigid temps. NPR. https://www.npr.org/sections/live-updates-winter-storms-
      2021/2021/02/18/968973671/its-life-and-death-texans-still-without-power-as-nation-faces-
      more-winter-storms
Oxner, R. 2021. Austin and Travis County officials can keep enforcing local mask mandate for
        now, judge says. The Texas Tribune. https://www.texastribune.org/2021/03/26/austin-
        masks-paxton-lawsuit/
Porterfield, Carlie. 2021. Dr. Fauci: Texas And Mississippi Mask Mandate Rollbacks Are `Ill-
      Advised' And `Risky'. Forbes.
      https://www.forbes.com/sites/carlieporterfield/2021/03/03/dr-fauci-texas-and-mississippi-
      mask-mandate-rollbacks-are-ill-advised-and-risky/?sh=775bcb4d1611
Sears, James and Villas-Boas, J. Miguel and Villas-Boas, Vasco and Villas-Boas, Sofia, Are We
      #Staying Home to Flatten the Curve? (May 25, 2020). Department of Agricultural and



                                               35
      Resource Economics. CUDARE Working Papers. Available at SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=3569791.
Sullum. 2021. https://chicago.suntimes.com/columnists/2021/4/20/22394076/covid-19-texas-
      pandemic-infection-rates-restrictions-gov-greg-abbott-jacob-sullum
Svitek, P. 2020. Gov. Greg Abbott orders Texans in most counties to wear masks in public. The
      Texas Tribune. https://www.texastribune.org/2020/07/02/texas-mask-order-greg-abbott-
      coronavirus/
Traynor, K., 2021. Texas freeze brought unexpected COVID-19 vaccination challenges.
      American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy.
Viscusi, W.K., 2020. Pricing the global health risks of the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Risk
      and Uncertainty, 61(2), pp.101-128.
Yan, Y., Bayham, J., Richter, A. and Fenichel, E.P., 2021. Risk compensation and face mask
      mandates during the COVID-19 pandemic. Scientific Reports, 11(1), pp.1-11.




                                              36
                      Figure 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on Stay-at-Home Behavior

            Panel (a): Percent Staying at Home Full Time                                      Panel (b): Percent Staying at Home Full Time
               [Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days]                                   [Matching on Selected Pre-Treatment Days and All Observables]




        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of SD (20.3%), ND (19.0%),                        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of KY (33.6%), TN (27.9%),
       VT (17.7%), TN (16.4%), LA (11.7%), CO (8.2%), and GA (6.6%).                                   GA (26.7%), NV (10.3%), and SD (1.5%).

                  Panel (c): Median Hours at Home                                                   Panel (d): Median Hours at Home
                [Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days]                                  [Matching on Selected Pre-Treatment Days and All Observables]




                                                                                             Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (40.8%), OK (37.3%),
 Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (86.2%), NJ (11.6%), and CO (2.2%).                                  NJ (16.9%), and CO (5.0%).
                                                                                37
Notes: Observable matching variables include daily testing per 100k pop and cumulative doses of COVID-19 vaccination per 100k pop population, and number of
days of business closures, shelter-in-place orders/advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity and population density.
Figure 2A. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on Log (Foot Traffic Per 100,000 Population),
                                     Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days

            Panel (a): Restaurants and Bars                                           Panel (b): Restaurants




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (35.9%), OK (35.7%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (39.4%), OK (37.3%),
     KY (16.6%), TN (7.4%), VT (2.7%), and NV (1.6%).                     KY (20.8%), VT (2.1%), CO (0.3%), and DC (0.1%).


                     Panel (c): Bars                                                     Panel (d): Retail




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (35.2%), ND (27.9%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (45.1%), TN (34.5%).
NM (17.5%), VT (6.5%), TN (5.2%), NV (4.4%), and KY (3.2%).                     NV (13.1%), DC (5.7%), and ND (1.6%).
                                                                38
                                                                Figure 2A, Continued


           Panel (e): Entertainment Venues                                                           Panel (f): Business Services




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of KY (30.7%), NE (19.6%),                  Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of TN (74.9%), LA (13.7%), and GA (11.4%).
   ND (16.3%), OK (15.4%), GA (12.2%), and NM (5.8%).


          Panel (g): Personal Care Services                                                           Panel (h): Grocery Stores




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (67.8%), SC (12.4%),                  Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (61.7%), VT (20.0%), and FL (18.3%).
           LA (11.5%), TN (4.7%), and NV (3.6%).
                                                                         39
      Figure 2B: Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on Log (Foot Traffic Per 100,000 Population),
                            Matching on Selected Pre-Treatment Days and Observable Controls

                  Panel (a): Restaurants and Bars                                                           Panel (b): Restaurants




      Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (53.8%), OK (26.5%),                        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (55.0%), OK (24.9%),
                 KY (11.7%), NV (7.5%), and VT (0.5%).                                                KY (12.3%), NV (7.5%), and VT (0.3%).


                           Panel (c): Bars                                                                     Panel (d): Retail




      Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (60.0%), NV (27.5%),                        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (41.1%), LA (24.5%),
            NM (5.3%), KY (3.0%), MI (2.6%), and ND (1.5%).                                           NV (23.7%), KY (6.6%), and TN (4.1%).
                                                                           40
Notes: Observable matching variables include daily testing per 100k pop and cumulative doses of COVID-19 vaccination per 100k pop population, and number of
days of business closures, shelter-in-place orders/advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity and population density.
                                                                          Figure 2B, Continued


                     Panel (e): Entertainment Venues                                                           Panel (f): Business Services




          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of KY (34.5%), TN (33.4%),                          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (46.4%), NV (42.6%),
                           GA (16.4%), and NV (15.7%).                                                       DC (4.1%), TN (3.9%), and LA (3.0%).


                    Panel (g): Personal Care Services                                                           Panel (h): Grocery Stores




          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (60.0%), GA (14.6%),                          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (40.5%), LA (38.1%),
                 NV (10.3%), DE (6.5%), ND (6.3%), TN (2.3%).                                                     PA (19.7%), and VT (1.6%).
                                                                                   41
Notes: Observable matching variables include daily testing per 100k pop and cumulative doses of COVID-19 vaccination per 100k pop population, and number of
days of business closures, shelter-in-place orders/advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity and population density.
                       Figure 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                                   New COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population

                                        Panel (a): COVID-19 Daily Cases Per 100,000
                                           [Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days]




                  Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (67.8%), LA (15.0%), SC (9.5%), VT (4.9%), and NM (2.7%).




                                      Panel (b): COVID-19 Daily Cases Per 100,000
                              [Matching on Selected Pre-Treatment Days and All Observables]




                        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (58.5%), KY (28.2%), LA (6.7%), and SC (6.6%).

Notes: Observable matching variables include daily testing per 100k42pop and cumulative doses of COVID-19 vaccination per 100k pop
population, and number of days of business closures, shelter-in-place orders/advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity and population
density.
              Figure 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on Ratio of
                    Weekly Continued Unemployment Claims Per 1,000 Covered Jobs


                               Panel (a): Weekly Continued Claims Per 1,000 Covered Jobs
                                          [Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days]




                              Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of FL (39.8%), CO (37.6%), OH (14.3%),
                                                       MI (8.1%), and LA (0.2%).

                               Panel (b): Weekly Continued Claims Per 1,000 Covered Jobs
                              [Matching on Selected Pre-Treatment Days and All Observables]




                              Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of CO (30.0%), TN (25.7%), FL (17.8%),
                                                MI (9.6%), LA (9.4%), and NV (7.4%).

Notes: The dates above indicate the start of the week claims data are measured. Observable matching variables include daily testing
per 100k pop and cumulative doses of COVID-19 vaccination per 100k pop population, and number of days of business closures,
                                                                43 and population density. Extended donor pool includes Kentucky
shelter-in-place orders/advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity
with recoded daily death rates more than 3 standard deviations from state-specific mean to the state-specific mean.
                   Table 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                                         Stay-at-Home Behavior

                                             Full-Time Stay-at-Home                          Median Hours at Home

                                               (1)                  (2)                       (3)                (4)

                                             Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                            -0.496*               -0.055                    -0.025             0.028
P-Value                                     [0.121]              [0.667]                   [0.792]            [0.667]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.083]              [0.371]                   [0.417]            [0.292]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                    24.149               24.149                    12.521             12.521
                                                          Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows
                                                      Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to March 24

Texas Re-Opening                            -0.687*               -0.168                    -0.127             -0.201
P-Value                                     [0.121]              [0.621]                   [0.621]            [0.458]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.083]              [0.417]                   [0.208]            [0.167]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                    24.149               24.149                    12.521             12.521
                                                       Post-Treatment Window -- March 25 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                -0.353*                           0.029                     0.052              0.207
P-Value                         [0.167]                          [0.417]                   [0.833]            [0.583]
One Sided P-Value               [0.083]                          [0.250]                   [0.417]            [0.250]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean         24.149                          24.149                    12.521             12.521
Donor Pool and Matching Variables
Pre-Opening Matching Days                      11                    6                        11                 6
Match on All Observables                       No                   Yes                       No                Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Observable matching variables include the average of the pre-
treatment and post-treatment period testing per 100,000 population and doses of vaccination per 100,000 population, and
number of days of restaurant, bar, and personal care services closure policies, shelter-in-place orders and advisories, mask
mandates, state urbanicity and population density. Pre-opening matching days in columns (1) and (3) include each day
between February 27th, 2021 and March 9th, 2021. In columns (2) and (4), we match on every other day in the pre-treatment
period beginning on February 27th. Permutation-based p-values are generated via placebo tests.




                                                               44
                                 Table 2A. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                      Log (Foot Traffic Per 100,000 Population), Matching on Outcome for All Pre-Treatment Days
                                 Restaurants                                                                          Business   Personal
                                                   Restaurants           Bars            Retail    Entertainment                            Grocery
                                  and Bars                                                                            Services    Care
                                      (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)          (5)               (6)      (7)        (8)

                                                              Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to April 13
Texas Re-Opening                     0.009             0.000             0.012       -0.005       0.032        -0.007             -0.005     -0.028
P-Value                             [0.917]           [0.917]           [0.871]     [0.250]      [0.458]      [0.542]            [0.621]    [0.621]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.542]           [0.542]           [0.417]     [0.121]      [0.167]      [0.371]            [0.333]    [0.333]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947             7.914             4.533        8.237       6.848        7.370               4.154      6.112
                                                                         Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows
                                                                      Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to March 24
Texas Re-Opening                     0.017             0.009             0.021           0.012         0.036            0.013     0.007      -0.021
P-Value                             [0.871]           [0.792]           [0.750]         [0.333]       [0.333]          [0.458]   [0.667]    [0.583]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.583]           [0.500]           [0.292]         [0.167]       [0.121]          [0.292]   [0.371]    [0.292]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947             7.914             4.533           8.237         6.848            7.370     4.154       6.112
                                                                       Post-Treatment Window -- March 25 to April 13
Texas Re-Opening                     0.000             0.000             0.000          -0.024*        0.027            -0.028    -0.019     -0.036
P-Value                              [1.00]           [0.917]           [0.958]         [0.167]       [0.542]          [0.333]   [0.500]    [0.371]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.583]           [0.417]           [0.458]         [0.083]       [0.208]          [0.208]   [0.371]    [0.208]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947             7.914             4.533           8.237         6.848            7.370      4.154      6.112
 * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

 Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Permutation-based p-values are generated via placebo tests.




                                                                                  45
                             Table 2B. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
     Log (Foot Traffic Per 100,000 Population), Matching on Outcome for Selected Pre-Treatment Days and All Observables

                                 Restaurants                                                                            Business        Personal
                                                   Restaurants           Bars            Retail    Entertainment                                        Grocery
                                  and Bars                                                                              Services         Care
                                      (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)             (8)

                                                              Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to April 13
Texas Re-Opening                     0.000             0.000             -0.018          -0.006         -0.011            -0.015          -0.037          -0.018
P-Value                             [0.871]           [0.833]           [0.500]         [0.583]        [0.583]           [0.371]         [0.417]         [0.792]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.371]           [0.333]           [0.333]         [0.292]        [0.333]           [0.292]         [0.208]         [0.371]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947             7.914              4.533           8.237          6.848            7.370            4.154           6.112
                                                                         Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows
                                                                      Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to March 24
Texas Re-Opening                     0.013             0.013            0.034       0.011        0.000          0.012                     -0.034          -0.011
P-Value                             [0.833]           [0.833]          [0.621]     [0.542]      [0.667]        [0.500]                   [0.417]         [0.917]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.417]           [0.417]          [0.167]     [0.333]      [0.371]        [0.292]                   [0.167]         [0.333]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947             7.914            4.533       8.237        6.848          7.370                      4.154           6.112
                                                                       Post-Treatment Window -- March 25 to April 13
Texas Re-Opening                     -0.015            -0.014            -0.075          -0.024         -0.042            -0.045          -0.041          -0.025
P-Value                             [0.792]           [0.750]           [0.371]         [0.371]        [0.583]           [0.292]         [0.250]         [0.583]
One Sided P-Value                   [0.371]           [0.333]           [0.167]         [0.208]        [0.333]           [0.167]         [0.167]         [0.371]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean             7.947              7.914            4.533           8.237           6.848            7.370            4.154           6.112
 * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

 Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Observable matching variables include the average of the pre-treatment and post-treatment
 period testing per 100,000 population and doses of vaccination per 100,000 population, and number of days of restaurant, bar, and personal care services closure
 policies, shelter-in-place orders and advisories, mask mandates, state urbanicity and population density. Pre-opening matching days in each specification are
 every other day between February 27th, 2021 and March 9th, 2021. Permutation-based p-values are generated via placebo tests.




                                                                                  46
                   Table 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                              Daily COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population
                                                 Daily COVID-19                                   Daily COVID-19
                                                   Case Levels                                     Growth Rate
                                               (1)                  (2)                       (3)                (4)

                                             Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                            -1.167                -1.145                    -0.002             -0.004
P-Value                                     [0.871]              [0.917]                   [0.833]            [0.750]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.583]              [0.667]                   [0.500]            [0.417]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                    23.336               23.336                     -0.039             -0.039

                                                          Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows
                                                      Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to March 24

Texas Re-Opening                            -0.341                -0.922                    -0.013             -0.008
P-Value                                     [0.871]              [0.708]                   [0.750]            [0.583]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.583]              [0.500]                   [0.371]            [0.292]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                    23.336               23.336                     -0.039             -0.039
                                                       Post-Treatment Window -- March 25 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                 -1.779                           -1.313                    0.006               0.000
P-Value                         [0.917]                          [0.958]                   [0.917]            [0.792]
One Sided P-Value               [0.583]                          [0.667]                   [0.500]            [0.458]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean         23.336                          23.336                     -0.039             -0.039
Donor Pool and Matching Variables
Pre-Opening Matching Days                     11                     6                       11                   6
Match on All Observables                      Yes                   No                       Yes                 No
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Observable matching variables include the average of the pre-
treatment and post-treatment period testing per 100,000 population and doses of vaccination per 100,000 population,
restaurant, bar, and personal care services closure policies, shelter-in-place orders and advisories, mask mandates, state
urbanicity and population density. Pre-opening matching days in columns (1) and (3) include each day between February 27th,
2021 and March 9th, 2021. In columns (2) and (4), we match on every other day in the pre-treatment period. Permutation-
based p-values are generated via placebo tests.




                                                               47
                   Table 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                             Daily COVID-19 Deaths Per 100,000 Population
                                                 Daily COVID-19                                    Daily COVID-19
                                                  Death Levels                                    Death Growth Rate
                                               (1)                  (2)                       (3)                (4)

                                             Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                            -0.002                0.006                     -0.001              -0.017
P-Value                                     [0.708]              [0.750]                   [0.250]             [0.750]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.292]              [0.417]                   [0.167]             [0.458]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                     0.767                0.767                     -0.014              -0.014
                                                          Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows

                                                      Post-Treatment Window -- March 10 to March 24
Texas Re-Opening                             0.094                0.094                     -0.025              -0.008
P-Value                                     [0.667]              [0.583]                   [0.417]             [0.750]
One Sided P-Value                           [0.458]              [0.333]                   [0.250]             [0.417]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                     0.767                0.767                     -0.014              -0.014
                                                       Post-Treatment Window -- March 25 to April 13

Texas Re-Opening                 -0.074                           -0.061                    0.000               -0.025
P-Value                         [0.750]                          [0.708]                   [0.208]             [0.667]
One Sided P-Value               [0.333]                          [0.371]                   [0.167]             [0.292]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean          0.767                            0.767                    -0.014              -0.014
Donor Pool and Matching Variables

Pre-Opening Matching Days                     11                     6                       11                   6
Match on All Observables                      Yes                   No                       Yes                 No
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Observable matching variables include the average of the pre-
treatment and post-treatment period testing per 100,000 population and doses of vaccination per 100,000 population,
restaurant, bar, and personal care services closure policies, shelter-in-place orders and advisories, mask mandates, state
urbanicity and population density. Pre-opening matching days in columns (1) and (3) include each day between February 27th,
2021 and March 9th, 2021. In columns (2) and (4), we match on every other day in the pre-treatment period. Permutation-
based p-values are generated via placebo tests.




                                                               48
              Table 5: Exploring Heterogeneity in Effect of Texas' Reopening on Percent Stay at
                                 Home Full-Time and Foot Traffic into Bars

                                                       % Stay at Home Full-Time                Foot Traffic in Bars
                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                                               Panel I: Overall
Texas Reopening                                      -0.440       -0.441        -0.546     0.014       0.014      0.003
  Permutation-based [p-value]                       [0.625]      [0.625]       [0.458]    [0.958]     [0.958] [0.958]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                 {15/24}      {15/24}       {11/24}    {23/24}     {23/24} {23/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                         20.065       20.065        20.065     2.725       2.725      2.725
                                                                        Panel II: County Urbanicity
Texas Reopening *  50% Urbanicity                    -0.508       -0.509        -0.614     0.017       0.017      0.005
  Permutation-based [p-value]                       [0.458]      [0.458]       [0.899]    [0.958]     [0.958] [0.958]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                 {11/24}      {11/24}       {10/24}    {23/24}     {23/24} {23/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                         20.922       20.922        20.922     3.488       3.488      3.488
Texas Reopening * < 50% Urbanicity                    0.202        0.202         0.096     -0.010      -0.010    -0.021
  Permutation-based [p-value]                       [0.800]      [0.800]       [0.899]    [0.949]     [0.949] [0.850]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                 {16/24}      {16/24}       {18/24}    {19/24}     {19/24} {17/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                         19.322       19.322        19.322     2.063       2.063      2.063
                                                                    Panel III: County % Voted for Trump
Texas Reopening *  50% Vote Trump                    -0.199       -0.200        -0.305     0.001       0.001     -0.010
  Permutation-based [p-value]                       [0.856]      [0.856]       [0.666]     [1.00]      [1.00]     [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                 {18/24}      {18/24}       {14/24}    {21/24}     {21/24} {21/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                         19.679       19.679        19.679     2.663       2.663      2.663
Texas Reopening * < 50% Vote Trump                   -0.686       -0.686        -0.792     0.027       0.027      0.016
  Permutation-based [p-value]                       [0.522]      [0.522]       [0.391]    [0.912]     [0.870] [0.912]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                 {12/24}      {12/24}        {9/24}    {21/24}     {20/24} {21/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                         24.587       24.587        24.587     3.447       3.447      3.447

N                                                    63,800            63,800        63,800       63,800         63,800       63,800
Controls:
COVID-19 New Testing Rate?                              N                Y              Y            N              Y            Y
Testing & Cumulative Vaccine Doses?                     N                N              Y            N              N            Y
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Regressions include Texas and each donor state. The weights are generated by multiplying share of state population by the
synthetic weights. Each column includes county and day fixed effects; (2) and (5) include daily testing per 100,000 population; and
columns (3) and (6) include daily cumulative doses of a COVID-19 vaccination administered per 100,000 population in addition to
the controls used in columns (2) and (5). P-values, generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets and ranking of the
treated unit is included in braces.




                                                                  49
  Table 6: Exploring Heterogeneity in Effect of Texas' Reopening on Foot Traffic into Restaurants and
                                      Daily COVID-19 Case Rate

                                                       Foot Traffic into Restaurants         Daily COVID-19 Case Rate
                                                        (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)      (6)
                                                                                 Panel I: Overall
Texas Reopening                                       -0.005       -0.005        -0.004      -1.035     -1.034   -2.450
  Permutation-based [p-value]                        [0.916]      [0.916]       [0.958]     [0.958]    [0.958] [0.833]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                  {22/24}      {22/24}      {23/24}      {23/24}   {23/24] {20/24]
  Mean of Dependent Variable                          8.152         8.152        8.152      17.429     17.429   17.429
                                                                          Panel II: County Urbanicity
Texas Reopening *  50% Urbanicity                     -0.007       -0.007        -0.006      -1.198     -1.198   -2.614
  Permutation-based [p-value]                        [0.916]      [0.916]       [0.833]     [0.958]    [0.958] [0.875]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                  {22/24}      {22/24}      {20/24}      {23/24}   {23/24} {21/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                          8.557         8.557        8.557      16.668     16.668   16.668
Texas Reopening * < 50% Urbanicity                    0.009         0.009        0.010       0.515      0.516    -0.900
  Permutation-based [p-value]                        [0.850]      [0.850]       [0.800]      [1.00]     [1.00]  [0.800]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                  {22/24}      {17/24}      {16/24}      {20/24}   {20/24} {16/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                          7.801         7.801        7.801      18.089     18.089   18.089
                                                                     Panel III: County % Voted for Trump
Texas Reopening *  50% Vote Trump                     -0.006       -0.006        -0.005      -1.068     -1.068   -2.484
  Permutation-based [p-value]                        [0.904]      [0.904]        [1.00]     [0.952]    [0.952] [0.762]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                  {19/24}      {19/24}      {21/24}      {20/24}   {20/24} {16/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                          8.147         8.147        8.147      16.822     16.822   16.822
Texas Reopening * < 50% Voted Trump                   -0.005       -0.005        -0.004      -1.000     -0.999   -2.416
  Permutation-based [p-value]                        [0.870]      [0.870]        [1.00]      [1.00]     [1.00]  [0.870]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                  {19/24}      {20/24}      {23/24}      {23/24}   {23/24} {20/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                          8.219         8.219        8.219      24.528     24.528   24.528

N                                                     63,800           63,800        63,800       73,370         73,370       73,370
Controls:
COVID-19 New Testing Rate?                               N               Y              Y            N              Y            Y
Testing & Cumulative Vaccine Doses?                      N               N              Y            N              N            Y
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Regressions include Texas and each donor state. The weights are generated by multiplying share of state population by the
synthetic weights. Each column includes county and day fixed effects; (2) and (5) include daily testing per 100,000 population; and
columns (3) and (6) include daily cumulative doses of a COVID-19 vaccination administered per 100,000 population in addition to
the controls used in columns (2) and (5). P-values, generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets and ranking of the
treated unit is included in braces.




                                                                  50
                  Table 7. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
                   Weekly Continued Unemployment Claims Per 1,000 Covered Jobs
                                                                 (1)                                  (2)

                                                          Panel I: Entire Post-Treatment Window ­
                                                              Weeks of March 14th to April 4th

Texas Re-Opening                                               -0.512                               -0.429
P-Value                                                       [0.861]                               [1.00]
One Sided P-Value                                             [0.391]                              [0.609]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                                      27.536                               27.536

                                                         Panel II: Short- and Longer-Run Windows
                                             Post-Treatment Window -- Weeks of March 14th and March 21st

Texas Re-Opening                                               -1.318                               -0.437
P-Value                                                       [0.652]                              [0.783]
One Sided P-Value                                             [0.435]                              [0.522]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                                      27.536                               27.536

                                                Post-Treatment Window -- Weeks of March 28th to April 4th

Texas Re-Opening                                               0.294                                -0.421
P-Value                                                        [1.00]                              [0.957]
One Sided P-Value                                             [0.652]                              [0.478]
Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                                      27.536                               27.536
Donor Pool and Matching Variables
Pre-Opening Matching Weeks                                       All                                  4
Match on All Observables                                         No                                  Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimates are generated using synthetic control methods. Observable matching variables include the average of the
pre-treatment and post-treatment period testing per 100,000 population and doses of vaccination per 100,000 population,
restaurant, bar, and personal care services closure policies, shelter-in-place orders and advisories, mask mandates, state
urbanicity and population density. Pre-opening matching weeks in column (1) include all weeks between February 21st and
Match 7th. In column (2), we match on the weeks beginning February 7th, February 21st, February 28th, and March 7th.
Permutation-based p-values are generated via placebo tests




                                                              51
     Table 8: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of Texas Reopening on Unemployment Insurance Claims,
                                  Unemployment Rate and Employment-to-Population Ratio



                                                             Continued UI                 Initial              Unemployment              Employment-to-
                                                               Claims                    UI Claims                 Rate                  Population Ratio

                                                            (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
Texas Reopening                                            1.896        0.763         0.080        0.138      0.216        0.217        -0.327        -0.647
  Permutation-based [p-value]                             [0.458]      [0.750]        [1.00]      [0.958]    [0.372]      [0.391]      [0.430]       [0.136]
  Placebo Test {Texas Rank /# Donors + 1}                 {11/24}      {18/24}       {24/24}      {23/24}    {19/51}      {20/51}      {22/51}       {7/51}

Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                                   27.536       27.536        4.087        4.087      6.850        6.850        57.788       57.788
N                                                           240          240           240          240        204          204          204          204

State and Time Effects?                                      Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Observable Controls?                                         No           Yes          No          Yes         No           Yes           No           Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimates in columns (1)-(4) are obtained from state-by-week data on UI Claims from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Estimates in columns (5)-(8) are
obtained from state-by-month from the January 2021 through April 2021 Current Population Survey. All models in columns (1)-(4) include state and week
fixed effects. All models in column include state and month fixed effects. Observable controls include number of days of business closures, shelter-in-place
orders/advisories, mask mandates, average daily testing, and average daily doses. P-values, generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets and
ranking of the treated unit is included in braces.




                                                                                52
Appendix Figure 1: Sensitivity of Stay-at-Home and Foot Traffic Synthetic Results to Use of Daily Stay-at-Home and Foot
                                    Traffic Data, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days

           Panel (a): Percent Staying at Home Full Time                                Panel (b): Restaurants and Bars




       Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of SC (33.8%), NE (25.1%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (32.0%), TN (26.8%),
                  CO (18.5%), RI (15.5%), and LA (7.2%).                              GA (15.5%), FL (14.2%), and NV (11.5%).



                        Panel (c): Restaurants                                                   Panel (d): Bars




                                                                       51
       Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (30.7%), TN (30.0%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (64.0%), FL (18.8%),
                 GA (17.7%), NV (11.7%), and FL (9.9%).                                      DC (12.3%), and NV (4.8%).
Appendix Figure 2. Sensitivity of Synthetic Control Estimates on Stay-at-Home Behavior to
 the Exclusion of Travis County from Treated Unit, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days


                           Panel (a): Percent Staying at Home Full Time




           Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of ND (22.4%), TN (19.7%), SD (16.7%), VT (15.6%),
                                    LA (11.2%), GA (7.3%), and CO (7.1%).


                                 Panel (b): Median Hours at Home




                     Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (85.8%), and NJ (14.2%).



                                                     52
Appendix Figure 3. Sensitivity of Synthetic Control Estimates on Foot Traffic to the Exclusion of Travis County from Treated
                                         Unit, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days

                Panel (a): Restaurants and Bars                                           Panel (b): Restaurants




    Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (42.4%), LA (36.2%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (42.9%), LA (38.1%),
               KY (16.0%), TN (4.2%), and VT (1.2%).                                      KY (18.5%), and VT (0.5%).



                         Panel (c): Bars                                                     Panel (d): Retail




    Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (36.4%), ND (29.9%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (44.9%), TN (35.8%),
    NM (18.1%), VT (7.1%), TN (6.5%), NV (1.6%), and KY (0.4%).                           NV (16.8%), and DC (2.4%).
                                                                    53
                                                        Appendix Figure 3, Continued


           Panel (a): Entertainment Venues                                                    Panel (b): Business Services




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of KY (30.5%), OK (21.0%),                   Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of TN (72.2%), GA (20.8%),
   ND (17.5%), NE (16.2%), GA (12.0%), and NM (2.9%).                                                   and LA (7.1%).



          Panel (c): Personal Care Services                                                    Panel (d): Grocery Stores




Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (58.2%), LA (27.2%),                   Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (65.6%), FL (21.2%),
                        and SC (14.5%).                                                                and VT (13.3%).
                                                                     54
Appendix Figure 4. Sensitivity of Synthetic Control Estimates to the Exclusion of Travis, Hays, and Williamson Counties from
                                     Treated Unit, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days
             Panel (a): Staying at Home Full Time                                Panel (b): Foot Traffic into Restaurants




     Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of ND (23.5%), TN (21.2%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of OK (41.7%), LA (38.4%),
    SD (15.5%), VT (15.2%), LA (11.4%), CO (6.7%), and GA (6.6%).                          KY (19.5%), and VT (0.3%).



                Panel (c): Foot Traffic into Bars                            Panel (d): Daily COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000




     Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of LA (41.1%), ND (27.3%),        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (55.2%), SC (22.5%),
          NM (18.6%), VT (8.5%), NV (3.0%), and TN (1.5%).           55        LA (11.1%), VT (6.2%), NM (2.8%), and DE (2.2%).
Appendix Figure 5. Sensitivity of Synthetic Control Estimates on New COVID-19 Cases to
          Use of Individual Daily Data, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days


                           Panel (a): Daily COVID-19 Case Growth Rate




     Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (65.2%), NM (18.2%), OK (7.2%), VT (6.1%), and PA (3.3%).



                           Panel (b): Daily COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000




          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (51.1%), ND (27.4%), RI (14.6%), and SD (6.8%).



                                                      56
Appendix Figure 6. Sensitivity of Synthetic Control Estimates on new COVID-19 Case
     Rate to Exclusion of Travis County, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days




        Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (74.4%), SC (11.0%), LA (7.8%), and VT (6.8%).




                                                   57
Appendix Figure 7. Robustness of Findings to Use of Cumulative COVID-19 Case Rate and
 Daily Growth in Cumulative COVID-19 Case Rate, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days

                     Panel (a): Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000




                Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (58.5%), OH (28.2%), RI (9.3%),
                                        MI (2.3%), and LA (1.7%).


                  Panel (b): Daily Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth Rate




               Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (49.4%), RI (19.3%), KY (16.8%),
                                        ND (9.0%), and SD (5.6%).



                                                    58
Appendix Figure 8. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Texas Reopening on
       Daily COVID-19 Deaths, Matching on All Pre-Treatment Days


                    Panel (a): COVID-19 Daily Deaths Per 100,000




          Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of GA (77.8%), OK (14.4%), and DE (7.8%).




                    Panel (b): COVID-19 Daily Death Growth Rate




     Note: Synthetic Texas is comprised of MA (33.8%), KY (21.3%), NV (15.6%), DC (10.8%),
                        PA (5.5%), GA (5.5%), NE (5.5%), and ND (2.0%).


                                                59
 Appendix Table 1: Sensitivity of Heterogeneity Estimates to Alternate Urbanicity and Voting Behavior
                     Cutoffs, Stay at Home Behavior and Foot Traffic into Bars
                                                             % Stay at Home Full-Time              Foot Traffic in Bars
                                                            (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                               Panel I: County Urbanicity
Texas Reopening *  75% Urbanicity                         -0.560        -0.561      -0.066      0.015      0.015      -0.002
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.435]       [0.435]     [0.435]     [0.912]    [0.912]     [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {10/24}      {10/24}      {10/24}     {21/24}    {21/24} {23/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              21.675       21.675       21.675      3.789      3.789      3.789
Texas Reopening * < 75% Urbanicity                         0.067         0.066      -0.039      0.010      0.010      0.004
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.957]       [0.957]     [0.957]     [0.912]    [0.957] [0.957]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {22/24}      {22/24}      {22/24}     {21/24}    {22/24} {22/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              19.568       19.568       19.568      2.396      2.396      2.396

Texas Reopening *  40% Urbanicity                          0.138            0.138         0.032    -0.010      -0.010                    -0.021
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.788]          [0.788]       [0.894]   [0.894]     [0.894]                   [0.894]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {15/24}          {15/24}       {17/24}   {17/24}     {17/24}                   {17/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              19.322           19.322        19.322    1.892       1.892                     1.892
Texas Reopening * > 40% Urbanicity                        -0.482           -0.482        -0.588    0.016       0.016                     0.005
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.500]          [0.500]       [0.458]    [1.00]      [1.00]                   [0.958]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {12/24}          {12/24}       {11/24}   {24/24}     {24/24}                   {23/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              20.671           20.671        20.671    3.403       3.403                     3.403
                                                                              Panel II: County % Voted for Trump
Texas Reopening *  60% Vote Trump                          0.079            0.079        -0.027    0.014       0.014                     0.003
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.947]          [0.947]        [1.00]   [0.894]     [0.894]                    [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {18/24}          {18/24}       {19/24}   {17/24}     {17/24}                   {19/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              19.365           19.365        19.365    2.515       2.515                     2.515
Texas Reopening * < 60% Voted Trump                       -0.645           -0.645        -0.751    0.014       0.014                     0.003
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.416]          [0.416]       [0.375]    [1.00]      [1.00]                    [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {10/24}          {10/24}        {9/24}   {24/24}     {24/24}                   {24/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              23.927           23.927        23.927    3.883       3.883                     3.883

N                                                         63,800            63,800         63,800          63,800          63,800        63,800
Controls: Daily Testing                                     N                 Y              Y               N               Y             Y
Controls: Testing & Cumulative
                                                             N                N               Y               N               N             Y
Vaccine Doses
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: Regressions include Texas and each donor state. The weights are generated by multiplying share of state population by the synthetic weights.
Each column includes county and day fixed effects; (2) and (5) include daily testing per 100,000 population; and columns (3) and (6) include daily
cumulative doses of a COVID-19 vaccination administered per 100,000 population in addition to the controls used in columns (2) and (5). P-values,
generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets and ranking of the treated unit is included in braces.



                                                                       60
 Appendix Table 2: Sensitivity of Heterogeneity Estimates to Alternate Urbanicity and Voting Behavior
                  Cutoffs, Foot Traffic into Restaurants and Daily COVID-19 Rate

                                                           Foot Traffic into Restaurants       Daily COVID-19 Case Rate
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)
                                                                              Panel I: County Urbanicity
Texas Reopening *  75% Urbanicity                         -0.007       -0.007       -0.006     -1.682     -1.681  -3.098
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.912]      [0.912]      [0.912]    [0.957]    [0.957] [0.782]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {21/24}      {21/24}     {21/24}     {22/24}    {22/24} {18/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              8.585         8.585       8.585     21.521     21.521   21.521
Texas Reopening * < 75% Urbanicity                        0.005         0.005       0.006      1.699      1.700    0.283
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.912]      [0.912]       [0.12]     [0.12]    [0.912]   [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {21/24}      {21/24}     {21/24}     {21/24}    {21/24} {23/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              8.018         8.018       8.018     16.163     16.163   16.163

Texas Reopening *  40% Urbanicity                         0.012             0.012        0.013     0.482       0.483                     -0.933
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.842]          [0.842]       [0.788]    [1.00]      [1.00]                   [0.788]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {16/24}          {16/24}       {15/24}   {19/24}     {19/24}                   {15/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              7.680             7.680        7.680    16.685      16.685                    16.685
Texas Reopening * > 40% Urbanicity                        -0.006           -0.006        -0.005    -1.144      -1.143                    -2.559
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.958]          [0.916]       [0.916]   [0.958]     [0.958]                   [0.875]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {23/24}          {22/24}       {22/24}   {23/24}     {23/24}                   {21/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              8.536             8.536        8.536    18.034      18.034                    18.034
                                                                              Panel II: County % Voted for Trump
Texas Reopening *  60% Vote Trump                         0.001             0.001        0.002     1.514       1.515                      0.098
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.947]          [0.947]        [1.00]   [0.842]     [0.842]                    [1.00]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {18/24}          {18/24}       {19/24}   {16/24}     {16/24}                   {19/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              8.112             8.112        8.112    15.546      15.546                     15.546
Texas Reopening * < 60% Voted Trump                       -0.008           -0.008        -0.007    -2.039      -2.038                    -3.454
  Permutation-based [p-value]                            [0.916]          [0.916]       [0.916]   [0.958]     [0.958]                   [0.833]
  Placebo {Texas Rank / Donors + 1}                      {22/24}          {22/24}       {22/24}   {23/24}     {23/24}                   {20/24}
  Mean of Dependent Variable                              8.375             8.375        8.375    27.687      27.687                     27.687

N                                                         63,800            63,800         63,800          73,370          73,370        73,370
Controls:
COVID-19 New Testing Rate?                                   N                Y               Y               N               Y             Y
Testing & Cumulative Vaccine Doses?                          N                N               Y               N               N             Y
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: Regressions include Texas and each donor state. The weights are generated by multiplying share of state population by the synthetic weights.
Each column includes county and day fixed effects; (2) and (5) include daily testing per 100,000 population; and columns (3) and (6) include daily
cumulative doses of a COVID-19 vaccination administered per 100,000 population in addition to the controls used in columns (2) and (5). P-values,
generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets and ranking of the treated unit is included in braces.

                                                                       61
Appendix Table 3: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of Texas Reopening on
         Bar/Restaurant and Entertainment Employment-to-Population Ratios


                                                                  Restaurant and Bar                 Entertainment
                                                                   Employment-to-                   Employment-to-
                                                                   Population Ratio                 Population Ratio

                                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)
Texas Reopening                                                    -0.389         -0.520           0.016      -0.013
  Permutation-based [p-value]                                     [0.549]        [0.451]          [0.961]    [0.961]
  Placebo Test {Texas Rank /# Donors + 1}                         {28/51}        {23/51}          {49/51}    {49/51}

Texas Pre-Treatment Mean                                           4.126          4.126            0.669      0.669
N                                                                   204            204              204        204

State and Month Effects?                                            Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes
Observable Controls?                                                No             Yes             No          Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Regressions include data from the January 2021 through April 2021 Current Population Survey. All models
include state and month fixed effects. Observable controls include number of days of business closures, shelter-in-place
orders/advisories, mask mandates, average daily testing, and average daily doses. P-values, generated using permutation
test, are reported inside brackets and ranking of the treated unit is included in braces.




                                                            62
