                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   LANGUAGE BARRIERS IN MULTINATIONALS AND KNOWLEDGE TRANSFERS

                                      Louise Guillouet
                                      Amit Khandelwal
                                     Rocco Macchiavello
                                     Matthieu Teachout

                                     Working Paper 28807
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28807


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021


This project would not have been possible without the support and collaboration of U Set Aung,
Thilawa SEZ Management Committee, participating factories, and Ian Porter. Our project
managers, Paing Thu Htet, Mohak Mangal, Madhav Malhotra, Sangyung Park, have provided
exceptional research support, as has the entire Yangon team: Aung Thet Paing, La Min Eain,
Myat Mo Phu, Thura Aung, and Zimbo Htike. Pol Antrás, Charles Angelucci, David Atkin,
Oriana Bandiera, Wouter Dessein, Ben Faber, Bob Gibbons, Isabela Manelici, Andrea Prat,
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Rafael Sadun, Meredith Startz, John Van Reenen, Jose Vasquez
provided helpful comments at various stages of the project. We also thank conference and
seminar participants at Berkeley, CEU, Census, CEPR, Copenhagen, Dartmouth, 2020 Empirical
Management Conference, EBRD, EIIT, HBS, IADB, IPA, LSE, MIT, 2020 NEUDC, PSE, PSU,
Sussex, Tufts and Yale. The project is registered at the AEA RCT Registry 0004326. We
obtained approval from the Columbia University IRB under protocols AAAR2302 and
AAAS3817. Financial support from the International Growth Center, Jerome A. Chazen
Institute for Global Business and Columbia's Center on Japanese Economy and Business is
gratefully acknowledged. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Louise Guillouet, Amit Khandelwal, Rocco Macchiavello, and Matthieu Teachout. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Language Barriers in Multinationals and Knowledge Transfers
Louise Guillouet, Amit Khandelwal, Rocco Macchiavello, and Matthieu Teachout
NBER Working Paper No. 28807
May 2021
JEL No. F0,F23,L20

                                        ABSTRACT

A distinct feature of MNCs is a three-tier organizational structure: foreign managers (FMs)
supervise domestic managers (DMs) who supervise production workers. Language barriers
between FMs and DMs could impede transfers of management knowledge. We develop a model
in which DMs learn general management by communicating with FMs, but communication effort
is non-contractible. These conditions generate sub-optimal communication within the MNC. If
communication is complementary with language skills, the planner could raise welfare by
subsidizing foreign language acquisition. We experimentally assess the validity of the general
skills and the complementarity assumptions in Myanmar, a setting where FMs and DMs
communicate in English. The first experiment examines the general skills assumption by asking
prospective employers at domestic firms to rate hypothetical job candidates. They value
candidates with both higher English proficiency and MNC experience, a premium driven, in part,
by frequent interactions with FMs. The second experiment examines the complementarity
assumption by providing English training to a random sample of DMs working at MNCs. At
endline, treated DMs have higher English proficiency, communicate more frequently with their
FMs, are more involved in firm management, and perform better in simulated management tasks.
Organizational barriers within MNCs can thus hinder knowledge transfers and lead to an under-
investment in English relative to the social optimum.

Louise Guillouet                              Rocco Macchiavello
Columbia University                           Management Department
lg2905@columbia.edu                           London School of Economics
                                              London
Amit Khandelwal                               United Kingdom
Graduate School of Business                   and CEPR
Columbia University                           R.Macchiavello@lse.ac.uk
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027                            Matthieu Teachout
and NBER                                      International Growth Centre
ak2796@columbia.edu                           London
                                              mrt2138@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
Developing countries routinely offer subsidies to attract multinational companies (MNCs) with the
hope of generating positive spillovers for the rest of the economy. While some studies detect evidence
of the latter, others do not (see Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare 2010 for a review). The uneven
empirical support suggests that beneficial spillovers are not automatic, and that policymakers
might have to consider complementary policies to fully realize potential spillovers from MNCs. A
transfer of knowledge from MNCs to domestic firms and workers is the initial spark for spillovers.
This paper documents that language barriers within MNCs can be an important friction limiting
this initial knowledge transfer­and thus the potential for spillovers­and examines under which
conditions a government intervention is justified.
    A distinct feature of MNC organizational structures is that a subsidiary is typically led by expe-
rienced foreign managers (FMs) who supervise less-experienced domestic middle managers (DMs),
who in turn supervise domestic production workers. In these firms, communication between an FM
and a DM often occurs in a language that is not native to at least one layer. In our setting­MNCs
operating in Myanmar­communication occurs in English, a non-native language for both layers.
Tailored surveys reveal that DMs' English proficiency is low on average and that language barriers
are an impediment to learning from FMs. Language acquisition and communication, however, are
costly activities, and a certain level of language barriers would be expected within a MNC, even
when firms and employees invest in the privately optimal level of language training.
    In this paper, we ask under what conditions private incentives to invest in English knowledge
diverge from the social optimum and examine whether these conditions arise in our context. We
first formulate a model in which a DM learns management­a skill that is tacit and hard-to-codify
(Polanyi 1966, Gibbons and Henderson 2012)­ by communicating with an FM. Following a standard
assumption within organizational economics, we assume that the amount, and content, of commu-
nication between the FM and DM is non-contractible (e.g., Crawford and Sobel 1982, Dessein 2002
and, for an approach closer to our model, Dewatripont and Tirole 2005). This "within MNCs"
contractual friction, which we take to be a realistic feature of the workplace, leads to under-supply
of communication between organizational layers when the knowledge acquired through communi-
cation with the FM is a general skill. In those circumstances, the planner would like to intervene
to reduce communication frictions between FMs and DMs to boost knowledge transfers. The non-
contractibility of communication within organizations, however, prevents the planner from targeting
directly the market failure. Instead, we consider one practical policy instrument to bring the de-
centralized equilibrium closer to the socially efficient level of communication: subsidizing language
acquisition. A necessary condition for the planner to be able to partially correct the inefficiency by
subsidizing English acquisition is that communication is complementary with language ability.1
    1
      We take it for granted that a common language improves efficiency as shown in, for instance, Cremer et al. 2007's
model of optimal language design ("code") inside an organization and lab experiments (e.g., Selten and Warglien
2007). To focus on how non-contractible communication within an MNC hinders the initial transfer of knowledge, we
deliberately abstract from productivity spillovers to workers and other firms. For the same reason, we also abstract
from imperfections in the market for language training as a general skill (e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke 1998).


                                                          1
    We explore the validity of the general skills and complementarity assumptions through two
experiments. The first protocol examines whether the management knowledge learned through
communication at MNCs is a general skill valued by other employers. We recruit a sample of 51
experienced human-resource managers who work at domestic firms to rate hypothetical resumes
of job applicants for a general management position. In a first block of questions, HR managers
are shown pairs of resumes that vary randomly in applicant characteristics. HR managers place a
premium on applicants with English knowledge, MNC experience, and particularly value applicants
with both characteristics. We explore the mechanisms driving this premium through a second rating
exercise. In this second block, HR managers rate applicants with advanced English proficiency
and MNC work experience according to their hypothetical answers to interview questions. We
randomly vary how frequently the applicant reports interacting with their FM, how involved they
are in management, and how frequently they use Microsoft Office (a hard skill). Applicants with
frequent interactions with FMs are offered wages as high as those offered to applicants with the
hard skill.2 These findings support the assumption that frequent communication with FMs allows
DMs to learn general management knowledge that is valued by the domestic labor market.
    The second experiment explores the complementarity between communication and English pro-
ficiency. We contracted with a leading English language training provider in Yangon to offer a
48-hour English training course free of charge to a random sample of DMs employed at 27 MNCs
operating at Myanmar's largest Special Economic Zone. At endline, treated DMs' English skills,
as measured by a tailored test, improve relative to control. Several results support the comple-
mentarity assumption: treated DMs report having more frequent communication and interactions
with FMs (but not with other DMs), having a higher (hypothetical) willingness to pay to spend
additional time interacting with FMs (but not with other DMs) and being more involved in the
management of personnel. These outcomes are self-reported and tracking actual changes in job
performance is complicated because DMs perform a wide range of tasks at the MNCs. To over-
come this measurement challenge, we design a standardized management exercise that simulates
the organizational structure of an MNC. An English-speaking enumerator acting as a "FM" pro-
vides instructions to a DM to manage a packaging task. The task is a randomly drawn vector of
steps that place specific items in a precise order and packaged in a certain way. The DM then
manages two enumerators (who have no English knowledge) acting as production workers ("PWs")
to complete the task. The "PWs" supervised by treatment DMs complete their assigned task faster
with no differences in mistakes­i.e., achieve higher performance­relative to control DMs. Treatment
DMs, however, ask more questions and end up spending more time communicating with the "FM".
This supports the complementary assumption.
    The final section explores additional survey evidence and back-of-envelope calculations that

    2
      A potential concern is that HR managers in domestic firms might perceive these candidates to be better selected,
rather than having directly benefited from frequent communication with FMs in their previous jobs. A third response
option regarding frequency of communication, which explains that the applicant was supposed to interact frequently
with the FM, but did not for exogenous reasons, allows us to test for this possibility. We find no evidence for a
potential selection effect.


                                                          2
supports a key assumption of the model­the non-contractible nature of communication­and the
additional conditions justifying the use of language subsidies as a policy instrument. These addi-
tional conditions appear to be relevant in our context, thus justifying an intervention. It is worth
emphasizing, however, that the particular language training we offered is unlikely to be the most
cost effective intervention to raise English proficiency since foreign languages are more effectively
learned at a younger age (Dixon et al. 2012) and there might be additional imperfections in the
market for language training.
    Our project explores the conditions for policy intervention in Myanmar, but we believe that such
conditions would arise in other contexts.3 The adoption of English as the corporate lingua franca is
increasingly common (Economist 2014), particularly outside Anglophone countries. Additionally,
recent decades have seen a sharp rise in South-South FDI flows, e.g., the surge of Chinese invest-
ments in Africa (Hanson 2012). Language barriers could be an important impediment to knowledge
transfers in these contexts, as well. In contrast, when middle-managers are bilingual­which is more
likely to be satisfied in high human capital countries or host countries with shared ties with the
MNC country­language may be a smaller barrier and the rationale for policymakers to intervene
diminishes (as predicted by our model).
    Our main contribution is to emphasize that organizational frictions within MNCs can impede
the initial source of knowledge transfers necessary for spillovers from FDI. In doing so, we connect
two separate but related strands of the literature. Multinationals are a key source of technology
and knowledge (e.g., Keller and Yeaple 2013, Yeaple 2013) and drive a large share of world trade
(Bernard et al. 2018). For this reason, a large literature seeks to understand the consequences
of FDI on developing countries; see the comprehensive survey by Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare
(2010) and the recent review by Keller (2021). These studies typically focus on spillovers from
MNCs to domestic firms and workers, for example through supply-chain linkages (e.g., Aitken and
Harrison 1999, Javorcik 2004, Abebe et al. 2018) or through wages (e.g., Balsvik 2011, Poole 2013).
Systematic evidence for positive FDI spillovers has proven elusive. One possibility, overcome by
Alfaro-Ureña et al. (2019) is that measurement and identification challenges make spillovers difficult
to detect. A second possibility is that contextual factors, like those explored in this paper, might
influence the likelihood that FDI generate positive spillovers for the host economy.
    A separate literature has analyzed the internal organizational structures of MNCs; see the survey
by Antràs and Rossi-Hansberg (2009). Antràs et al. (2006) model the formation of cross-country
hierarchical production teams with less skilled workers specialized in production and more skilled
workers specialized in problem solving (see also Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg 2012). Antràs et al.
(2008) argue that MNCs create a layer of middle managers in host countries to reduce the costs
of transmitting knowledge across borders. Unlike this literature, which builds on Garicano (2000)
model's of hierarchies, we focus on the inefficiency arising from the non-contractibility of communi-

   3
      Language is an important driver of trade and FDI flows. A robust empirical finding is that shared language ties
facilitate trade (Rauch and Trindade 2002, Head et al. 2010, Melitz and Toubal 2014). A survey article by Blonigen
and Piger (2014) argues that common language is ceteris paribus associated with a two-fold increase in FDI flows, a
magnitude that vastly exceeds the responsiveness to tax exemptions.


                                                         3
cation.4 Relatedly, Keller and Yeaple (2013) also argue that because knowledge embedded within
MNCs is difficult to codify, offshore production requires communication between headquarters and
foreign affiliates. The efficiency losses from language barriers could also rationalize the cross-border
MNC technological frictions typically assumed in quantatitive models (e.g., Arkolakis et al. 2018).5
    Our paper also contributes to the literature on management practices (e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen
2007, Bloom et al. 2012b). Two findings from this literature motivate our work. First, firm per-
formance correlates with the quality of management practices and multinational firms are better
managed (Bloom and Van Reenen 2007, Bloom et al. 2016). Second, management practices diffuse
slowly because they are hard to codify and transmit (Gibbons and Henderson 2012). Rather than
offering explicit management consulting or training interventions (e.g., Bloom et al. 2012a, Mac-
chiavello et al. 2015, Alfonsi et al. 2020), our paper argues that management can be learned from
direct interactions within an organization. Recent studies have also studied management knowl-
edge transfers between firms. Cai and Szeidl (2017) find large impacts of business networks on
firm performance in China; Giorcelli (2019) find large impacts on Italian firms that sent managers
to the U.S. for management training; Bai et al. (2021) examine the role of supplier networks and
labor mobility in fostering knowledge spillovers in the Chinese auto-industry; Bisztray et al. (2018)
document knowledge spillovers in importing along managerial networks.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the setting and facts that motivate the
model and experiments. Section 3 describes the model. Section 4 describes the resume experiment
that tests the "general skills" assumption in the model. Section 5 describes the language experiment
that tests for the "complementarity" assumption in the model. Section 6 discusses other model's
assumptions and the rationale for policy intervention. Section 7 concludes.


2       Setting & Motivating Evidence
This section describes our setting and the evidence that motivates the research design.

2.1     Setting
    Following a military coup in 1962, Myanmar spent nearly five decades isolated from global trade
and foreign investment. Beginning in 2010, the military-backed government agreed to transition
towards democratic rule, and a few years later, the country initiated economic reforms to re-
integrate into the global economy by removing trade barriers and implementing new regulations to
    4
      Contracting problems and informational barriers have been shown to be important constraints to trade (e.g.,
Macchiavello and Morjaria 2015, Startz 2021) and arguably could also inhibit knowledge transfers, particularly in low
income countries (see Atkin and Khandelwal 2020 for a review). We focus on within-firm interactions and highlight
the role of non-contractible communication and language barriers in limiting transfers of management knowledge.
Atkin et al. (2017) show that technology adoption can be slowed by communication frictions within the firm (but
due to incentive problems, not language barriers).
    5
      The management literature has also examined language barriers within MNCs (see the recent survey by Tenzer
et al. 2017). One line of study is the choice of the company's lingua franca exemplified in the cases of Japanese
companies adopting English: Rakuten (Neeley, 2017) or more recently, Honda. Our project, instead, takes the
language of communication as given and studies the problem from the policymaker's perspective.


                                                         4
attract FDI. These reforms have been successful and average annual FDI inflows between 2010 and
2019 was $2.5 billion compared to just $0.4 billion in the previous decade. Roughly 90% of flows
originate from East and South-East Asia.6
    The 2014 Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Law was a key component of the economic reforms and it
established the regulatory framework that governs the country's SEZs. Much of our analysis focuses
on firms operating in the country's main zone, Thilawa SEZ, which opened in September 2015.
Firms at Thilawa receive the typical benefits associated with SEZs: tax breaks, duty drawbacks on
imports used for exports, and high-quality infrastructure (roads, easy access to a wet and dry port,
electricity, and water). In 2018, there were 45 MNCs with operations at the SEZ. Japanese MNCs
are the largest investors, followed by Singaporean, Thai, Chinese, European/American and Korean
MNCs. The MNCs span a wide range of sectors, including chemicals, distribution, electronics,
garments, logistics, machinery, and metals (see Figure A.1).

2.2    Timeline
    Our data come from tailored worker and firm surveys conducted between Summer 2018 and
Summer 2020.7 In 2018, we conducted a survey of 400 domestic managers (DMs) at 30 MNCs.8
A consistent definition of a "manager" is not straightforward because the firms span many sectors
and managers span many tasks (e.g., production supervisors, human-resource managers, purchasing
agents, and so forth). Piloting revealed that individuals earning over $200/month, the income-tax
reporting threshold in Myanmar, is a plausible objective metric to identify DMs at each company.
This survey assessed language proficiency in English and in the original foreign language of the
company, and asked about DMs' communication and interactions with FMs. We simultaneously
conducted a firm-level survey by asking the HR managers questions about FMs' language skills and
learning frictions at the company.
    In January 2019, we designed the language experiment protocol and recruited 27 MNCs to
participate.9 We surveyed 298 DMs at these firms by phone to collect baseline outcomes and their
scheduling preferences for the language training. When we refer to the "baseline survey", we refer
to both the 2018 in-person survey and the phone survey from January 2019. We then periodically
surveyed participants by phone throughout the duration of the treatment and beyond. In January
2020, we started administering the endline survey, testing participants on language and asking
about communication within the firm.10 The in-person endline was interrupted in March 2020 due

   6
      Calculations from World Development Indicators, WB Open Data and Myanmar's Directorate of Investment
and Company Administration.
    7
      We supplement these surveys with administrative data collected by the SEZ, when available.
    8
      The 30 firms who agreed to participate had on average 141.4 employees. The 15 firms who did not participate
were smaller, with on average 60.1 employees.
    9
      Of the three firms who did not participate, one is a large Chinese MNC who uses Mandarin as their lingua franca
and would not have valued the English training, and the other two Japanese firms had an average employee size of
94.5.
   10
      Throughout the project, we attempted to survey FMs with limited success. We did conduct interviews and
language tests for 23 FMs. Anticipating a low response rate, we use summary statistics from the survey of FMs as
motivating facts, and designed the project to not require their active participation.


                                                         5
to COVID-19 and, given necessary precautions, the survey resumed remotely. The endline was
completed in June 2020. In June 2020, we recruited human-resource managers at domestic firms
outside the SEZ to conduct remotely the resume rating exercise. We explain more details about
the surveys and experiments in Sections 4 and 5.

2.3    Motivating Facts
    The data collected in 2018 reveal five facts about MNC organizational structures, language
barriers, communication and learning that motivate the model and empirical strategy. We describe
these facts here.

Fact 1: Three-Layer Organizational Structure

Table 1 reports the organizational structure of the firms. The top layer is comprised of a small
number, 4.5 on average, senior expatriate managers (FMs). FMs are responsible for coordinating
with headquarter operations, setting the strategic direction for the Myanmar factory, and overseeing
operations with the help of a middle-level management layer. These FMs are, on average, 39.3 years
old and have 8.8 years of work experience at their firm. Their average salary is $2002 per month
with a standard deviation of $2100. The typical FMs works in Myanmar for 2.2 years.
    The second layer is comprised of an average of 13.3 Myanmar middle-managers (DMs). The
DMs are younger than FMs, on average 28.5 years old, and earn an average monthly salary of $363.
The third layer is comprised of Myanmar domestic production workers, who earn $99 per month on
average. For reference, Myanmar's GDP per capita is roughly $117 per month and the minimum
monthly wage is approximately $70.

Fact 2: DMs Want to Learn Management Skills

Surveys elicited why DMs chose to work at MNCs. Panel A of Figure A.2 shows that nearly 58%
of DMs report that learning new skills is the main benefit of working for the MNCs in the SEZ. In
contrast, higher wages and better working conditions are reported to be the main benefit of working
in the SEZ by only 10% and 15%, respectively. Panel B reveals that it is specifically management
skills that most DMs intend to learn at their jobs (more so than hard skills, like production skills
or accounting).

Fact 3: DMs English Language Proficiency is Low

Communication between FMs and DMs occurs in English, which is the native language of neither
group.11 Despite being more educated than production workers and probably better selected, in



  11
     English knowledge in Myanmar is low and the country ranks 93rd on the EF English Proficiency­which lies in
the category of "very low" proficiency­ alongside neighboring countries Cambodia and Thailand, and just below "low"
proficiency countries like Bangladesh and Vietnam (EPI 2020).


                                                        6
part, to communicate with FMs relative to DMs in Myanmar firms, English knowledge among DMs
in our sample is low.
    We assessed language proficiency through two tests. One test was conducted by the firm we
hired for the language training and administered to a random sample of DMs (see Section 5 for
details). Assessing language proficiency being the core business of the provider, we present these
results first to establish the baseline level of English proficiency in the sample of DMs. Panel
A of Figure 1 presents the distribution of scores and their mapping to the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) scale according to the language provider. The test
scores indicate that 85.4% of sampled DMs have, at best, an elementary level of English proficiency
which includes less than A1, A1 or A2 levels on the CEFR scale. A person with A1 proficiency can
"understand and use only a few everyday expressions/phrases aimed at the satisfaction of needs
of a concrete type." A person with A2 proficiency can "understand sentences and frequently used
expressions for areas of immediate relevance but not much beyond." Only a minority of DMs,
14.6%, have achieved the intermediate "B" categories on the scale or above.
    With the help of two external consultants, we also created and administered our own language
tests to the full sample of DMs and the sub-sample of FMs. In the listening module, DMs were
asked to answer 16 questions, in an increasing order of difficulty, until they answered two consecutive
questions incorrectly. In the speaking module, DMs answered questions in English about their work
routine and career aspirations and their answers were independently scored by the two consultants.
On the subset of DMs who took both the language provider's test and our test, Figure A.3 indicates a
positive correlation between the two suggesting that our tailored test can assess language proficiency.
    Panel B of Figure 1 reports the distribution of test scores among the DMs and FMs at baseline.
This figure demonstrates that English proficiency among DMs is on average lower than FMs: the
average FM score is about one sd above the average DM score. As mentioned above, we had
difficulty securing time to administer the English test to all FMs. However, during the Summer
2018 survey administered to HR managers to collect firm-level data, the HR managers were asked
to report the English proficiency of FMs and DMs. Those responses, denoted by a  in Table 1,
confirm that DMs proficiency is low: on average, just 11.1% of DMs are reported to be "proficient"
in English compared to 32.3% of FMs.
    We also administered tests to assess FMs' knowledge of Burmese and DMs' knowledge of the
native language of the FMs (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, depending on the firm). Figure A.4 reports
these distributions; virtually none of the FMs know Burmese and very few DMs are proficient in
the FMs' language.12




  12
     Language barriers could be reduced by providing Burmese language training to FMs. In practice, FMs oppor-
tunity cost of time is significantly higher than DMs, and, because they reside in the host country for a limited period
of time, their incentives to learn the local language are muted.


                                                          7
Fact 4: Learning Challenges

Language barriers between FMs and DMs appear to create challenges to learning. DMs report
that 33.8% of the time they spend in meetings together with FMs is lost due to language barriers.
Additionally, at these meetings, DMs report a low level of comprehension, on average 60.4% of
the conversation. Average comprehension rises to a modest 62.9% with Google Translate. The
limited benefit likely stems from Google Translate not translating directly between Burmese and
Japanese/Korea/Chinese (a challenge known as indirect translation). Average comprehension rises
to 84.0% when a translator is present. Translators, however, are expensive. Half of the firms
in our sample do not hire translators. Those that do typically hire translators on a casual basis.
Conditional on hiring a translator, these firms pay for translation services for, on average, 1.5 hours
per day and the translator typically follows the FMs. Part-time translators cost approximately $100
a day, well above the average daily DM wage of $15.7. Meetings also last longer when a translator
is present.
   Several anecdotes provide texture to the workplace challenges created by language barriers:
   · DM, Japanese firm A: "Although the boss can speak English, if the issue is important, we
      use translator. The [Myanmar] factory manager cannot speak English at all. So, when the
      translator is not there, we have to talk to him with body language or by drawing pictures. It
      takes more time."

   · DM, Japanese firm B: "He's [FM] not an English native speaker and we are not native speaker
      either. So, although we try our best, there are misunderstanding frequently. Sometimes, we
      don't know what he wants."

   · FM, Japanese firm C: "I told the staff to handle products in certain way but they didn't really
      understand it and did it differently. Sometimes, they do things that I ask them not to do and
      until I find out about it, they are doing it wrongly."

   · FM, Korean firm D: "One problem is that it is difficult to teach Myanmar workers the details
      of their job due to language barriers."

   · DM, Korean firm E: "Synonyms had not come out from my mind to clarify the meanings of
      the words while having conversations with FMs."

   · DM, Korean firm F: "I asked FMs to repeat what they said for more than two times, and was
      afraid to speak with them."

   · DM, Thai firm G: "I could not understand very well what FM said, and could not give concise
      explanations to FMs. Also, I was afraid of speaking in meetings."

Fact 5: Lower Communication Frictions Correlate with More DM-FM communication

Lower communication frictions between DMs and FMs are correlated with more frequent com-
munication with FMs and higher involvment in the management of the firm. We assess this by

                                                   8
estimating the following specification:


                                          yi =  + englishi + Xi  +           i                                       (1)
where englishi is the (standardized) English test score at baseline and Xi is a set of controls, includ-
ing demographics and DM position.13 We consider four outcomes: frequency of FM communication
(scale 1-4), self-reported involvement in plant operations (scale 1-4)14 , the score on questions of
management practices adapted from the U.S. Census of Management and Organizational Practices
Survey (scale 1-15), and wages.
    Table 2 reports the results. A one sd increase in the English score is correlated with a 0.11
higher frequency of communication, 0.13 more involvement, a 0.22 higher management score, and
a 0.15 higher wage.
    Of course, the coefficient on English in equation (1) may be biased if DMs with better English
are selected to interact with FMs based on unobservables. An (imperfect) solution to control for
unobserved factors correlated with English is to measure DMs' communication with two superiors:
their FM (who is either their direct boss or their closest FM at the firm) and a domestic manager.
If the DM did not have a domestic superior, we asked them to report communication with another
domestic manager with whom they interact with regularly. This allows us to compare interactions
with each superior while controlling for a DM fixed effect through the following specification:


                                yib = i + 1 F Mb + 2 (F Mb × englishi ) +             ib                             (2)
where i is a DM fixed effect, F Mib is a dummy that takes a value of one if boss b is the foreign expat.
We examine two outcomes: frequency of communication and the share of a typical conversation
understood. For domestic bosses, the share of conversations understood is, naturally 100% since two
individuals would be speaking in Burmese. The results of the regression are reported in columns
5-6 of Table 2. Not surprisingly, DMs report 0.76 less frequent communication (scale 1-4) and
16.8% poorer comprehension with FMs relative to domestic bosses. However, these interactions
improve with DM's English knowledge. Raising DM English test score by 1 sd is correlated with
a 0.18 more frequent communications with the FM, and a 6.1% improvement in comprehension.
Although a correlation, these results suggest a complementarity between DMs' language ability and
the frequency of communications with FMs.




   13
      The set of positions is: assistant, staff, officer, leader, assistant manager, manager, senior manager, accountant,
supervisor, general manager, director and executive. The set of departments is: general management, accounting and
finance, human resource, logistics, production, engineering, research and development, marketing.
   14
      The scale for communucation frequency is: 1) "never" 2) "seldom" 3) "often" 4) "very often". The scale for
involvement is: 1) "not involved at all", 2) "rarely involved", 3) "sometimes involved", and 4) "there is never a
discussion without me, and I take the final call".


                                                           9
3     Model
    This section presents a model that illustrates how language barriers between DMs and FMs
can justify a policy intervention. In our framework, a DM learns general skills by communicating
with FMs. The source of the inefficiency is the non-contractibility of communication between
the FM and the DM. In equilibrium, the communication effort supplied by the FM is inefficient
because it only takes into account the returns of communication inside the MNCs and not the
(additional) returns accruing to the DM due to learning. The learning of general skills by DMs
is therefore suboptimal. The non-contractability prevents the planner from directly targeting the
source of knowledge transfers: communication. So, we consider a partial remedy of subsidizing
the DM's acquisition of language skills. A necessary, but not sufficient, condition is that the FM's
communication effort is complementary to the language ability of DM. The model thus justifies why,
even if a perfectly functioning language skill market exists, the planner may want to subsidize the
acquisition of the foreign language to (partially) correct for the under-provision of communication,
and therefore general skills training, inside MNCs.
    To focus on the role of non-contractibility and language barriers in stifling the initial spark
for knowledge transfers, we deliberately abstract from productivity spillovers to domestic firms
and workers as well as from imperfections in the market for language training (e.g., due to credit
constraints, asymmetric information, social networks, or behavioural biases). While potentially
relevant in our setting, the implications of these market failures have been investigated elsewhere
(e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke 1998, Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006).
    We first provide the model set up and describe the equilibrim. We then discuss the subsidy
policy and conclude with a discussion of the main assumptions.

3.1   Setup
    We consider a two-period model of production with a single domestic manager (DM) and a
foreign manager (FM). For simplicity, there is no discount between the two periods. The DM and
the FM communicate through a language foreign to the DM. We denote   0 the foreign language
ability of the DM and we assume that the DM can purchase units of language knowledge  in a
                                                                      2
perfectly functioning market. Specifically, we denote c() = c +       2 ,   the cost of aquiring foreign
language skills to the DM, where c is the unit price charged by competitive language training
                2
providers and   2   represents the DM's effort cost of acquiring language skills.
    To focus on the interaction between DM and FM, we abstract from production workers and
also assume that the DM produces a good sold at price p = 1 in both periods. Output produced
by the DM is equal to her productivity level . Productivity depends on the DM's knowledge of
management , and on the communication with the FM . We assume that (, ) is increasing
and strictly concave in both arguments. For simplicity, we assume that (, 0) =  and (0, ) = .
Unlike for language ability, we assume that there is no market to acquire knowledge of management;
instead, management knowledge is acquired through communication with the FM.


                                                   10
    The DM starts period t = 1 with a management knowledge normalized to 1 = 0. Communi-
                                   
cation with the FM is given by  = 2  , where   0 is the level of communication effort chosen
by the FM. This functional form reflects the complementary assumption: the FM's communication
effort is more effective as the DM's language proficiency rises. We denote  ( ) =  the cost of
communication to the FM. This communication effort is non-contractible. The non-contractible
nature of communication is a cornerstone of organizational economics, which we model along the
lines of Dewatripont and Tirole (2005). We consider a scenario in which the FM transmits knowl-
edge through costly effort and the DM's ability to absorb the knowledge depends on her level of
language proficiency .
   Besides increasing productivity, communication with foreign managers leads to learning. In
t = 2, the DM has acquired management knowledge through communication with the FM in the
                               
prior period. We denote 2 = 2 1 the management knowledge of the DM in period t = 2.
The parameter  captures both the amount and generality of skills learned through communication
with the FM. It is thus natural to set   1 and, to avoid corner cases with no communication and
language acquisition in equilibrium, also assume  > (c )/2. Finally, we assume that the knowledge
acquired in t = 1 makes further communication with the FM in period t = 2 unnecessary and
therefore the DM produces output on her own in t = 2.15 Since communication at t = 2 is zero, we
denote 1 =  the level of communcation in t = 1.
   The model can thus be summarized by the following timing of events:
                                                                 2
   · t = 0: DM buys language  at unit price c and effort cost    2

   · t = 1: FM offers a wage w to work with the DM. The FM decides how much to communicate,
                                                                                 
      , with the DM with cost of communication effort  . Output is given by 1 = 2  .
                                                       
   · t = 2: DM works alone and produces output 2 = 2  .



3.2      Equilibrium
   We describe the private equilibrium and compare it with the allocation that the planner desires.

Private Equilibrium

The model is solved by backward induction.
                                          
   In t = 2, the DM's payoff is given by 2  .
                                                    
   In t = 1, the FM sets  to maximise her profits: 2  -  - w. Note that the wage paid
to the FM, w, does not depend on communication effort  . This is where the non-contractibility
assumption kicks in. If communication effort was contractible, DM and FM would negotiate a
compensation scheme which induces the FM to also take into account DM profits at t = 2. To
be precise, our results hinge on the fact that the FM does not internalize the entire returns of her
  15                              (2 ,)
       Specifically, we assume     
                                              < .
                                         =0



                                                    11
communcation effort in period t = 1 on the DM's productivity in t = 2. Given the non-contractible
                                                      
nature of communication, the FM sets  =               2
                                                        .     The complementarity between communication effort
and DM's language knowledge implies that  is increasing in language knowledge .
                                                                                    
   In t = 0, the DM chooses  to maximise her payoff over the two periods, given by 2  + w -
       2
 c +   2   . Note that, for simplicity, we assume the wage w is independent of language . This
assumption can be relaxed, as discussed below.
   The FOCs lead to the following equilibrium levels of communication and language skills:

                                               1 2                               2
                                    * =            -c                   * =        -c
                                               2                                  

Social Planner

The social planner chooses both language skills  and level of communication  to maximise the
overall surplus generated in the economy:

                                                                                                    2
                max      2              +      2              -                  -            c +
                 ,                                                                                  2
                      output in [t=2]       output in [t=1]       cost of comm
                                                                                     cost of language aquisition
The first order conditions leads to the following level of communication and language skills:

                          (1 + )2 (1 + )2                                              (1 + )2
                  SP =                    - c >                            SP =                - c > 
                             2                                                            
The level of communication under the planner's problem is higher than in the private equilibrium.
The FM underinvests in communication as she does not internalize the returns to communication
in t = 2. If the amount and content of communication were contractable, the DM would pay the
FM to increase her communication effort in t = 1, so the social optimum would be achieved.

3.3    Language Subsidy
   We now consider how the planner could reduce the inefficiency. The planner cannot increase
communication by directly subsidizing FM's communication effort because it is non-contractible.
In designing her intervention, the planner therefore needs to work with the incentive compatibility
                                        
constraint of the FM set by  =          2
                                             (IC FM).
   We consider a practical policy instrument where the planner subsidises the acquisition of lan-
guage skills by the DM, which would raise  by raising . We denote this subsidy s so the total
                                                                                        2
cost of acquiring language skills  for the DM is now (c - s) +                          2 .   This implies that the planner
                                                                                                        2
also faces the incentive compatibility constraint for the DM, given by  =                                   - (c - s) (IC DM).
The marginal cost of public funds (Stiglitz and Dasgupta 1971) for the planner is assumed to be




                                                               12
constant and equal to   1. The planner maximises the following program:
                                                           2
                      max 2  + 2  -  - (c - s) +                - s
                       s                                    2
                                      
                                                 
                                            =    2
                                                          (IC FM)
                               s.t.
                                            2
                                       =
                                                - (c - s) (IC DM)
The optimal subsidy and equilibrium level of language skills and communication are given by:
                                  1     (2(1 - ) + 1)
                         s =                              - c(1 - )
                               2 - 1            

                       1     1 + 2                          1        1 + 2
              s =                     - c         s = 2                       - c
                    2 - 1                                (2 - 1)         
In a limit case in which there is no distortion associated with raising funds to cover the subsidy
( = 1), the optimal subsidy is equal to the marginal returns of  for the FM, i.e., the portion
of the social returns to language not taken into account by DM's investment choice. That is,
       ((1 ,)- )
s =                        = 1/ which yields  < s < SP and   <  s <  SP . Note that
                  =/ 2
the language subsidy partially corrects for the inefficiency by increasing the equilibrium level of
language skills of the DM. Since communication and language are complementary, the subsidy
increases the communication effort provided by the FM and, thus, learning by the DM. As long as
                                                               1
the marginal cost of public funds is not too high,  < 1 +     2-c    , it is optimal for the planner to
subsidise the acquisition of language skills for the DM. In general, the optimal subsidy is decreasing
in the marginal cost of funds, , and is increasing in the cost of providing language training, c.
Holding constant , countries with higher language proficiency should subsidize less.

3.4   Discussion
   Before moving on to the empirical analysis, we discuss in further detail some of the assumptions
we have made along the way. We discuss first our assumptions about communication within the
firm. We then discuss the assumptions that justify a language subsidy as a partial remedy.

Modeling Approach

Our model is in the spirit of Dewatripont and Tirole (2005) model of communication. We capture
the costly and non-contractible nature of communication, but focus, for simplicity, on the case in
which only the FM exerts communication effort. Introducing a moral hazard in team framework
(as in Dewatripont and Tirole 2005) where both the DM and the FM exert costly communication
effort would not change the main insights of the model. We also implicitly assume that payoffs are
non-contractible. For example, if the FM could buy an equity share in the DM's firm in period
t = 2, this would allow her to internalize the learning externality. In practice, such contracts appear
implausible in our setting. Theoretically, such contracts would also not restore efficiency in more



                                                  13
general models, e.g., if DM's effort is needed to run the firm at t = 2.16
      We focus on the inefficiency arising from the non-contractibility of communication. For sim-
plicity, we abstract from the formalization of communication in hierarchies developed by Garicano
(2000) (see also Antràs et al. 2008; Antràs and Rossi-Hansberg 2009; Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg
2012 for applications to trade). In Garicano (2000), the number of layers in the hierarchy and the
span of control are chosen to optimally use scarce communication resources in the organization, i.e.
the organization is efficient. Changes in the cost of communication, for example due to a reduction
in language barriers, would lead to changes in both the number of layers and the span of control.
Testing these predictions is beyond the scope of our empirical analysis.

Conditions for a Subsidy

We have so far assumed that the wage w earned by the DM does not depend on . We make this
assumption for simplicity, but it can be relaxed. Note that if w depends on , the DM IC would be
              2
given by  =     + w () - (c - s). In the case of no distortion from taxation,                the planner would like
                        )
to   implement s = (1+2
                          - c A language subsidy s is thus justified if w ()                 < 1/. This condition
states that the marginal return to  internalized by the DM in t = 1, w (), must be smaller than
                                                                       ((1 ,)- )
the marginal returns to  for the FM, which is given by                                       = 1/. The condition
                                                                                  =/ 2
can be violated if the DM makes a take-it-or-leave it offer to the FM (in which case w captures all
the surplus) or if the DM has an outside option u() with u ()  1/.17 In Section 6, we argue
that the assumptions we impose are likely met in practice.
      A related scenario under which a subsidy is no longer effective is the one in which the FM and
the DM can perfectly contract on the amount of language skills . When this is the case, they
will maximize the joint surplus subject to the FM IC, thereby replicating the program of the social
planner. In the equilibrium of our baseline model, if the DM can commit to work in the MNC in
t = 1, the FM is willing to pay 1/ for the DM to acquire an extra unit of language knowledge 
and the DM would accept the offer. In practice, this scenario is unlikely as language acquisition is
a general skill and many employers might be unwilling to pay for it.18
      Finally, note that we have imposed the standard assumption that the social planner puts equal
weight on all agents. A natural extension would be to consider the case of an industrial-policy
planner who only values the surplus of the FM with weight  < 1. In the limit case  = 0 the
planner would not subsidize DM's language acquisition. In practice, this limit case is not a realistic
description of many industrial settings in developing countries. First, if the host government taxes
(or subsidises) some of the profits of the MNC, the planner takes into account the tax base and

     16
      We also assume that DMs cannot commit to work for two periods for the FM. This assumption can also be
relaxed (e.g., along the lines of Acemoglu and Pischke 1998) without altering the main insights of the analysis. We also
abstract from other aspects of non-contractible communication like strategic information transmisson (e.g., Crawford
and Sobel 1982 and Dessein 2002).
   17
      In theory, if the marginal returns to language in the outside option are larger than in the MNC, the DM might
end up over-investing in language, thus partially compensating for the under provision of communication.
   18
      In Section 6 we also discuss results from an experimental protocol that suggests that FMs and DMs are unlikely
to maximize joint surplus in language training attendance decisions.


                                                          14
thus  > 0. Second, governments fiercely compete to attract FDI. While, in theory, governments
could simply rely on lump-subsidies and tax breaks to attract MNCs, the evidence suggests that
policies that improves the institutional environment in which the MNCs operate are successful in
attracting FDI. An industrial planner would thus commit to  > 0. Third, if one were to model
externalities from FDI, the planner would want to intervene even if  = 0.
    In sum, the model presented above clarifies how the non-contractible nature of communication
within the firm can lead to inefficiently low knowledge transfers of general skills even in the absence
of externalities or distortions in the market for foreign language training. Furthermore, if foreign
language skills  and communication effort  are complement, the social planner may be able to
partially correct the inefficiency by subsidizing foreign language skills. In Section 4, we explore
the general skills assumption through a resume-rating experiment, where HR managers based
in domestic firms evaluate the profiles of candidates with random attributes. In Section 5, we
explore the complementarity assumption through a RCT in which we (exogenously) increase English
language skills for DMs working inside MNCs. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss additional evidence
on the assumptions discussed above.


4     Protocol 1: Management Knowledge as General Skills
    This section investigates the empirical support for whether DMs, through communication with
FMs, improve their general management skills. To do so, we measure how potential domestic
employers value this skill through a hypothetical resume rating protocol. We first explain the
research design and empirical specification and then discuss the results.

4.1   Research design
    We assess the value of the skills learned in MNCs by eliciting the demand for such skills on the
Myanmar labor market. We recruited HR managers who work at Myanmar-owned firms, operating
outside the SEZ. The recruitment occurred through a job platform where we explained that we were
seeking HR managers with at least 2 years of work experience to review resumes for management
positions (and would be paid $20). This recruitment exercise yielded a sample of 51 HR managers
working at domestic firms. These firms are somewhat larger (median size 330) and more service-
sector oriented than the firms at the SEZ (at that time). Table A.1 reports the demographics of the
HR managers. As their primarily role at their companies is to recruit personnel, the typical manager
reports screening 523 resumes (typically resumes submitted through online job platforms) in the
past six months and hiring about 44 new employees. They have experience recruiting employees
with MNC experience and themselves, on average, have 1.7 years of MNC work experience (and a
total of 7.0 years of work experience).
    Our hypothetical resume rating exercise is inspired by Kessler et al. (2019), who incentivize re-
cruiters by matching them with real job seekers who have similar characteristics as the hypothetical
ones chosen by the recruiters in the rating exercise. The research design yields hedonic valuations


                                                  15
on applicant attributes. In our setting, sharing the resumes of the DMs in our sample would have
jeopardized our relationship with the MNCs at the SEZ. It would have also been difficult to recruit
a pool of separate DMs with the characteristics in the second block of the experiment (see be-
low). A concern with a non-incentivized resume rating exercise is whether or not the HR managers
would take the exercise seriously. We address this concern when we discuss the results and their
relationship to existing findings from the literature.

Block 1: Applicant Characteristics

    In the first block, we created randomized resumes to analyze the valuations placed on char-
acteristics of job applicants. The respondent was told that all potential job applicants graduated
from the same university (Yangon University of Economics) with the same degree (Bachelors in
Business Administration), lived in Yangon, and were married.19 They were applying for a general
management position at the respondent's company. A candidate's resume was created by randomly
drawing values from the following characteristics: gender, age, English proficiency, MNC status of
the previous job, previous company size, and total work experience.20 The donor pool of character-
istic values, summarized in Panel A of Table A.2, was chosen to broadly reflect the demographics
of our DMs.
    Each respondent was shown 20 pairs of resumes, and for each pair they were asked what wage
they would offer to both candidates, how much they think both candidates would have learned at
the previous job (1-10 scale), and how much involved in management they think both candidates
were at the previous job (1-10 scale).21
    We assess the HR manager responses through the following specification:


           yrc = r + p + 1 englishc + 2 M N Cc + 3 englishc  M N Cc +                         k xkc +    rc        (3)
                                                                                         k4

where yrc is the outcome that HR manager r places on applicant c (e.g., the wage offer). The
coefficients of interest are on the advanced English dummy, the MNC work experience dummy
and their interaction. The interaction captures by how much more the HR manager values an
applicant who is proficient in English and has MNC work experience. The xkc capture the additional
characteristics that we randomly vary: gender, age, previous company size and total experience.
We include respondent fixed effects r and pair fixed effects p , and cluster standard errors by
respondent r.




  19
      Piloting revealed that job applicants in Myanmar indicate marital status and residency location on their resumes.
  20
      We allowed the age­either 25 or 26­to vary to mitigate the respondents focusing only on the other attributes,
but kept the range narrow to increase power.
   21
      This question on involvement separated involvement in the management of personnel and the involvement in
communicating targets to subordinates. We report the average the involvement score over both dimension (the results
on each individual component are similar).


                                                          16
Block 2: Mechanisms

    In the second block, we asked respondents to evaluate candidates' responses to potential inter-
view questions. This block was designed to mimic questions that could arise during an interview,
and helps analyze directly the importance of communication between the applicant and his previous
foreign boss.
    All applicants graduated from the same university with the same degree (Bachelors in Business
Administration from Yangon University), lived in Yangon, married, male, age 26, and had 3 years
of experience at a 125-employee Japanese company. Additionally, the HR managers were told that
the applicants had advanced English proficiency, as did their FM. The reason to note the English
levels of both the applicant and the FMs was to ensure that the HR manager would perceive little,
if any, communication barriers between the applicant and his FM.
    The HR managers were shown profiles with answers to the following questions: a) "How often
did you interact with your foreign boss (formal/informal meetings, over lunch, etc.)"; b) "How
frequently did you use Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint); and c) "How often were you
involved in setting and communicating the company's targets". The donor pool of responses to
these questions are summarized in Panel B of Table A.2.
    The first question elicits the valuation recruiters place on the mechanism of interest: communi-
cation with FMs. The possible values were "frequently", "infrequently", and "I was hired to interact
frequently with the foreign boss but interacted infrequently because he had to leave the country
for a family emergency." We were concerned that respondents who saw candidates with "frequent"
communication may think that the applicant had been selected to interact with FM based on un-
observed attributes, thus conflating the treatment effect of communication with a selection effect.
The last value indicates the applicant was chosen to communicate frequently with the FM but
ultimately did not for exogenous reasons.22 The second question assessed the frequency of using
Microsoft Office, a hard skill that companies value. The third question assessed the frequency of
management involvement in setting and communicating factory-level targets.
    HR managers were shown 11 pairs of profiles with answers to these questions, and were asked
what wage would they offer to both candidates, and how much they think both candidates would
have learned at the previous job (1-10 scale). We did not ask to score involvement since the third
interview question is about management involvement.
    We assess the HR managers' responses in this block through the following specification:


                yrc = r + p + 1 f reqcommc + 2 hardskillc + 3 involvementc +                    rc             (4)
  22
     We were concerned that respondents would find this statement unusual. After the resume rating exercise was
completed, we asked HR managers the following question: "In some interview scripts, you may have seen the response
"I was supposed to interact frequently, but interacted infrequently because the foreign boss left the country for a
family emergency." How did you interpret this?" We provided multiple choices for the HR manager to select: a)
"The candidate was making an excuse for infrequent communication"; b) "The candidate may have been good if
he was hired to talk frequently, but was genuinely unable to communicate with the foreign boss due to unexpected
circumstances"; c) "It did not make sense"; d) "Other (please specify)". Only 10% HR managers reported (c), while
71% chose (b). This suggests that HR managers interpreted the "interview answer" as we meant them to do.


                                                        17
where yrc is the outcome that HR manager r places on applicant c (e.g., the wage offer). All three
coefficients are of interest. The categorical variable f reqcommc takes on three values, as noted
above. The other variables are binary indicators. We include both respondent fixed effects r and
pair fixed effects p and we cluster standard errors by respondent r.

4.2    Results
Block 1 (Applicant Characteristics) Results

    Table 3 reports the regression results of the first block. Column 1 reports the primary outcome,
the wage that HR managers would offer to candidates. The results suggest that the wage premium
for an applicant with advanced English proficiency is 15.9% (a $51.3 increase from a mean $323.2).
The return to MNC experience is similar: all else equal, having MNC experience would increase
the wage offer by 10.2% (a $33.1 increase). Moreover, a candidate with both advanced English and
MNC experience further raises the return by 3.6%, or an additional $11.5. Thus, the results suggest
that potential employers in this setting place particular value on experience acquired in an FDI
firm when the individual speaks English, and is consistent with the model's assumption that lower
communication barriers within MNCs should increase the general management skills acquired.
    Although the resume rating exercise asked about hypothetical applicants and was not incen-
tivized, these coefficients appear plausible. The return to English is remarkable consistent with
the non-experimental Mincerian wage regressions in column 4 of Table 2, where a 1 sd increase
in English is associated with a 12.7% higher wage. Since the DMs all work at MNCs, we cannot
identify a MNC wage premium in our sample, but Alfaro-Urena et al. (2019) indicate that the
MNC wage premium across several studies is between 5-10%. The estimated size premium is also
consistent with the literature. In our hypothetical setting, HR managers would offer a 18.4% pre-
mium ($40.0 higher wage) to an applicant from a large 125-employee firm relative to a 25-employee
firm, a magnitude consistent with the 18% large-size premium estimated by Reed and Tran (2019)
on a harmonized set of household and labor force surveys across developing countries. As for the
experience premium, our estimates are at the upper end the experience premium estimated by
Lagakos et al. (2018), who find a premium of 16-30% across developing countries. However, their
study compares workers with 5-9 years of potential work experience (years elapsed since finishing
school, rather than actual work experience) relative to 0-4 years and, thus, likely to be a lower
bound on the experience premium.
    Column 2 reports the respondent's perception of how involved the candidate was in management
at the previous job (1-4 scale).23 Applicants with advanced English proficiency have a 0.15 higher
perception of involvement off a mean of 2.50. Applicants with MNC experience have a 0.03 higher
perception of involvement. We interpret this lower coefficient as the fact that MNCs are perceived
as a challenging environment to be involved in when one does not speak English. By contrast, the
HR managers attach a sizable increase in perceived involvement for applicants with both charac-
  23
     The number of observations in the involvement regression is lower because this question was introduced after a
fourth of the respondents had already completed the ratings.


                                                        18
teristics: the coefficient on the interaction is 0.14, which is statistically significant. This suggests
that improving the English proficiency to advanced for an applicant with MNC experience greatly
improves the perceived involvement in management. Not surprisingly, overall work experience is
the largest driver of the perceived involvement of the candidate.
    Column 3 reports the results for "how much do you think the candidate has learned in their
previous job" on a 1-10 scale. We find that perceived learning coefficients are higher for advanced
English and MNC experience although we do not find the interaction statistically significant at
conventional levels.

Block 2 (Mechanisms) Results

    The second block explores the role of frequent communication with FMs as a mechanism for
why profiles with high English proficiency and MNC experience are valued. Table 4 reports the
results by examining respondent choices among profile pairs that vary in their hypothetical answers
to three questions about their previous job: how frequently did the respondent communicate with
their FM, how frequently did they use Microsoft Office, and how frequently they were involved in
setting company targets.
    The first column reports the wage offers for candidates. Candidates who interact frequently
with FMs are highly desired; they would be offered a 9.9% higher wage relative to a candidate who
did not frequently speak with their FM (a $40.8 increase over a mean of $410.2).24 In fact, this
increase is similar to the coefficient on candidates who frequently report using Microsoft Office (a
$33.9 increase). This result supports the key mechanism that for general management positions,
potential employers appear to desire candidates who interact with FMs, and they attach a valuation
that is roughly similar to candidates who have a "hard" skill. Naturally, frequent involvement in
management is most preferred, and HR managers would offer an even larger wage premium to such
applicants (a $53.1 increase).
    As discussed above, one worry is that profiles that indicate frequent communications with FMs
reflect an unobserved attribute of that applicant. To gauge this selection story, we can examine
the coefficient on the response that the candidate had been chosen to interact with the FM, but
ultimately did not do so. We think that HR managers interpreted this response at face value (see
footnote 22). The wage increase on this response is small ($2.8) and not statistically different from
the leave-out category (infrequent communication with the FM). This suggests that the respondents
value the impact of interactions with FMs as opposed to simply be chosen to interact with the FM.
    Column 2 examines perceived learning. The results suggest that HR managers perceive learning
to be higher for applicants who interact frequently with the FM. The coefficient implies a 0.52 higher
perceived learning for applicants who frequently communicate with the FM relative to infrequent
communication. As before, this perception is similar to the level of the hard skill (a 0.43 increase in

  24
     Notice that the mean wage offer in Block 2 is much higher than in Block 1, which is consistent with the fact
that we told recruiters these candidates have an Advanced English level and three years of experience in a large
establishment owned by an MNC.


                                                       19
perceived learning). We only observe a modest and statistically insignificant effect on the selection
coefficient, and applicants who report being frequently involved in setting and communicating
targets see a 0.84 increase in perceived learning.
     Taken together, the evidence suggests that domestic employers value experience acquired by
DMs' working in MNCs. Furthermore, workers that are proficient in English and those given the
opportunity to work closely with FMs are particularly valued. The evidence is thus consistent with
the model's assumption that management knowledge learned in MNCs is a general skill, in the
sense of being valued in the labor market for domestic firms, and that this skill is learned, in part,
through frequent communication with the FM. If the amount and content of such communication
are non-contractible, the model suggests that the empirical evidence in this section would imply
inefficiently low knowledge transfers. The social planner could curb the inefficiency by subsidizing
DM's foreign language acquisition. A necessary condition for that to be the case is that DMs'
foreign language proficiency and FMs' communication are complementary. We now turn to explore
whether this is the case in our context.


5        Protocol 2: Complementarity Between Communication and Lan-
         guage Proficiency
     This section explores the complementarity assumption. To do so, we offer English language
training to a random sample of DMs. This allows us to track the effect of an (exogenous) increase
in DMs language level  on communication with FMs  .

5.1      Research Design and Measurement
     We recruited 298 domestic managers at 27 MNCs operating in the SEZ. As noted above, we
classify domestic managers as MNCs employees of Myanmar nationality earning over $200 per
month, the income-tax reporting threshold in Myanmar and a plausible lower bound for holding a
management position and interacting directly with senior FMs.25
     The experiment design was as follows. Within each firm (a stratum), we randomly assigned half
of the domestic managers to attend a free English training course. In total, 154 DMs were assigned
to treatment. We contracted with an English-language company to provide the language training,
which was entirely conducted by native English-speaking teachers. The course provided 48 hours
of training and was conducted over 3 months, with two 2-hour sessions per week. Only DMs from
the SEZ would participate in the classes, and the provider taught its standard English for business
course.26 The sessions took place after working hours and on weekends, and we offered DMs the

    25
      We excluded Myanmar employees earning above the salary threshold if they held a technical occupation involving
no supervision of subordinates (e.g., engineer or production technician), and brought into the sample frame 64 DMs
below the salary threshold at the request of 18 firms.
   26
      This course is very similar to a standard language course with daily life scenarios replaced with business sit-
uations. For example, the course would teach the correct article ("a" vs. "an") to use for the following positions:
accountant, engineer, artist, receptionist, manager, doctor, consultant, pilot, etc. In the provider's regular course,


                                                         20
option to take the course either at a rented space near the SEZ or at the company's main office in
downtown Yangon. The provider's standard procedure is to conduct an initial English assessment
to determine the student's knowledge (see Figure 1, Panel A) and place students into a beginners
or intermediate course. We allowed the provider to follow this practice, and treatment DMs were
assigned to one of two sections based on their initial English knowledge. Due to teaching capacity
constraints, we could not train all the DMs simultaneously and staggered the training over nine
cohorts through 2019. The typical cohort had around 15 DMs.27 Throughout 2019, treatment and
control DMs were asked to answer short phone surveys that asked about interactions with FMs. Six
to eight weeks after completing the course, we administered an endline survey and the management
simulation exercise.
    Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) developed an approach to measure management practices that
we implemented through closed-end questions. Measuring management performance , however, is
challenging in our setting because DMs perform a range of tasks at firms that span a range of
sectors. We designed a management simulation to assess DMs' management performance on a
standardized task. The simulation exercise was structured as follows. The goal was to mimic the
three-tier organizational structure of MNCs in our setting. An enumerator with advanced English
proficiency acts as the "FM" by providing instructions in English to DMs to complete a task. The
DM would then manage two "production workers" ("PWs"), performed by enumerators with no
knowledge of English. These PWs were shielded from the "FM"-DM interactions so they could not
hear the instructions. As is the case at the firms, the DM-"PWs" interactions occurred in Burmese.
    The task simulates a common assembly-line task for production workers: precisely placing
several items into a package. The task was to instruct the "PWs" to select 4 out of 8 objects,
arrange them in a pre-specified order and place them in certain position in a box demarcated for
shipping. The objects and order were randomized across simulations to mitigate potential learning
among the production workers, and there were a possible 192 combinations of tasks (see Table A.4).
Production workers were also randomized from a pool of enumerators. We recorded the length of
"FM"-DM and DM-"PWs" interactions, the number of questions, and the total mistakes completing
the task. As we were concerned about experimenter's effects (e.g., treated DMs might exert more
effort in the simulation as a result of having being assigned to treatment), we also performed a
second placebo management task (for a different randomly drawn task) where the "FM" delivered
the instructions in Burmese.
    Due to the suspension of in-person surveys in Spring 2020 from Covid-19 lock-downs mandated
by the Institutional Review Board, we switched from in-person to phone surveys to collect the
main endline variables for 119 out of 298 DMs in the sample. We were unable to implement the
management simulation on this sub-sample since the simulation requires a physical presence.



they would use non-job related words. As another example, students would listen to a conversation and decide which
of the following statements are true or false: "Jim Davis works in the advertising department", "Paula will be an
intern in the company for three weeks", "Jonathan Ross is Jenny Bradshaw's assistant", etc.
   27
      The first cohort had DMs from one firm and the remaining cohorts had DMs from between 4 and 11 firms.


                                                       21
5.2    Baseline Statistics and Empirical Specifications
    Table A.3 reports baseline balance between the treatment and control individuals. The average
age is 28.2 years with a tenure of 1.3 years. Across the sample, about 38% of DMs are men. The
average monthly salary is $351.8. The table indicates that the randomization achieved balance
across most observed covariates. Only age is marginally significantly different whe comparing the
treatment and control group, with treatment individuals being about 9 months older on average.
The final row of Table A.3 reports attrition at endline. Some 9% of DMs refused the endline survey,
a low attrition rate which is not significantly different between treatment and control groups.
    We estimate intent-to-treat (ITT) using an ANCOVA specification (McKenzie, 2012):


                               yi = 0 + f + treati + y0i + modei +                 i                            (5)
The specification includes a firm f fixed effect to reflect the stratification, and i indexes the DM.
Whenever possible, the outcome value is the average value of the variable measured through surveys
that took place after 75% of the training had been completed and at endline. If an outcome was
only measured at endline, we use just that value. The baseline value, y0i , is the average value of
the variable measured at baseline and during surveys that took place before 75% of the training
had been completed.28 We also include a dummy that turns on if the endline was collected over
the phone during the COVID-19 lockdown. Standard errors are clustered by company department;
there are 76 company-departments pairs.
    We also present treatment-on-the-treated specifications (TOT):


                              yi = 0 + f + takeupi + y0i + modei +                     i                        (6)
where takeupi is a continuous value between 0 and 1 based on the number of sessions attended out
of 24 and is instrumented with treatment. Standard errors are clustered by department.

5.3    Results
    We explore how treatment affects interactions with FMs. Before doing so, we first demonstrate
that the intervention did, in fact, improve language proficiency for treatment DMs.

Takeup and English Proficiency Improvement

    Table 5 reports the first-stage results that regress takeup on treatment. Columns 1-2 report
the attendance rates using two different definitions of takeup. Column 1 indicates that 45% of
  28
     For dropouts and non-takeup treatment DMs, we assign their survey schedule corresponding to the language
course they should have attended. For control DMs, we assign survey schedules corresponding to the course attended
by their treatment colleagues of similar English level. (If a firm had treatment DMs attending different courses, we
assigned the schedule according to the majority of the treatment DMs). We conducted nine surveys via phone in
addition to the (in­person) baseline and (in-person, and then phone due to COVID-19) endline surveys. On average,
2.71 surveys contribute to the baseline average value (2.81 for treatment DMs and 2.60 for control DMs) and 2.70
surveys contribute to the average endline value (same for treatment and control DMs).


                                                        22
DMs attended at least three-quarters of the course (18 out of 24 sessions). Alternatively, column 2
reports the continuous takeup variable: on average, DMs attend, on avarege, 56.8% of the course.
We use the continuous takeup measure in the TOT specifications.29
    The more direct way to measure the impacts of the language course is to examine DMs' English
proficiency at endline using our tailored test (using test questions that differed from the baseline
test). Column 3 reports the impact on English test scores from being assigned to treatment:
0.15sd. The TOT specification in column 4 shows an effect that is almost twice as large­0.26sd.
The remaining columns separate the effects on speaking (columns 5-6) and listening comprehension
(columns 7-8). The point estimates on speaking and listening are both statistically different from
zero at the 10% level. Thus, the English training appears to have successfully improved the English
proficiency for treatment DMs.30

Communication is Complementary with Language Ability

    The model assumes a complementarity between English proficiency and communication with
FMs. The top panel of Table 6 explores communication responses at endline.
    We first examine the extensive margin of communication: is there an impact of the language
training on the frequency of communication in the past 7 days? Columns 1-2 indicate a positive
impact on communication frequency. Treatment DMs report a 0.20 increase from a baseline average
value of 2.31 (on a 1-4 scale), and the TOT coefficient is 0.33. Columns 3-4 regress a dummy that
turns on if the DM participated in a meeting with the FM in the last working day. While noisy,
the results suggest a 0.08 increased probability of attending such meetings from a baseline average
value of 0.41. On the intensive margin, columns 5-6 report that treatment DMs indicate losing
less time due to translations and misunderstandings when they talk to FMs. The coefficients are,
however, imprecisely estimated.
    One may be worried that improved English leads to greater confidence and so more communi-
cation in the firm in general, not just with foreign managers. Moreover, one might worry about a
Hawthorne effect where the results would be driven by treatment DMs wanting to please the re-
searchers by answering more enthusiastically to all questions. To address both concerns, in columns
7-10, we turn to DM's interaction with another DM at a similar or higher level in the firm's hierar-
chy.31 Treated DMs do not report talking more frequently with their domestic bosses/colleagues.
They report attending meetings with a fellow DMs slightly more frequently but this result is in-
significant and the effect measured is much smaller than the one observed with respect to FMs

   29
      Figure A.5 shows the attendance distribution. Although an imperfect benchmark, the 76% initial-class atten-
dance rate exceeds the average 65% initial-class attendance rate for training programs reviewed by McKenzie and
Woodruff (2014).
   30
      Although the training and setting is different from ours, Hoya et al. (2018) conduct an experiment on adults in
the UK that teaches English as a second language through a 66-hour course. They find that improvement in English
proficiency among treatment doubles relative to control individuals, and we find a similar impact (6.13 vs 3.01 points
on a 100-point scale).
   31
      If a DM's direct boss was a foreign expat, we would ask the respondent to identify also one Myanmar manager
(either a boss or somewhat at their level in the hierarchy).


                                                         23
(columns 3-4). We conclude that English is complementary with communication between DMs and
FMs specifically, and not with communication in general.
    Panel B of Table 6 examines management involvement. We asked DMs to self-report their
involvement on a scale of 1 to 4 in two broad management tasks: managing employees and setting
targets. For the former, we asked how involved DMs were in setting individual targets for sub-
ordinates, promoting good performers, and hiring new employees for their team. For the latter,
we asked how involved DMs were in communicating factory and team targets to subordinates. In
columns 1-2, we find that treatment DMs increase their involvement in managing employees by 0.14,
an effect that is both economically and statistically significant. However, we find no differential
involvement of treated individuals in communicating targets (columns 3-4).
    We then examine DMs' knowledge of management best practices in columns 5-6. We followed
almost exactly the multiple choice questions in the "management practices" section of the U.S.
Census's Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS) which aims to get at the
same practices as the qualitative questionnaire used in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). We then
score each question and obtain a total "management score".32 When we moved to the phone
endline due to COVID-19, we opted to reduce survey length and retained only the management
questions about monitoring for this sample. The regression controls for this switch through the
endline mode dummy. We do not observe any statistical difference between treatment and control
in these management knowledge questions. Our interpretation is that the management practices
questionnaires reflect firm policies that may not vary significantly across individuals. Additionally,
as revealed below through anecdotal responses, the types of management learned by treatment
DMs via the FMs are more specific than these management questions.

Returns to Communication and Language Ability

    We provide further evidence of the complementarity between language ability and communica-
tion. At the endline, we asked DMs how much they would be willing to pay (WTP) for an hour of
"one-on-one" conversation with a senior manager, either a FM or another DM (more senior than
themselves). Referring to our model, this corresponds to the DM's marginal benefit of learning
from an additional unit of communication with the FM. Table 7 shows that treated individuals are
willing to pay $32.67 more to spend an hour with the FM, an effect which is significant at the 5%
level. The effect is more than twice as large when looking at the TOT: Treated DMs are willing to
pay $53.62 more than DMs in the control group to spend time with their FMs.
    One concern is that difference between WTP for FM and DM across treatment and control can
be accounted for by "schmoozing" or a desire to influence FMs, rather than opportunities for further
learning. In columns 3-4 of Table 7 we ask DMs for their WTP for a one hour conversation with
a hypothetical FM working at a different firm. Control DMs are WTP less money to spend time
  32
     For example, we asked participants "What should managers' promotions primarily based on?" The proposed
answers were "Solely performance and ability; Partly performance and ability, and partly other factors (for example,
tenure or connections); Mainly factors other than performance and ability (for example, tenure or connections);
Managers are normally not promoted."


                                                        24
with an FM outside their company (the control mean is $31.42 as opposed to $39.74), suggesting
that it is considered less valuable, perhaps due to the lack of opportunities to ask for raises or
promotions. However, treated DMs are still WTP to pay $19.09 more than control individuals for
this opportunity. This suggests that English skills increase the DM's valuation for time spent with
a FM and provides further support for the complementarity assumption.
   As with our communication results, one may be worried that improved English leads to greater
confidence in one's ability to learn in general, not just from foreign managers. Moreover, one might
worry about a Hawthorne effect, especially given that these WTP questions are not incentivized. To
address both concerns, we also asked DMs about their WTP for a meeting with another Myanmar
DM. The resultsare shown in columns 5-6 of Table 7. We observe no differential reported WTP
between treatment and control.

Language at Work: Management Simulation

   Participating firms operate across a wide range of sectors and, within those firms, DMs occupy
a diverse set of roles. This makes it difficult to accurately measure DMs behavior and performance
on the job through metrics that also enable a comparison across such a different range of firms, job
titles and tasks. To overcome this measurement challenge, we present results from a management
simulation exercise. The management simulation provides a way to measure performance in a
controlled setting.
   Table 8 reports the results. Columns 1-2 report the "PWs" time to complete the task when
managed by the treatment DMs relative to control DMs. Production teams managed by treatment
DMs performed the task 0.19 minutes faster relative to the control mean of 1.28, suggesting about
a 15% improvement in productivity. The TOT is 0.37 minutes faster. However, despite this shorter
time, mistakes were no different between treatment and control (columns 3-4), so mistake-adjusted
productivity improved.
   Why did performance improve for treatment DMs? Columns 5-6 offers a mechanism. We find
that treatment DMs spend more time talking with the "FMs" when receiving the instructions.
Column 5 indicates that treatment DMs spend 0.36 more minutes relative to the control mean
of 1.89 minutes; and, the TOT estimate is 0.70. The reason for this additional time is because
treatment DMs ask more questions: on average, treatment DMs ask 1.05 additional questions (and
the TOT estimate is nearly 2.03 additional questions). This suggests that treatment DMs have
more meaningful interactions with the "FM". They spend more time talking and treatment DMs
are more likely to understand the task better by asking more questions.
   As a placebo check, we performed the simulation exercise where the "FM" directed the man-
agement task in Burmese (for a new randomly drawn task). We would expect no difference in
management performance between treatment and control firms in this placebo simulation, and this
is confirmed in Panel B of Table 8.




                                                25
General skills and Outside Options

    We had planned a longer run followup to the endline to assess skills of treatment and controls
DMs. In January 2021, we began this survey round but halted it on February 1st 2021 when
a military coup removed the democratically elected government from office, leading to a general
strike, protests and an increasingly violent repression by the army.
    In this sub-section, we thus provide anecdotal evidence based on a few interviews that we
conducted in order to understand the specific skills that treatment DMs learned from FMs. We
also analyze DMs short-run labor market options outside the SEZ from the endline as a complement
to the resume rating results from Section 4.
    In preparation for the final planned endline, we collected anecdotes from treated DMs about
what skills they have learned from working with FMs. A few examples are as follows:

    · DM, Japanese firm: "I learned Marketing Strategy, Financial management, Report Evaluation
      and Analysis from FMs. I can learn these skills as my understanding level and communication
      skills are higher than before."

    · DM, Japanese firm: "I have learned Excel formula from FM... English is a medium language
      while he was teaching formula, and I understood completely what he said because my listening
      skill is higher than before."

    · DM, Japanese firm: "From FM, I have learned Microsoft Excel and PDCA (Plan Do Check
      Act cycle) which is used in Japan. There is a slight difference in learning process because I
      am not afraid of speaking with foreigners and I become to understand what they said."

    · DM, Japanese firm: "I have learned punctuality, discipline, technical and management skills
      from Japanese Managers."

    · DM, Thai firm: "Problem solving, Customer dealing skills have been learned from FMs. The
      learning process is faster as my confidence allows me to participate in meeting fully and I can
      understand very well what FMs present in the meetings".

Many of the skills listed in these examples (e.g., Marketing Strategy, Microsoft Excel, PDCA,
punctuality) appear to be general. The anecdotes suggest that the increased learning opportunities
from communication with the FMs should translate into improved professional opportunities both
inside and outside the firm and are thus in line with the results from the resume rating protocol
analyzed in Section 4.33 At the same time, the wide range of skills mentioned by the respondents
also confirm difficulties in quantifying relevant management knowledge transfers across such a wide
spectrum of sectors and roles.
   33
      Consistent with this observation, Table A.6 shows that 5 months after the language training was completed
treated DMs started applying to more jobs. However, we find no effect on the likelihood of promotion or salary
increase at that time. Table A.5 indicates that treatment DMs do not increase their reading, watching news or
television, use of social media, relative to controls, which suggests that the language course did not trigger potential
learning through other mechanisms during the period of study.


                                                          26
5.4      (No) Spillover to Control DMs
     A potential concern with the above results is that the impact of the language training on
treatment DMs may come at the expense of the control group. While this is not a substantial
concern for outcomes such as acquisition of language skills or management skills which are non-
rival, the means through which the latter is acquired, communication with FMs, may be a rival
good (particularly so if FMs are constrained in their total communication budget).
     Our randomization procedure was not designed to tests for spillovers on control DMs. Such a
design would have varied the intensity of treatment DMs across FMs. Instead, we stratified by firm,
and this leads to potentially random variation in the share of treatment DMs across departments
within the firm. We choose the department level, described above, as the unit of analysis for
spillovers because it represents a relevant unit of management for DMs, with typically at least one
FMs above and subordinates under them. On average, each control DM is in a department with
4.8 (sd: 3.2) other sample DMs, 2.7 (sd: 2.1) of whom are treated.
     We examine the extent to which control DMs are affected by the intensity of treatment in their
department by running the following specification:
                                  yi = 0 + f +  #T reatedd + sized +               i

where #T reatedd is the number of treated DMs working in the same department and sized is the
total number of sample DMs working in the same department of control DM i. As in the previous
specifications we control for strata (firm) fixed effects f . Table A.7 shows results for the main
outcome variables: english knowledge, communication, involvement, WTP for FM meetings, and
management simulation. Overall, we are unable to find effects along any of these outcomes, which
is suggestive that control DMs were not crowded out by treatment DMs.


6        Further Evidence
     In this section, we provide additional suggestive evidence that supports the presence of an
inefficiency in our setting and justifies a language subsidy. First, we discuss evidence that supports
the assumption of non-contractible communication. Second, we discuss evidence that supports the
other conditions that make a language subsidy potentially effective.

6.1      Non-contractible Communication
     Our main justification for the non-contractibility assumption is that is a feature of the work-
place, and is therefore a cornerstone of workhorse frameworks in organizational economics.34 The
    34
     An important question is whether relational contracts between the DM and FM can overcome the non-
contractibility of communication (Gibbons and Henderson 2012). This is unlikely for several reasons. Relational
contracts achieve first-best if parties are sufficiently patient. In our setting, the FM and DM have a relatively short
horizon to develop a collaboration: the DMs will leave the MNC, and the FMs may return home. Second, a well-
functioning relational contract requires parties to clearly understand the terms of the relationship (e.g., Chassang
2010, Gibbons et al. 2021). The lack of common language­the key friction in our setting­makes this harder. Finally,
compared to a benchmark with perfect contractibility, Garicano and Rayo (2017)'s model argues that knowledge


                                                          27
non-contractible nature of communication in our context is supported by two pieces of empirical
evidence. First, as discussed in Section 5.3, we asked DMs to report their willingness to pay (WTP)
for an hour of "one-on-one" conversation with their FM. If communication is non-contractible, we
should expect a sizable wedge between the reported WTP by the DMs and the opportunity cost of
time of the FMs (their hourly wage) in our sample. Panel A of Figure A.6 reports the distribution
of the DMs WTP, as well as the average and max hourly wage of FMs in our sample. 67% of DMs
report a higher WTP than the average FM hourly wage and 51% report a higher WTP than the
hourly wage of the best paid FM in our sample. This wedge suggest that additional communication
between DMs and FMs could increase total surplus.
    Second, at the longer-run follow-up survey in 2021, we began to ask DMs to report how many
hours they spent talking with their FM in the past week and how many hours they would have liked
to spend talking with their FMs over that same period. Under the non-contractibility assumption,
we should also expect seeing a wedge between the ideal and the actual communication time. Panel
B of Figure A.6 shows the distribution of values reported by the 96 DMs who had responded to
the survey before it was halted. On average, in the seven days preceding the survey, DMs would
have liked to talk to their FMs 1.4 hours more than they actually did: the actual time is thus lower
than the ideal one.35
    Taken together, this evidence suggests that there is a gap between the level of communication
desired by the DM and what is provided by the FM.

6.2    Support for the Language Subsidy
    The model argues that the general skills and the non-contractibility assumptions are sufficient
to create an inefficiency. However, the rationale for the planner to implement a language subsidy
and partially correct that inefficiency relies on additional assumptions. In particular, a subsidy
is justified if the DM's choice of English proficiency does not fully internalize the returns of her
language investment for the MNC. If either (i) the FM and DM can contract on the DM's language
skill level or (ii) the English wage premium reflects the marginal value of DM's English knowledge
                          1
in the MNC (w ()           ),   the DM's privately optimal language investment would be the same or
larger than the one desired by the planner.
    With respect to (i), we explored DM's and FM's ability to contract on DM's English proficiency
implementing a limited experiment during the language training program. For a short period, we
offered an incentive (in the form of mobile phone credit worth $10) conditional on the DM attending
a class. We randomized whether this payment was made to the DM or to the FM. In the spirit of
Bubb et al. (2018), the logic of the test is that if the two parties can reach an agreement to split the


transfers through relational contracts are slow and incomplete.
   35
      Note that if communication was contractible, we would expect the DM to pay for it, in some form. At work,
DM's wages are positively correlated with communication with the FM, the opposite of what we might expect. Of
course the DM might be able to compensate the FM in other ways, e.g., through favors. Although there does not
appear to be much evidence of DM and FM in our sample interacting outside of working hours, we cannot completely
rule out such possibility.


                                                      28
surplus created by language training, the identity of the recipient of the payment should not matter
for attendance. If, instead, the identity of the recipient matters, it suggests that parties are unable
to maximize and share the joint surplus. We find that the DM's random assignment to receiving
the incentive increases attendance by 13 percentage points (up from a baseline probability of 56%),
but the FM's random assignment to receive incentive has no effect on the DM's attendance. This
provides suggestive evidence that DMs and FMs are unlikely to be able to contract on the level of
English knowledge.
   With respect to (ii), back-of-envelope calculations also suggest that the marginal benefit of lan-
                                                                                             1
guage skills for the MNC are significantly larger than the DM's English wage premium (w () <   ).
                                                                         1
We calibrate the marginal benefits of the language training to the MNC (   ) using the manage-
ment simulation results in Section 5.3. On the benefit side, the production workers perform the
task faster if managed by treated DMs (15%, column 1 of Table 8). We multiply the estimated
productivity gain by the average monthly wage of PWs in the firm and by the average span of
control of DMs in the firm.36 On the cost side, FMs spend more time communicating with DMs
(19%, column 5 of Table 8). We multiply this estimate by the average share of FM's time spent
talking with DMs 6% and by the monthly wage of FMs at the firm. Our estimate for the average
                                                     1
(gross) benefits of the language training for MNCs (   ) is thus $18 per month. We compute the
DM's returns from improving English (w ()) using estimates from the resume ratings experiment.
When the English level of the DM goes from elementary to advanced (an increase of 2.2 sd in the
DMs english skills distribution) the monthly wage offer increases by $51.3 (column 1 of Table 3).
The language training increases the English level of DMs by 0.15 sd, so the expected wage increase
from the language training we offer is $3.6 per month, about 5 times smaller than the MNC's. The
                                     1
data thus suggest that indeed w () <   .
   Applying a conservative 10% annual discount factor, the estimates above imply that DMs
would not pay for the training on their own (See Figure A.7, Panel A). This is consistent with the
model assumption that DM's investment in English is privately optimal and with DMs self-reported
willingness to pay for a training program similar to the one we offered. Assuming a conservative
3% probability that the DM leaves each month, the NPV of providing the training is also negative
for most MNCs in the sample (see Figure A.7, Panel B). Note, however, that the joint returns for
DMs and MNCs from the training are positive in 47.0% of cases, but only two MNCs had offered an
English language training before our intervention, bringing us back to point (i). As we conclude, it
is worth reiterating that the purpose of our intervention was not to evaluate the particular training
program we offered but rather to establish a rationale for some kind of intervention. For example,
fostering language acquisition in school might be more effective as foreign languages are better
learned at a younger age (Dixon et al. 2012).




  36
       We assume decreasing returns in the span of control (see Figure A.7 for details).


                                                           29
7     Conclusion
     For decades, policymakers across the developing world have opened their fiscal coffers to attract
MNCs in the hopes that their superior operational practices will spillover to domestic companies.
We explore conditions that would justify policies that could complement the typical package of
tax incentives, land acquisition, and infrastructure investments to attract FDIs. We focus on one
particular aspect­language barriers within MNCs­that may impede the transfer of management
knowledge to domestic managers.
     Our setting­MNCs in Myanmar­is a specific one, but we believe that many of its characteristics
would be relevant in other settings. The use of English as the lingua franca at the workplace is com-
mon throughout the globe. When DMs in the host country have low proficiency, we would expect
communication barriers to be large. Analogously, we would expect similar communication barriers
to arise when workplace communication occurs in the FMs' native tongue. For example, Uganda
recently added compulsory Mandarin education to selected secondary schools, presumably to take
advantage of the large inflow of Chinese FDI in recent years. And, of course, many countries have
implemented mandatory English-as-second-language policies starting as early as primary school.
While there might be several justifications for such policies, our framework and results points at
societal benefits from learning a language that foster knowledge transfers from FDI.
     There may be additional inefficiencies that policymakers should correct in order to increase the
likelihood of positive spillovers from MNCs. These could include the provision of infrastructure, re-
moving information frictions to improve matches between MNCs and domestic suppliers, addresses
credit constraints of existing or potential employees, and so forth. The approach we take in this
paper­to clarify the conditions under which the planner should intervene and to design a set of
experimental protocols to explore these conditions­ could be adopted to explore other frictions that
may impede spillovers from MNCs in developing countries.


References
Abebe, G., M. S. McMillan, and M. Serafinelli (2018): "Foreign direct investment and
    knowledge diffusion in poor locations: Evidence from Ethiopia," Tech. rep., National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1998): "Why do firms train? Theory and evidence," The
    Quarterly journal of economics, 113, 79­119.

Aitken, B. J. and A. E. Harrison (1999): "Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign
    investment? Evidence from Venezuela," American economic review, 89, 605­618.

Alfaro-Urena, A., I. Manelici, and J. Vasquez (2019): "The Effects of Multinationals on
    Workers: Evidence from Costa Rica," Tech. rep., London School of Economics.



                                                   30
Alfaro-Ureña, A., I. Manelici, and J. P. Vasquez (2019): "The Effects of Joining Multina-
  tional Supply Chains: New Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages," Available at SSRN 3376129.

Alfonsi, L., O. Bandiera, V. Bassi, R. Burgess, I. Rasul, M. Sulaiman, and A. Vitali
  (2020): "Tackling youth unemployment: Evidence from a labor market experiment in Uganda,"
  Tech. rep.

Antràs, P., L. Garicano, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2006): "Offshoring in a knowledge econ-
  omy," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 31­77.

Antràs, P. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2009): "Organizations and Trade," Annual Review of
  Economics, 1, 43­64.

Antràs, P., E. Rossi-Hansberg, and L. Garicano (2008): Organizing Offshoring: Middle
  Managers and Communication Costs, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 311­39.

Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. RodrÃguez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018): "Innovation
  and Production in the Global Economy," American Economic Review, 108, 2128­73.

Atkin, D., A. Chaudhry, S. Chaudry, A. K. Khandelwal, and E. Verhoogen (2017):
  "Organizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pak-
  istan*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1101­1164.

Atkin, D. and A. K. Khandelwal (2020): "How Distortions Alter the Impacts of International
  Trade in Developing Countries," Annual Review of Economics, 12, null.

Bai, J., P. Barwick, S. Cao, and S. Li (2021): "Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover and
  Industrial Quality Upgrading," .

Balsvik, R. (2011): "Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals? Evidence
  from Norwegian manufacturing," The review of economics and statistics, 93, 285­297.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2018): "Global Firms,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 56, 565­619.

Bisztray, M., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2018): "Learning to import from your peers," Journal
  of International Economics, 115, 242­258.

Blonigen, B. A. and J. Piger (2014): "Determinants of foreign direct investment," Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 47, 775­812.

Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2012a): "Does Man-
  agement Matter? Evidence from India *," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1­51.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2012b): "Americans do IT better: US multina-
  tionals and the productivity miracle," American Economic Review, 102, 167­201.

                                                 31
------ (2016): "Management as a Technology?" Working Paper 22327, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007): "Measuring and explaining management practices across
  firms and countries," The quarterly journal of Economics, 122, 1351­1408.

Bubb, R., S. Kaur, and S. Mullainathan (2018): "The limits of neighborly exchange," Un-
  published manuscript, Poverty Action Lab.[430].

Cai, J. and A. Szeidl (2017): "Interfirm Relationships and Business Performance," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 133, 1229­1282.

Caliendo, L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2012): "The impact of trade on organization and pro-
  ductivity," The quarterly journal of economics, 127, 1393­1467.

Chassang, S. (2010): "Building Routines: Learning, Cooperation, and the Dynamics of Incom-
  plete Relational Contracts," American Economic Review, 100, 448­65.

Crawford, V. P. and J. Sobel (1982): "Strategic information transmission," Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, 1431­1451.

Cremer, J., L. Garicano, and A. Prat (2007): "Language and the Theory of the Firm," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 373­407.

Dessein, W. (2002): "Authority and communication in organizations," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 69, 811­838.

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole (2005): "Modes of communication," Journal of political econ-
  omy, 113, 1217­1238.

Dixon, L. Q., J. Zhao, J.-Y. Shin, S. Wu, J.-H. Su, R. Burgess-Brigham, M. U. Gezer,
  and C. Snow (2012): "What we know about second language acquisition: A synthesis from
  four perspectives," Review of Educational Research, 82, 5­60.

Economist (2014): "The English empire," The Economist.

EPI, E. F. (2020): "EF English proficiency index," Education First Retrieved from Education
  First Rankings.

Garicano, L. (2000): "Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production," Journal
  of political economy, 108, 874­904.

Garicano, L. and L. Rayo (2017): "Relational Knowledge Transfers," American Economic
  Review, 107, 2695­2730.

Gibbons, R. and R. Henderson (2012): "Relational contracts and organizational capabilities,"
  Organization science, 23, 1350­1364.

                                               32
Gibbons, R., M. LiCalzi, and M. Warglien (2021): "What Situation Is This? Shared Frames
  and Collective Performance," Strategy Science.

Giorcelli, M. (2019): "The long-term effects of management and technology transfers," American
  Economic Review, 109, 121­52.

Hanson, G. H. (2012): "The rise of middle kingdoms: Emerging economies in global trade,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 41­64.

Harrison, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2010): "Trade, foreign investment, and industrial
  policy for developing countries," in Handbook of development economics, Elsevier, vol. 5, 4039­
  4214.

Head, K., T. Mayer, and J. Ries (2010): "The erosion of colonial trade linkages after indepen-
  dence," Journal of International Economics, 81, 1 ­ 14.

Hoya, C., A. McCallum, A. Patel, and T. Wilson (2018): "Measuring the impact of
  Community-Based English Language Provision: Findings from a Randomised Controlled Trial,"
  .

Javorcik, B. (2004): "Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domestic firms?
  In search of spillovers through backward linkages," American economic review, 94, 605­627.

Keller, W. (2021): "Knowledge Spillovers, Trade, and Foreign Direct Investment," Working
  Paper 28739, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Keller, W. and S. R. Yeaple (2013): "The Gravity of Knowledge," American Economic Review,
  103, 1414­44.

Kessler, J. B., C. Low, and C. D. Sullivan (2019): "Incentivized resume rating: Eliciting
  employer preferences without deception," American Economic Review, 109, 3713­44.

Lagakos, D., B. Moll, T. Porzio, N. Qian, and T. Schoellman (2018): "Life cycle wage
  growth across countries," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 797­849.

Macchiavello, R. and A. Morjaria (2015): "The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a
  Supply Shock to Kenyan Rose Exports," American Economic Review, 105, 2911­45.

Macchiavello, R., A. Rabbani, and C. Woodruff (2015): "The market for training services:
  a demand experiment with Bangladeshi garment factories," American Economic Review, 105,
  300­304.

McKenzie, D. (2012): "Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments,"
  Journal of development Economics, 99, 210­221.




                                                 33
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2014): "What Are We Learning from Business Training and
  Entrepreneurship Evaluations around the Developing World?" World Bank Research Observer,
  29, 48­82.

Melitz, J. and F. Toubal (2014): "Native language, spoken language, translation and trade,"
  Journal of International Economics, 93, 351­363.

Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2006): "Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World:
  Caste, Gender, and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy," American Economic Review,
  96, 1225­1252.

Neeley, T. (2017): The Language of Global Success: How a Common Tongue Transforms Multi-
  national Organizations, Princeton University Press.

Polanyi, M. (1966): The Tacit Dimension, Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

Poole, J. P. (2013): "Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic firms: Evidence from
  worker mobility," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 393­406.

Rauch, J. E. and V. Trindade (2002): "Ethnic Chinese Networks In International Trade," The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 116­130.

Reed, T. and T. T. Tran (2019): The Large-Firm Wage Premium in Developing Economies,
  The World Bank.

Selten, R. and M. Warglien (2007): "The emergence of simple languages in an experimental
  coordination game," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 7361­7366.

Startz, M. (2021): "The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting problems in Nigerian trade,"
  Tech. rep., Stanford University.

Stiglitz, J. E. and P. Dasgupta (1971): "Differential taxation, public goods, and economic
  efficiency," The Review of Economic Studies, 38, 151­174.

Tenzer, H., S. Terjesen, and A.-W. Harzing (2017): "Language in International Business:
  A Review and Agenda for Future Research," Management International Review, 57.

Yeaple, S. R. (2013): "The Multinational Firm," Annual Review of Economics, 5, 193­217.




                                               34
Tables and Figures

                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                              Mean     Std Dev      N firms      N
              Total Employees                                 141.4      215.9         45       5144

              Foreign managers (FMs)
               Number                                          4.5        4.9          30       134
              Wage (USD)                                      2002       2100          12        61
              Age (yrs)                                        39.3       9.1          12        23
              Tenure at company (yrs)                          8.8        8.4          12        23
              Tenure at company in Myanmar (yrs)               2.2        1.7          12        23
              English score (%)                                63.6       25.1         12        23
              Share proficient in English (%)                  32.3       41.2         17         -

              Domestic managers (DMs)
               Number                                          13.3       11.7         30       400
              Wage (USD)                                       363        486          30       366
              Age (yrs)                                        28.5       7.1          30       378
              Tenure at company (yrs)                          1.4        1.3          30       400
              English score (%)                                45.0       23.4         30       400
              Share proficient in English (%)                  11.1       17.1         17         -

              Production workers (PWs)
               Number                                         119.2      220.3         27       3218
              Wage (USD)                                        99        32.3         24       2199

 Notes: Table reports summary statistics from 2018 survey. The  indicates data collected from administrative records
collected by the SEZ's management committee. The variables denoted by  indicate firm-level information collected
from interviews with a senior human resource manager at the MNCs.




                                                        35
                            Table 2: English Proficiency and Communication


                                            Across managers                               Within managers

                       BvR Mngt /15      Invt. (1-4)   Freq. FM (1-4)   Log wage     Freq. (1-4)   Time lost (%)
                           (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

  English                   0.223           0.129             0.107        0.148
                           (0.106)         (0.056)           (0.060)      (0.027)

  FM                                                                                    -0.756         -0.168
                                                                                       (0.057)        (0.007)

  FM × English                                                                          0.183          0.061
                                                                                       (0.058)        (0.007)

  Dem. controls              Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes           No             No
  Firm FEs                   Yes            Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
  DM FEs                      No             No                No          No           Yes            Yes
  Mean of Dep. Var.          9.22           2.09              2.48        13.01         2.82           0.92
  N                          375            375               350          351          774            776
  R2                         0.29           0.49              0.38        0.74          0.61           0.73

 Notes: Table shows regressions of management, communication and wage outcomes on DMs' standardized English
test score, as measured by the language test conducted at the 2018 survey. Column 1 is is the score on the 15 MOPS
management practice questions. Column 2 is the average score of self-reported involvement in managing people and
setting targets at their job, on a scale from 1 to 4 (with 1="I'm not involved in this at all" and 4="There's never
a discussion without me and I make the final decision"). Column 3 is the frequency of interaction with the FM, on
a scale from 1 to 4 (with 1=never, 2=seldom, 3=often, 4=very often). Column 4 is log monthly salary. Columns
5-6 report DMs' responses with respect to either the FM or a Myanmar manager. In these regressions, there are
two observations for each DM, the DM's standardized English score is interacted with dummy that turns on if the
interlocutor is an FM, and the regressions include DM fixed effects. Column 6 is the percentage of time lost in
translation in a 60 min conversation with the supervisor. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. In columns
1-4 they are clustered at the department level, and in columns 5-6 they are clustered at the DM level.




                                                        36
                    Table 3: Characteristics Valued by HR Managers: Demographics


                                                          Wage offer       Perceived          Perceived
                                                               (USD)      Invt. (1-4)     Learning (1-10)
                                                                (1)            (2)                (3)

         Advanced English                                      51.27          0.15               0.40
                                                               (7.48)        (0.05)             (0.11)

         MNC Experience                                        33.08          0.03               0.28
                                                               (8.05)        (0.05)             (0.10)

         Advanced English * MNC Experience                     11.54          0.14               0.09
                                                               (6.77)        (0.06)             (0.13)

         Age (=26)                                              2.93          0.01              -0.06
                                                               (4.23)        (0.03)             (0.06)

         Gender (=Male)                                         9.07          0.02               0.15
                                                               (4.58)        (0.04)             (0.07)

         Large size (=125)                                     39.96          -0.06              0.36
                                                               (6.88)        (0.07)             (0.12)

         Total Experience (=3y)                                70.75          0.47               1.17
                                                               (6.68)        (0.08)             (0.11)

         Respondent FEs                                         Yes           Yes                Yes
         Pair FEs                                               Yes           Yes                Yes
         Mean                                                  323.20         2.50               4.81
         R2                                                     0.83          0.73               0.77
         N                                                     2040           1560               2040

 Notes: Table shows regressions of hypothetical resume characteristics on wage offers, involvement score and learning
scores as stated by the 51 HR manager respondents. The first column reports the wage offer stated by the respondent
for each profile. Column (2) reports the respondent's rating of how involved the profile was in setting and communi-
cating targets and managing people at the previous job on a scale from 1 to 4. Column (3) reports the respondent's
rating of how much the profile would have learned at the previous job on a scale from 1 to 10. The leave-out group
for English and FDI contains resumes displaying elementary English and experience in a domestic firm. The leave
out for age, gender, company size, and total experience is age 25, female, firm size of 25 employees, and 1 year work
experience, respectively. All regressions include respondent fixed effects and pairs of resumes fixed effects. Standard
errors are reported in parenthesis and are clustered at the respondent level.




                                                          37
              Table 4: Characteristics Valued by HR Managers: "Interview Responses"


                                                                  Wage offer         Perceived
                                                                    (USD)        learning (1-10)
                                                                       (1)              (2)

               Freq. communication with FM                           40.81              0.52
                                                                     (5.36)            (0.08)

               Selected to communicate freq.                          2.79              0.10
                                                                     (5.59)            (0.08)

               Freq. Microsoft user                                  33.90              0.43
                                                                     (4.24)            (0.06)

               Freq. setting and communicating targets               53.12              0.84
                                                                     (5.92)            (0.10)

               Respondent FEs                                         Yes               Yes
               Pair FEs                                               Yes               Yes
               Mean                                                  410.24             5.51
               R2                                                     0.93              0.88
               N                                                      1122             1122

 Notes: Table shows regressions of hypothetical job candidate characteristics on wage offers and learning scores as
stated by the 51 HR manager respondents. Dependent variable in the first column is the wage offer stated by the
respondent for the profile. Dependent variable in the second column is an evaluation made by the respondent of
how much the candidate has learned on the job, on a scale from 1 to 10. The leave-out cell is for profiles that
display infrequent communication with their FM, infrequent MS Office user, and infrequent involvement in setting
and communicating targets. All regressions include fixed effects for respondents. Standard errors are reported in
parenthesis and are clustered by respondent.




                                                        38
                                      Table 5: Take-Up and English Proficiency




                                   First stage                  Overall             Speaking              Listening

                          Takeup> 75%       Takeup c.       ITT       TOT         ITT       TOT        ITT        TOT
                               (1)             (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)

      Treatment                0.456           0.568       0.154      0.258      0.187      0.313      0.155      0.261
                              (0.048)         (0.036)     (0.073)    (0.116)    (0.097)    (0.151)    (0.108)    (0.171)

      Baseline value            No                No        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      Strata FEs               Yes               Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      Control mean             0.00              0.00      -0.08       -0.08     -0.07      -0.07      -0.10      -0.10
      1st stage F-stat                                                278.17               272.58                273.78
      N                        298               298        268         268       265        265       267         267
      R2                       0.37              0.58       0.48        0.48      0.46       0.47      0.30        0.30

 Notes: Table reports treatment effects on takeup of English classes and English score. Column 1 is takeup defined as a dummy
that turn on if the DM attended at least 18 out of 24 sessions. Column 2 is takeup defined as the share of the classes attended
(a continuous value between 0 and 1). Columns 3-4 is the standardized English score measured at endline. Columns 5-6 is the
standardized English speaking score. Columns 7-8 is the standardized English listening score. Columns 3-8 control for baseline
values of the dependent variables. All regressions control for the mode of endline and include strata fixed effects. Standard
errors are reported in parenthesis and clustered at the department level.




                                                              39
                                   Table 6: Communication and Management


                                                                  Panel A: Communication
                                                      FM                                              Domestic Boss/Colleague

                      Talk Fqcy (1-4)       Attend mtg (0/1)            Time lost (%)         Talk Fqcy (1-4)      Attend mtg (0/1)

                       ITT        TOT        ITT           TOT          ITT         TOT        ITT        TOT       ITT      TOT
                        (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)     (10)

 Treatment             0.192      0.314      0.083       0.139          -1.969     -3.244     -0.026      -0.043    0.030     0.051
                      (0.104)    (0.158)    (0.056)     (0.086)        (2.092)    (3.186)    (0.107)     (0.165)   (0.057)   (0.088)

 Baseline control      Yes        Yes         No             No          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        No        No
 Firm FEs              Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 Control mean          2.58       2.58       0.41           0.41        17.45      17.45       3.11       3.11      0.70      0.70
 1st stage F-stat                307.92                    281.05                  281.57                306.88              281.05
 N                     226        226        261            261         223         223        258        258       261       261
 R2                    0.27       0.27       0.27           0.28        0.22        0.22       0.14       0.14      0.14      0.15

                                                             Panel B: Management
                                                      Involvement (1-4)                       Score (/15)

                                                People                    Targets             Management

                                            ITT        TOT             ITT       TOT         ITT        TOT
                                             (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)

                      Treatment             0.144       0.243        -0.052       -0.088     0.070      0.117
                                           (0.063)     (0.097)      (0.093)      (0.147)    (0.114)    (0.179)

                      Baseline control      Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                      Firm FEs              Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                      Cluster level
                      Control mean          2.28        2.28           2.70       2.70       6.32        6.32
                      1st stage F-stat                 273.56                    253.76                 282.64
                      N                     277         277            277        277        272         272
                      R2                    0.65        0.66           0.34       0.33       0.94        0.94

 Notes: Panel A reports treatment effects on communication outcomes. Columns 1-2 is communication frequency with the FM
(scale from 1 to 4, with 1=Never, 2=Seldom, 3=Often, 4=Very often). Columns 3-4 is the probability that the DM attended
a meeting with an FM in the last working day. Columns 5-6 is the share of conversation lost due to tanslation issues as a
percentage. Columns 7-8 is communication frequency with a DM. Columns 9-10 is the probability of attending a meeting with
a DM. Panel B reports treatment effects on management. Columns 1-2 is the involvement in the management of personnel
(on a scale of 1-4, 1=Not involved at all, 2=Rarely involved, 3=Sometimes involved, 4=There is never a discussion without
me and I make the final decision). Columns 3-4 is involvement in setting targets (same scale). Columns 5-6 is the score on
the 15 MOPS management questions. Except for the meeting outcomes, which were only collected at endline, all regressions
control for the average value of the dependent variable at baseline and at intermediary surveys before 75% of the treatment.
All regressions control for the mode of endline and include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and
clustered at the department level.




                                                                  40
                        Table 7: DMs' Willingness-to-Pay for Additional Meetings


                                                 FM               FM outside firm             DM
                                          ITT       TOT           ITT     TOT         ITT       TOT
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)     (4)         (5)         (6)

                  Treatment               32.7        53.6        19.1     32.3        7.7      12.6
                                         (13.7)    (20.9)         (8.3)   (13.0)      (7.1)    (10.5)

                  Baseline value          No          No           No      No          No          No
                  Strata FEs              Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
                  Control mean           32.23      39.74         26.89   31.42      24.04      24.45
                  1st stage F-stat                 225.32                 273.98               243.48
                  N                       212         212         269      269         220         220
                  R2                      0.16        0.13        0.15     0.13       0.13      0.13
 Notes: Table reports treatment impacts on willingness-to-pay (WTP) for a one hour, one-on-one conversation with different
managers. Columns 1-2 is the WTP for time with the FM. Columns 3-4 is the WTP for time with a (hypothetical) FM at
another MNC. Columns 5-6 is the WTP for time with a Myanmar manager. All regressions control for the mode of endline
and include strata fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and clustered at the department level.




                                                             41
                                        Table 8: Management Simulations


                                          Panel A: DM receives management task in English
                                 "PWs" Time      "PWs" Mistakes     "FM" Time        "FM" Questions

                                ITT       TOT        ITT          TOT      ITT      TOT        ITT       TOT
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)

          Treatment            -0.190     -0.365    0.100      0.193       0.351     0.675     1.032     1.982
                              (0.095)    (0.178)   (0.259)    (0.461)     (0.185)   (0.357)   (0.423)   (0.797)

          Baseline control       No        No         No           No       No       No         No        No
          Firm FEs              Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
          Control mean          1.28      1.28       1.85         1.85     1.89     1.89       1.97      1.97
          1st stage F-stat                47.87                   47.87             47.87                47.87
          N                     153        153       153           153     153       153       153        153
          R2                    0.19      0.19       0.14         0.13     0.32     0.32       0.18      0.19




                                         Panel B: DM receives management task in Burmese
                                 "PWs" Time     "PWs" Mistakes      "FM" Time       "FM" Questions

                                ITT       TOT        ITT          TOT      ITT      TOT        ITT       TOT
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)

          Treatment            -0.014     -0.028    0.054      0.103       -0.014    -0.027    0.262     0.504
                              (0.044)    (0.078)   (0.075)    (0.136)     (0.065)   (0.114)   (0.187)   (0.351)

          Baseline control       No        No         No           No       No       No         No        No
          Firm FEs              Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
          Control mean          0.49      0.49       0.27         0.27     0.75     0.75       0.57      0.57
          1st stage F-stat                66.40                   66.40             66.40                66.40
          N                     153        153       153           153     153       153       153        153
          R2                    0.29      0.29       0.14         0.15     0.26     0.26       0.09      0.09

 Notes: Panel A reports the treatment effects on the outcomes of the management simulation exercise in which instructions
were given in English. Columns 1-2 is the time taken by the DM's "production workers" to complete the task. Columns 3-4 is
the number of mistakes made by the DM's "production team" compared to the instructions. Columns 5-6 is the time in minutes
spent by the DM talking with the "FM". Columns 7-8 is the number of questions asked by the DM to the "FM". Panel B shows
the results of the simulation exercise in which instructions were given in Burmese. The management simulation was collected
at endline on N=153 DMs in 20 firms, and was then halted because of COVID-19 lockdowns. All regressions include strata
fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and clustered at the department level.




                                                             42
                                                          Figure 1: English Proficiency of DMs and FMs
                                                     Panel A: English Test Scores, Language Provider Test
                                                     CEFR
                                    60                                <A1       A1         A2         B1          B2        C1 C2 .03
                                                     scale:




                                    45
              Fraction of DMs (%)




                                                                                                                                    .02




                                                                                                                                          Density
                                    30



                                                                                                                                    .01

                                    15




                                     0                                                                                              0
                                             0                   20             40              60           80               100
                                                              Language Provider's Test Scores, Before Course (%)


                                                              Panel B: English Test Scores, Baseline Survey
                                     .02
                                                                                                                               DM Score
                                                                                                                               FM Score



                                    .015
             Density




                                     .01




                                    .005




                                         0
                                                 0                    20             40              60                80                  100
                                                                            English Test Scores at Baseline (%)

Notes: Panel A reports DMs' scores on the English test administered by the training provider before classes commenced. This
test was administered to treatment DMs who came to the first session of the course; N=123. The grey line reports the density
of scores (right axis), and the histogram reports where DMs would be classified according to the CEFR scale (left axis). Panel
B reports the distribution of DMs' and FMs' English scores from our tailored language tests conducted in the pre-experiment
survey in August 2018 (N=400 for DMs, N=23 for FMs). The test scores are the averages of a multiple choice listening test and
a speaking test which was graded by two external language teachers. Figure A.3 displays the strong positive correlation between
the two tests for the sample of DMs that took both. The CEFR scale comprises the following levels: A1 Can understand and
use only a few everyday expressions/phrases aimed at the satisfaction of needs of a concrete type; A2 Can understand sentences
and frequently used expressions for areas of immediate relevance but not much beyond; B1 Can understand the main points of
clear standard input on familiar matters regularly encountered 43in work, school, leisure, etc; B2 Comfortable in most situations
with a degree of spontaneity that makes regular interaction with native speakers quite possible without strain; C1 Comfortable
in nearly all situations, strong vocabulary, few errors; C2 Fluency at near mother tongue level.
A. Appendix Tables and Figures

                     Table A.1: Summary Statistics of Human Resource Managers


                                                           Mean              Sd                 N

           Age                                             29.3              6.1                50
           Education (years)                               16.2              0.9                48
           Work experience (years)                         7.0               4.9                51
           Experience in FDI (years)                       1.7               2.6                51
           Resumes seen in the last 6 months               522.5             953.5              51
           People recruited in the last 6 months           44.5              67.3               51
           Recruited people with FDI exp.                  10.7              25.8               51
Notes: Table reports summary statistics of the 51 HR managers at domestic firms recruited for the resume rating protocol.
                  Table A.2: Donor Pool of Characteristics and "Interview" Responses


                                       Panel A: Donor Pool of Profile Characteristics

 Criteria                                                        Values

 Gender                                                          {Male, Female}
 Age                                                             {25, 26}
 English level                                                   {Elementary, Advanced}
 Previous company ownership                                      {Myanmar, Japanese}
 Previous company size                                           {25 employees, 125 employees}
 Work experience                                                 {1 year, 3 years}


                                        Panel B: Donor Pool of Interview Responses
 Criteria                                                     Values

                                                                 {Frequently,
                                                                 Infrequently,
 How often did you interact with your foreign boss
                                                                 I was hired to interact frequently with the foreign boss
 (formal/informal meetings, lunches etc.)?
                                                                 but interacted infrequently because he had to leave the
                                                                 country for a family emergency}

 How frequently did you use Microsoft Office Package             {Frequently, Infrequently}
 (Word, Powerpoint, Excel)?

 How often were you involved in setting and                      {Frequently, Infrequently}
 communicating the company's targets?

 Notes: Panel A reports the donor pool of values for each demographic characteristic. Panel B reports the donor pool of values
for each response to the "interview" questions.
                             Table A.3: Baseline Balance for Language Experiment


                                                               Control        Treatment diff         N
                         Male (%)                                -0.00               0.00           298
                                                                (0.04)             (0.05)
                         Education (yrs)                       6.97***               0.04           298
                                                                (0.04)             (0.06)
                         Age (yrs)                            27.59***               0.62           281
                                                                (0.40)             (0.59)
                         Tenure (yrs)                          2.34***               0.03           298
                                                                (0.07)             (0.11)
                         Big 5 (z score)                      -0.74***               0.15           298
                                                                (0.09)             (0.13)
                         Monthly salary (USD)                312.02***              20.22           273
                                                               (28.09)             (42.13)
                         English score (%)                    53.87***               0.45           298
                                                                (1.96)             (2.94)
                         Involvement score (1-4)               2.88***               0.02           298
                                                                (0.06)             (0.10)
                         Management score (/15)                9.34***               0.21           298
                                                                (0.12)             (0.18)
                         Time lost with FM (%)                17.34***               3.15           284
                                                                (2.05)             (3.08)
                         Talk Freq. FM (1-4)                   2.79***             -0.18*           286
                                                                (0.06)             (0.10)
                         Endline attrition (%)                  0.04*              -0.06*           298
                                                                (0.02)             (0.03)
 Notes: Table reports the baseline balance for the language experiment. Each outcome is regressed on treatment and firm
(strata) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the department level. The first column reports the constant and its
standard error. The second column reports the coefficient on treatment status and its standard error. The p-value of joint
significance test for the 11 variables (excluding attrition) to predict treatment status is 0.36. The last row reports attrition at
endline.
                                      Table A.4: Management Simulation


       Step                             Action

       Selecting Objects                "FM" names a characteristic common to 4 (of 8) objects.
                                        Eg. items made of plastic, found on an office table etc.
                                        DM must identify the 4 objects by name to the "PWs".
                                        (6 possible combinations)

       Order                            Each object has a tag indicating price and weight.
                                        Order of placement is determined by the metric {price, weight}
                                        in {increasing, decreasing} order.
                                        (4 possible combinations)

       Placement                        "FM" indicates that objects not selected must be disposed {below the table,
                                        aside the selected object} and the box must be placed on the {ground,
                                        table}. In addition, "FM" specifies a third placement requirement of objects
                                        within the box {vertical, horizontal}
                                        (8 possible combinations)

       Possible mistakes                1.   Incorrect   objects
                                        2.   Incorrect   disposal of rejects
                                        3.   Incorrect   box placement
                                        4.   Incorrect   order of arrangement
                                        5.   Incorrect   placement of shipment items

 Notes: Table reports the details of the management simulation exercise. A management task is a randomly drawn action from
the three steps. The "FM" draws a task and provides the instructions to the DM. To complete the task, the DM supervises two
"PWs". Each DM received two tasks, one delivered in English and another delivered in Burmese. The last panel indicates the
possible mistakes that were recorded. We record the total time to execute the task and the times spent communicating with
the "FM" and the "PWs".
                                                                      Table A.5: English Usage Outside of MNC


                    Read textbooks        Watch news         Take courses        New job abroad       New job MNC         Watch movie             Travel                Study          Social media
                     ITT      TOT        ITT      TOT        ITT        TOT       ITT      TOT        ITT      TOT        ITT      TOT        ITT      TOT        ITT       TOT        ITT      TOT
                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)      (15)      (16)       (17)      (18)

 Treatment          0.056     0.097     0.036     0.061     -0.066     -0.113    0.011     0.020     0.083     0.143     -0.012    -0.020    0.025     0.044     0.022      0.038     0.007     0.013
                    (0.082)   (0.129)   (0.062)   (0.097)   (0.087)    (0.138)   (0.024)   (0.038)   (0.067)   (0.107)   (0.078)   (0.124)   (0.044)   (0.068)   (0.050)   (0.079)    (0.086)   (0.134)

 Baseline control    Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes    Yes       Yes
 Firm FEs            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes    Yes       Yes
 Control mean        0.41      0.41      0.16      0.16      0.27       0.27      0.03      0.03      0.11      0.11      0.59      0.59      0.07      0.07      0.07      0.07       0.40      0.40
 N                   153       153       153       153       153        153       153       153       153       153       153       153       153       153       153           153    153       153
 R2                  0.16      0.16      0.11      0.10      0.18       0.18      0.08      0.08      0.17      0.16      0.16      0.16      0.12      0.13      0.09      0.09       0.12      0.12

Notes: Table treatment effects on the use English outside of the workplace. DMs were asked "what have you used English for in the past six months" and provided with the
nine possible choices described in the top row. DMs could select as many choices as they wanted. This question was dropped from the endline questionnaire after the switch to
phone surveys due to COVID-19 restrictions. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and are clustered at the department level.
                                  Table A.6: Promotion, Wages and Job Search


                                            Promotion                 Log wage             N applications
                                          ITT         TOT          ITT         TOT          ITT         TOT
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)

                Treatment                0.022        0.036       -0.008      -0.013       0.292        0.486
                                        (0.054)      (0.084)     (0.069)      (0.107)     (0.158)      (0.244)

                Baseline value             No          No           No          No           No          No
                Strata FEs                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
                Control mean                .          0.56          .         5.89           .         0.49
                1st stage F-stat                     286.65                   228.64                   289.05
                N                         269          269         235          235         266          266
                R2                        0.20         0.20        0.23        0.23         0.16        0.15
 Notes: Table reports treatment effects on promotion, wage and job applications. Columns 1-2 is an indicator if the DM
received a promotion. Columns 3-4 is log wage. Columns 5-6 is the number of job applications reported by the respondent.
All regressions control for the mode of endline, include strata fixed effects and the baseline value of log wage for columns 3-4.
Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and are clustered at the department level.
                                           Table A.7: Spillovers to Control DMs


                                                                              Panel A: English and Communication

                                    English z-score         Talk Freq FM 1-4         Time FM min.               Time lost %          People score 1-4    WTP FM
                                          (1)                      (2)                    (3)                      (4)                     (5)             (6)

 N Treatment in Department                 -0.121                   -0.032                   -1.261                -0.064                 -0.082           18.510
                                          (0.076)                  (0.104)                  (3.975)               (2.207)                (0.100)          (12.486)

 N Total in Department                     0.062                    -0.005                   2.393                 1.677                  0.043             -7.653
                                          (0.044)                  (0.069)                  (2.355)               (1.212)                (0.062)           (8.757)

 Baseline control                           Yes                      Yes                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
 Firm FEs                                   Yes                      Yes                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
 Control mean                              -0.08                     2.58                     25.18                17.45                  2.28              32.23
 N                                          126                      104                        80                  103                   130                 98
 R2                                        0.58                      0.45                      0.37                 0.33                  0.68               0.21
                                                                                Panel B: Management simulation
                                                    Instructions in English                                                 Instructions in Burmese

                             "PWs" Time     "PWs" Mistakes       "FMs" Time     "FM" Questions        "PWs" Time     "PWs" Mistakes       "FM" Time     "FM" Questions
                                (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)                (7)             (8)

 N Treatment in Department      0.264           -0.048               -0.209          -0.165              -0.091             -0.058           -0.038          0.103
                               (0.145)         (0.187)              (0.073)         (0.255)             (0.065)            (0.127)          (0.069)         (0.244)

 N Total in Department          -0.156          0.095                0.146           -0.007              0.056              0.047            0.055           -0.032
                               (0.098)         (0.134)              (0.047)         (0.260)             (0.040)            (0.076)          (0.046)         (0.151)

 Baseline control                No                  No               No              No                  No                 No               No              No
 Firm FEs                       Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes             Yes
 Control mean                   1.28                1.85             1.89            1.97                0.88               0.63             1.15            1.27
 N                               75                  75               75              75                  75                 75               75              75
 R2                             0.23                0.26             0.60            0.39                0.34               0.28             0.33            0.12

 Notes: Table examines spillovers to control DMs. In each column, we regress the outcome of interest at endline on the
number of treated DMs working in the same department as the control DMs. We control for the total number of DMs in the
department (measured at baseline). Panel A examines English and communication outcomes. Panel B examines outcomes from
the management simulation.
                                                   Figure A.1: Firms by Origin and Sector



                               30   Logistics           Distribution     Garment              Chemicals   Metal        Packaging
                                    Construction        Electronics      Food and Beverage    Machinery   Other


                               25




                               20
             Number of firms




                               15




                               10




                               5




                               0
                                    Japan       Singapore     Thailand    China/HK   EU/USA      Korea    Taiwan   Myanmar/Japan JV



Notes: Figure displays the origin and sectors of the MNCs operating at the SEZ in 2018. One firm is majority Myanmar owned
but is partially owned by a Japanese consortium and the CEO of the firm is an foreign expat, and so we include this firm in
the analysis.
                                                   Figure A.2: Expectations on learning by employees at the MNCs


                                                               Panel A: Benefits of Working at MNCs

                                              60
                 % reported as main benefit




                                              40




                                              20




                                               0
                                                                  Proximity               Good wage              Good working condition
                                                                  New skills              Other                  No benefit



                                                                 Panel B: Skills Expected to Learn

                                              50




                                              40
             % reported as main skill




                                              30




                                              20




                                              10




                                              0
                                                                   Skills in production           New machines        Finance/accounting
                                                                   Management skills              Other               Nothing



Notes: Figure displays the share of DMs who reported the particular benefit as their primary benefit of working at MNCs in
the SEZ (Panel A) and the share of DMs that reported the particular skill as the primary skill they were hoping to acquire
(Panel B). These data come from a pilot survey conducted in June 2017.
                                                       Figure A.3: Comparison with Language provider's scores



                                             100
                                                                                                                 y = 1.65 + 0.96*X
        English Test Score at Baseline (%)




                                              80




                                              60




                                              40




                                              20




                                              0
                                                   0           20             40             60             80                  100
                                                              Language Provider's Test Scores, Before Course (%)

Notes: Figure displays a scatter plot and the line of best fit of the score obtained in the test administered by language training
provider and the score obtained on our tailored English test for the N=123 DMs who took both assesments.
                  Figure A.4: Proficiency of DMs in Native Language of FMs and Vice Versa



                 .25
                                                                                 DM score in FM's Native language
                                                                                 FM score in Burmese


                  .2




                 .15
       Density




                  .1




                 .05




                  0
                       0                  20                     40                      60                      80
                                               Other foreign language score in %

Notes: Figure displays the distribution of DM test scores on the native language of FMs at their company, and the distribution
of FM test scores in Burmese.
                                          Figure A.5: Attendance by Treatment DMs



                                100




                                 80
       Share of Treatment (%)




                                 60




                                 40




                                 20




                                 0
                                      0     20           40               60                 80                100
                                                    Share of training attended (%)

Notes: Figure plots the distribution of attendance of treatment DMs at the 24-session language training, for DMs who showed
up to at least one session. The unit is the number of sessions (each session lasts two hours).
                                     Figure A.6: Non-Contractibility of Communication


                                 Panel A: DMs WTP for a one-hour Meeting with the FM
                            1




                            .8
                  Density




                            .6




                            .4




                            .2

                                 0     Mean FM wage    Max FM wage        50                                      100
                                                                     DM WTP (USD)


Notes: Figure plots the empirical cumulative distribution of the DMs WTP for a one-hour "one-on-one" conversation with their
FM. The vertical bars show the mean and maximum FM hourly wage.


                                          Panel B: Ideal vs Actual communication
                            1
                                                                                                   Ideal amount
                                                                                                   Actual amount



                            .8
                  Density




                            .6




                            .4




                            .2

                                 0                          10                         20                         30
                                                      Hours spent talking with FM in past 7 days


Notes: Figure plots the empirical cumulative distribution function of the quantity of time (in hours) DM spent talking with
their FM in the past seven days, and the quantity of time they would have liked to spend talking with their FM in the past
seven days. This question was asked to 96 DMs at the follow-up survey in 2021, which was halted due to the military coup.
                                                              Figure A.7: Language Training NPVs


                                                                       Panel A: DMs Distribution
                                   .25




                                         .2




                                   .15
                   Fraction




                                         .1




                                   .05




                                         0
                                               -300             -250                -200            -150             -100                 -50
                                                                           NPV of english training for DM (USD)

                                                                                               1
Notes: Figure plots the distribution of NPVs for the language training for each DM i: N P Vi = r w - OCi - C . We set r, the
monthly interest rate, to 0.8%. w =3.6 is the monthly wage increase expected based on the English proficiency gained from the
language training and the returns to English from resume ratings; see text. OCi is opportunity cost of time associated with
taking the 48-hour course, which we derive from the hourly wage of DM i. C is the cost of the language training (USD 300).
The vertical bar is the average across all DMs.


                                                                       Panel B: MNCs Distribution
                                              .25




                                               .2




                                              .15
                              Fraction




                                               .1




                                              .05




                                               0
                                                      -2000   -1500    -1000      -500     0      500      1000   1500      2000   2500         3000
                                                                               NPV of english training for firm (USD)

                                                                                                   1                      0.5
Notes: Figure plots the distribution of NPVs for the language training for each MNC f : N P Vf = r+  p
                                                                                                       (0.15 × wP W,f × SCDM,f -
0.19 × wF M,f × tF M,f ) - C . We set r, the monthly interest rate, to 0.8%. p is the monthly probability of the DM leaving
which we set at 3% because the median tenure of DMs is two years. wP W,f is the average wage of production workers in firm
f . SCDM,f is the firm-specific span of control of an average DM in terms of PWs. wF M,f is the average wage of FMs in firm
f . tF M is the average share of the FM's time spent communicating with DMs. When we do not observe one of the firm-specific
variable in our data, we replace it by the average across all firms of the same country of origin. C is the cost of the language
training (USD 300). The vertical bar is the average across all firms.
