                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

               CREAM SKIMMING BY HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
                     INEQUALITY IN HEALTH CARE ACCESS:
               EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                       Anna Werbeck
                                      Ansgar Wübker
                                     Nicolas R. Ziebarth

                                     Working Paper 28809
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28809

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02139
                                    May 2021

We thank Sebastian Bauhoff, Kevin Devereux, Peter Eibich, Jenke De Keyser, Brigitte Dormont
and Harald Tauchmann for excellent discussions of this work. We also thank Tigran Aydinyan,
Sergej Bechtoldt, Katharina Blankart, Amitabh Chandra, Alberto Holly, Daniel Herrera, Tom
Hoe, Toshiaki Iizuka, Nima Jouchaghani, Hendrik Jürges, Helene Könnecke, Christoph
Kronenberg, Isabelle Maripier, Giuseppe Moscelli, Julien Mousquès, Catia Nicodemo, Cheti
Nicoletti, Simon Reif, Hendrik Schmitz, Jonas Schreyögg, Hannes Schwandt, Erin Strumpf,
David Slusky, Christian Waibel, Chris Whaley, Daniel Wiesen, Lilia Zhurakovska, Peter Zweifel
and participants at the 2020 Annual Meeting of the Swiss Society of Health Economists (sggö),
the 2019 Annual Meeting of the German Society of Health Economics(dggö), the 2019 Health
Economics Workshop in Stralsund, 2019 American-European Health Economics Study Group,
the 2019 ASHEcon meetings, the 2019 Annual Congress of the European Economic Association,
the 2019 IRDES-DAUPHINE Workshop on Applied Health Economics and Policy Evaluation,
the 2019 RGS conference, the 2018 Workshop of the dggö committee
,,Gesundheitsökonometrie" ("health econometrics") for helpful suggestions and comments.
Special thanks go to Alexander Hearing. We also thank Paul Pangburn for excellent research
assistance. We thank WIdO and an anonymous private insurer for supplemental insurance data.
The research reported in this paper is not the result of a for-pay consulting relationship. Our
employers do not have a financial interest in the topic of the paper which might constitute a
conflict of interest. The field experiment was carried out at RWI Essen, a German publicly
funded research institute, which does not have IRB approvals. All ethics guidelines by the
German Science Foundation were followed; the guidelines for good scientific practice are here
http://www.dfg.de/en/research_funding/principles_dfg_funding/good_scientific_practice/.The
standardized protocols minimized the time to inquire about appointments. No actual appointment
was made. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Anna Werbeck, Ansgar Wübker, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cream Skimming by Health Care Providers and Inequality in Health Care Access: Evidence
from a Randomized Field Experiment
Anna Werbeck, Ansgar Wübker, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 28809
May 2021
JEL No. I11,I14,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

Using a randomized field experiment, we show that health care specialists cream-skim patients by
their expected profitability. In the German two-tier system, outpatient reimbursement rates for
both public and private insurance are centrally determined but are significantly higher for the
privately insured. In our field experiment, following a standardized protocol, the same
hypothetical patient called 991 private practices in 36 German counties to schedule appointments
for allergy tests, hearing tests and gastroscopies. Practices were 4% more likely to offer an
appointment to the privately insured. Conditional on being offered an appointment, wait times for
the publicly insured were twice as long than for the privately insured. We also find smaller access
differences when reimbursement rate differences are smaller. Our findings show that structural
differences in reimbursement rates lead to structural differences in health care access.


Anna Werbeck                                     Nicolas R. Ziebarth
RWI Essen                                        Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Hohenzollernstraße 1-3                           Cornell University
Essen 45128                                      2218 MVR
anna.werbeck@rwi-essen.de                        Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                 and NBER
Ansgar Wübker                                    nrz2@cornell.edu
RWI Essen
ansgar.wuebker@rwi-essen.de
1.      Introduction

        Access  barriers  to  health  care  are  a  major  performance  indicator  in  comparative  health  care

system  analysis  (Siciliani  and  Hurst  2005;  Sicilinani  and  Verzulli  2009;  Jones  et  al.  2011,  Viberg  et  al. 

2013). The nonpartisan Commonwealth Fund uses wait times as the main measure of health care access 

in  their  "Timeliness  to  Care"  category,  where  the  United  States  ranks  9th  among  11  countries  in  the 

2017 survey (Commonwealth Fund 2017). At the same time, wait times have long been cited by critics 

as  proof  of  mediocre  outcomes  of  singlepayer  systems  (cf.  Mackillop  et  al.  1995).  Indeed,  wait  times 

for specialists are significantly longer in Canada as compared to the largely private system in the United 

States.  In  Canada,  30%  of  patients  have  to  wait  more  than  2  months  for  a  specialist  appointment  as 

compared to just 6% in the United States (Commonwealth Fund 2017). 

        Another  major  performance  indicator  to  rate  health  care  systems  is  equity  in  access  to  health 

care (e.g. van Doorslaer et al. 2000)--a dimension on which the United States has consistently ranked 

last among the 11 OECD countries benchmarked by the Commonwealth Fund (2014, 2017). In the U.S., 

thousands of private managed care insurers individually negotiate reimbursement rates with networks 

of providers. Furthermore, the public Medicaid system for the poor pays significantly lower rates than 

private  insurers  or  the  singlepayer  Medicare  system  for  the  elderly  (CMS  2018a).  Critics  of  this 

fragmented privatepublic U.S. system have pointed out large structural inequalities, even among those 

who  have  insurance  (Sommers  et  al.  2017).  One  consequence  of  a  system  with  major  differences  in 

reimbursement  rates  could  be  that  providers  creamskim  and  discriminate  against  those  with 

structurally lower reimbursement rates which tend to be the poor, the sick as well as minority groups 

(Reinhardt 2011). However, although plenty of anecdotal and descriptive evidence exists, it is difficult 

to show in a causal framework that health care providers cherrypick the privately insured because they 

are more profitable.  

                                                           1 
        This paper uses a randomized field experiment in a wellsuited institutional privatepublic payer 

setting to show that health care specialists creamskim the more profitable privately insured patients. 

Germany has a multipayer twotier system where the majority of the population is mandatorily insured 

under  the  public  system  in  one  of  the  110  nonprofit  public  "sickness  funds"  (Schmitz  and  Ziebarth 

2017).  In  the  public  system,  provider  reimbursement  rates  are  centrally  negotiated  and  do  not  vary 

across sickness funds. Moreover, costsharing is standardized and invariant across sickness funds, while 

provider  networks  are  nonexistent  and  enrollees  can  freely  choose  their  provider  (Bauhoff  2012, 

Bünnings  et  al.  2018).  The  situation  is  similar  for  the  9  million  privately  insured  residents: 

reimbursement  rates  are  uniform  across  the  44  private  insurers  and  provider  networks  do  not  exist; 

insurers  mostly  process  claims  (Atal  et  al.  2019).  However,  in  the  outpatient  sector,  reimbursement 

rates  for  the  privately  insured  are  on  average  more  than  twice  as  high  than  for  publicly  insured 

(Walendzik et al. 2008). This institutional setup is wellsuited for our study. No other country has a two

tier publicprivate health care system without provider networks and with reimbursement rates that (i) 

structurally  vary  between  the  two  systems  (ii)  but  are  otherwise  identical  across  plans  within  each 

system.  

        In our field experiment, we selected a total of 36 representative counties (both urban and rural) 

and called a total of 991 outpatient specialists to ask for appointments for elective medical treatments. 

One single test person called each practice twice, once as a fictitious privately insured new patient and 

once as a fictitious publicly insured new patient, randomizing the order of the insurance status between 

the  two  calls.  In  other  words,  the  same  test  person  called  each  private  outpatient  practice  twice 

following  the  exact  same  protocol,  thereby  ensuring  balanced  covariates  by  construction.  One  main 

advantage  of  calling  each  practice  twice  is  that  it  allows  the  researcher  to  exploit  withinpractice 

variation  when  analyzing  wait  times,  conditional  on  appointments  being  made.  In  other  words,  even 


                                                       2 
conditional on appointments actually being offered, the randomized insurance status is exogenous. The 

research design allows us to carry out straightforward statistical tests to assess whether extensive and 

intensive access barriers to health care differ significantly by insurance status.  

             Our  findings  show  that  access  to  the  health  care  system  differs  significantly  between  the 

privately  and  publicly  insured,  both  on  the  extensive  and  the  intensive  margin.  The  likelihood  that 

practices offer an appointment is a highly significant 4% larger for privately insured patients. Moreover, 

conditional on being offered an appointment, the wait times for publicly insured patients are more than 

twice  as  long,  and  on  average  13  weekdays  longer.  We  also  find  that  access  discrimination  is  not  as 

pronounced when the reimbursement rate differential is smaller.  

             This paper makes important contributions to the literature. Although the literature on physician 

behavior and treatment styles is rich and has a long tradition in economics (e.g., Clemens and Gottlieb 

2014,  also  see  Section  2),  the  causal  effects  literature  on  how  providers  discriminate  against  less 

profitable  patients  is  less  diverse.  We  contribute  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  role  of  varying 

reimbursement  rates  in  determining  equitable  access  to  the  health  care  system  for  disadvantaged 

population  groups.  For  example,  for  the  Unites  States,  Cooper  et  al.  (2018)  document  that 

reimbursement rates just among the privately insured could vary by a factor of 10 within cities and by 

more than 20 across the United States of America.  


             Natural  experiment  studies  closely  related  to  this  research  have  investigated  whether  the 

Medicaid Fee bump1 of 2013 and 2014 has increased health care access for lowincome populations in 

the  U.S.  Although  studies  outside  economics  solely  investigate  statistical  associations  (Polsky  et  al. 

2015;  Saloner  et  al.  2015;  Candon  et  al.  2018),  the  evidence  by  two  economic  causal  effect  studies 


                                                       
1
 The Medicaid fee bump is a provision of the Affordable Care Act that mandates states to increase Medicaid payments  to 
match Medicare rates for primary care visits for 2013 and 2014. 

                                                           3 
suggest that the Medicaid Fee bump likely did increase access among the poor (Alexander and Schnell 

2017; Maclean et al. 2018).  


        Our  study  is  one  of  the  first  realworld  studies  that  leverages  a  large  randomized  field 

experiment across an entire country--the fourth largest economy in the word--to test if the insurance 

status  causally  affects  health  care  access  because  of  a  higher  expected  profitability  of  the  privately 

insured.  For  that  purpose,  we  focus  on  one  of  the  few  countries  worldwide  with  coexisting  private

public  insurance,  a  system  without  confounding  factors  such  as  managed  care  or  restricted  provider 

access. Moreover, we know the exact reimbursement rates for the treatments requested, and we rely 

on actual claims data by ICD10 diagnoses from one of the largest public and one of the largest private 

insurers.  


        In our experiment, one single test person called almost one thousand providers twice where we 

randomized the order of the insurance status of the caller. Unlike the few existing studies outside the 

field  of  economics,  to  minimize  selection  concerns,  our  caller  routinely  informs  providers  about  the 

insurance  status  and  inquires  wait  times  without  further  framing.  Moreover,  we  focus  on  nonurgent 

routine  specialist  visits,  which  have  external  validity  for  everyday  interactions  between  patients  and 

providers  in  a  multipayer  system  with  a  publicprivate  mix  of  insurers.  We  believe  that  our  findings 

have external validity for similar systems, such as the U.S. system where healthier, wealthier and racially 

less  diverse  populations  are  typically  covered  by  better  paying  private  insurance,  whereas  the  public 

Medicaid system pays doctors much lower rates and covers sicker and poorer populations.  


        Our findings yield important insights into the driving forces of inequity in health care access (cf. 

Chen  et  al.  2019).  They  suggest  that  uniform  reimbursement  rates  (or  reimbursements  rates  that  are 

higher  for  disadvantaged  population  groups)  could  help  mitigate  inequality  in  health  care  access  and 


                                                         4 
align economic incentives with medical needs and priorities. At the same time, we do not dispute that 

differences  in  reimbursement  rates  can  be  the  outcome  of  an  efficient  system  if  patients  have  the 

choice between differently priced plans and make informed decisions (cf. Handel and Kolstad 2015).2 


    2.       Previous literature  

             This paper relates to various literature strands in economics. However, while many descriptive 

papers  on  socioeconomic  differences  in  health  care  access  exist,  the  causal  effects  literature  on 

discrimination in the health care sector is much thinner.  


             The  economics  literature  has  a  long  tradition  of  investigating  theoretically  and  empirically  the 

role of physicians as (imperfect) agents of their patients, see McGuire (2000) for an excellent overview. 

In addition, economists have investigated how physician behavior and productivity changes in response 

to  the  reimbursement  method,  in  outpatient  as  well  as  in  inpatient  settings  (Ellis  and  McGuire  1986; 

Nicholson  et  al.  2008).  Baker  and  Royalty  (2000)  show  in  the  U.S.  context  that  expanded  Medicaid 

eligibility  increased  access  to  physician  services.  Similarly,  Decker  (2009)  finds  that  cuts  in  Medicaid 

physician  fees  reduced  the  number  of  visits  for  Medicaid  patients  compared  to  privately  insured 

patients.  For  Germany,  Schmitz  (2013)  shows  that  newly  introduced  practicelevel  budgets  for  the 

publicly insured reduced the likelihood of followup visits. Reif et al. (2013) use administrative data on 

newborns  and  several  discontinuities  in  birth  weight  thresholds  that  trigger  higher  reimbursement 

rates  to  test  for  whether  treatments  quantity  and  quality  differs.  While  they  find  evidence  for  weight 

manipulation,  they  conclude  that  there  is  not  much  evidence  for  causal  revenuerelated  changes  in 

treatment quantity and quality at these margins in Germany. 


                                                       
2
   However,  the  large  majority  of  Germans  cannot  choose  between  the  private  and  public  system;  the  institutional  rules 
separate the public from the private insurance market (see Section 3). 

                                                                  5 
         For ethical reasons, realworld field experiments are almost impossible to implement to study 

actual  treatment  behavior,  which  is  why  researchers  have  conducted  audit  studies  (Bauhoff  2012)  or 

investigated hypothetical physician behavior in the lab; see BrosigKoch et al. (2017) and Kesternich et 

al. (2015) for lab experiments in Germany. For example, Kesternich et al. (2015) find among 266 medical 

students that professional norms shift more weight to patients and away from own profit and efficiency 

concerns.  In  one  of  the  few  realworld  causal  effects  studies  leveraging  relative  price  changes  in  the 

Medicare  outpatient  market,  Clemens  and  Gottlieb  (2014)  demonstrate  that  higher  relative 

reimbursement rates increase treatment volume, especially for elective procedures.  


        Absent  price  variation  in  singlepayer  markets,  implicit  rationing  of  medical  care  through  wait 

times is another popular topic  of  inquiry  for  economists  (e.g.  Lindsay  and  Feigenbaum  1984). Cullis et 

al.  (2000)  provide  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the  topic,  and  Siciliani  (2006),  Gravelle  and  Siciliani 

(2008), and Felder (2008) theoretical analyses. The link between wait times and socioeconomic status 

has  also  drawn  researchers'  interest.  For  example,  Monstad  et  al.  (2014)  find  a  negative  statistical 

correlation between income and wait times as well as education and wait times in Norway. Laudicella 

et al. (2012) show that the same correlations exist in England and that they hold up over the entire wait 

time distribution.  


        The  impact  of  insurance  status  on  wait  times  is  a  highly  policy  relevant  topic  in  countries  with 

coexisting insurance systems that pay providers differently, such as the United States, Switzerland and 

Germany.  Hence,  several  papers  have  studied  the  link  between  insurance  status  and  wait  times  of 

patients  (Roll  et  al.  2012;  Sundmacher  and  Kopetsch  2013;  Ramos  et  al.  2018).  All  of  them  find  that 

patients  whose  insurer  pays  lower  rates  have  to  wait  longer  for  an  appointment.  However,  because 

enrollment in "lower rate" insurers such as U.S. Medicaid is correlated with specific sociodemographics 

as well as Managed Care elements such as gatekeeping or capitation, it remains challenging to identify 

                                                           6 
causal effects of insurance  status on  discrimination  through providers. Similar  arguments hold  for  the 

case  of  Germany.  For  example,  Jürges  (2009)  uses  rich  SOEP  survey  data  and  find  in  multivariate 

regression  models--conditioning  on  selfreported  health--that  the  privately  insured  are  less  likely  to 

contact a physician but more likely to have a followup treatment after the first contact. Hullegie, Klein 

and  Salm  (2012)  use  the  same  data  and  exploit  the  discontinuity  to  opt  out  of  the  public  system  to 

conclude that the private insurance reduces doctor visits. 


        The paper that is closest to ours is Lüngen at al. (2008). In April and May of 2006, Lüngen et al. 

(2008)  called  189  specialist  practices  in  one  region  in  Germany  (in  the  neighboring  cities  of  Cologne, 

Bonn  and  Leverkusen).  After  excluding  a  third  of  all  practices,  they  find  that  practices  offered 

appointments to the privately insured three times faster than the publicly insured. One objective of this 

study  is  to  test  whether  these  findings  hold  up  when  using  a  much  larger  representative  sample  size, 

an improved methodology, and recent data. The main differences to our study are:  


        First,  Lüngen  at  al.  (2008)  only  called  practices  once  and  thus  cannot  exploit  withinpractice 

variation  using  practice  fixed  effects;  moreover,  we  show  that  our  randomization  was  successful  and 

the  covariates  balanced.  Second,  in  their  models,  Lüngen  at  al.  (2008)  only  control  for  the  specialty, 

whereas we control for county and practice fixed effects as well as the time of the day, the day of the 

week  and  the  week  of  the  year. Third,  Lüngen at al.  (2008)  study wait  times using a GLM model while 

we study both, the important extensive as well as the intensive margin. Fourth, whereas Lüngen et al. 

(2008)  conduct  their  experiment  about  15  years  ago,  our  experiment  happened  between  2017  and 

2018.  It  thus  considers  the  current  institutional  background  of  the  German  health  care  system.  Fifth, 

we  called  nearly  1000  practices  over  the  course  of  an  entire  year  in  36  countries,  which  we  chose  to 

ensure  representativeness.  Sixth,  the  sample  size  allows  us  to  study  differences  by  population  and 

physician  density,  East  and  West  Germany,  the  share  of  PHI  insured  in  the  market  and  the  average 

                                                          7 
income in the county. Finally, we use secondary claims data as well as calculated reimbursement rates 

from the SHI and PHI feeforservice schedules to trace wait time differences back to actual differences 

in reimbursement rates. This is important to exclude that other structural differences between the two 

groups are driving the effect. 3 


             In addition to Lüngen at al. (2008), four studies called providers at least twice with the insurance 

status randomized. However, two of them focus on the United States (Asplin et al. 2005, Skaggs et al. 

2001),  where  exact  reimbursement  rates  are  largely  unknown  and  the  utilization  management  of 

managed care organizations and provider networks likely act as confounders. Kuchinke et al. (2009) use 

the German setting but called 500 acute care hospitals in Germany, where reimbursement rates do not 

vary between public and private insurance.5 Fourth, Heinrich et al. (2018) called 163 specialists in one 

region  and  evaluated  a  2015  reform  that  intended  to  reduce  wait  times  for  the  publicly  insured  in 

Germany.  


             In  our  setting,  a  test  person  deliberatly  called  each  practice  twice  following  a  standardized 

protocol, where the (order of the) insurance status of the caller was randomized. Moreover, the same 

person called all private specialist practices and indicated the insurance status when trying to schedule 

a nonurgent medical examination. In Germany, telephone calls are the most common and most natural 

approach  to  schedule  appointments.  We  use  a  contemporaneous  setting  over  the  course  of  one  year 

                                                       
3
   Two  field  experiments  estimate  discrimination  based  on  socioeconomic  status  in  Canada  (Olah  et  al.  2013)  and  Austria 
(Angerer et al. 2019). The former study called 375 family practices in Toronto. They find that mentioning being an employee 
of a major bank vs. a welfare recipient increases the likelihood of getting an appointment. The latter study requested 1,310 
appointments  by  email.  They  find  that  closing  with  "Dr."  increases  the  likelihood  of  an  appointment.  In  another  study 
outside of economics, Resneck et al. (2006) called 631 dermatologists once and randomized insurance status. However, the 
practices  were  framed  and  knew  that  they  would  participate  in  a  study  and  the  main  outcome  was  whether  they  would 
accept Medicaid, Medicare and privately insured, in general. Finally, descriptive survey data from the National Ambulatory 
Medical  Care  Survey  show  that  officebased  physicians  in  the  United  States  are  more  likely  to  accept  new  patients  from 
private insurance compared to new patients from Medicare or Medicaid (cf. Decker 2012 or Holgash and Heberlein 2019).   
5
   In  a  spinoff  paper,  Schwierz  et  al.  (2011)  investigate  effect  heterogeneity  and  differentiate  the  findings  by  the  financial 
soundness of the hospital.  

                                                                      8 
between 2017 and 2018. We called almost one thousand practices located in a representative set of 36 

German  counties--more  than  any  other  study,  which  allows  us  to  carry  out  a  detailed  subgroup 

analysis. We focus on elective care among outpatient specialists as nonurgent settings are those where 

most  patientprovider  contacts  occur.  These  treatments  reflect  the  regular  daytoday  access  barriers 

to health care much better than studying medical emergencies. In addition, we know and calculate the 

centrally  negotiated  differences  in  reimbursement  rates  for  the  treatments  requested  and  also 

investigate  actual  claims  data  for  one  of  the  biggest  public  and  one  of  the  biggest  private  insurers  in 

Germany.  That  circumvents  an  inherent  problem  of  U.S.  studies  where  single  providers  and  insurers 

negotiate  thousands  of  largely  unobserved  reimbursement  rates  along  with  complex  differences  in 

insurerprovider networks under managed care, which also include costsharing elements and various 

utilization management tools.  


3.      The German Health Care System 

        Germany  has  a  twotier  health  insurance  system  with  a  coexisting  multipayer  public  and  an 

individual private market. Ninety percent of the population are covered by the public system and one 

of  the  110  nonprofit  sickness  funds  (GKV  Spitzenverband  2018).  They  pay  incomedependent 

contribution  rates  for  a  standardized  benefit  package  with  very  little  costsharing.  For  historical 

reasons, selected population subgroups have the right to leave the public system permanently and fully 

insure  their  health  risks  on  an  individual  longterm  health  insurance  market  with  relatively  little 

regulation.  Applicants  can  choose  between  thousands  of  plans  but  are  also  experiencerated  when 

signing  their  first  individual  private  contract  (in  subsequent  years,  premiums  are  community  rated). 

Schmitz and Ziebarth (2017), Pilny et al. (2017), and Bünnings et al. (2018) provide more details on the 

overall  structure of  the  German  health  insurance  market.  Atal  et al.  (2019)  provide  additional  specific 


                                                           9 
details  of  the  private  market.  Note  that  64  million  Germans,  or  77%  of  the  total  German  population, 

are  mandatorily  insured  with  the  public  scheme  (BMG  2019).  Those  people  do  not  have  the  choice 

between public or private insurance.7 


             Table  A1  in  the  Appendix  uses  representative  data  from  the  German  SocioEconomic  Panel 

Study  to  compare  mean  characteristics  of  the  publicly  and  privately  insured  in  Germany.  The  first 

column  shows  sociodemographic  averages  for  the  publicly  insured  and  the  second  column  shows 

sociodemographic  averages  for  the  privately  insured.  The  last  three  columns  further  differentiate  by 

the four population subgroups that can be privately insured (civil servants, high income, selfemployed, 

nonemployed).  As  seen,  the  privately  insured--not  just  on  average  but  also  in  all  four  subgroups 

separately--have  significantly  higher gross  wages (4,708 vs.  2,403) and significantly  higher posttax 

posttransfer  household  incomes  per  person  (40,031  vs.  23,228).  They  are  on  average  more  than  3 

years  older,  are  10  percentage  points  less  likely  to  be  smokers,  have  lower  BMIs  and  report  fewer 

physical  and  mental  health  limitations.  They  are  also  less  likely  to  be  hospitalized  and  have  fewer 

hospital  days  per  year.  Interestingly,  their  number  of  outpatient  visits  is  identical  to  those  that  are 

publicly insured.  


Reimbursement Rates in Statutory Health Insurance (SHI) 


             In  the  outpatient  SHI  sector,  primary  care  physicians  and  specialists  are  members  of  and  sign 

contracts  with  the  statelevel  "Regional  Association  of  Statutory  Health  Insurance  Physicians",  ASHIP 

                                                       
7
   Since  2007,  SHI  policyholders  have  the  option  to  enroll  is  so  called  "optional  tariffs"  (Wahltarife).  One  of  those  is  called 
Kostenerstattungstarif  and  allows  outpatient  providers  to  charge  the  same  higher  rates  as  for  PHI  policyholders,  the 
difference  of  which  has  to  be  paid  out  of  pocket  by  enrollees  and  is  only  partially  reimbursed  by  insurers.  Due  to  this 
unappealing  feature  and  also  because  these  possibilities  are  not  widely  known  in  the  general  population,  the  demand  for 
the Kostenerstattungstarif is very low and only an estimated 0.5% of all SHI enrollees chose it in 2010 according to the SOEP 
(2016). 


                                                                       10 
(Kassenärztliche  Vereinigungen),  see  KBV  (2018a).  There  are  17  ASHIPs,  who  are  responsible  for  the 

provision of health care services in their region. These ASHIPs all have contracts with the 110 sickness 

funds who pay out a "total reimbursement sum'' (Gesamtvergütung) to each of these 17 ASHIPs who, 

in turn, reimburse their member physicians on a quarterly basis.  


             In  SHI,  the  socalled  "Unified  Assessment  Scale''  (Einheitlicher  Bewertungsmastab,  EBM)  lists 

services  that  the  SHI  benefit  package  covers.  The  existence  of  the  EBM  is  stipulated  by  the  German 

Social  Insurance  Law  (§  87f.  SGB  V,  KBV  2018b).  The  EBM  assigns  a  point  value  for  each  health  care 

service, similar to the Relative Value Units (RVU) to outpatient providers in Medicare in the U.S. (CMS 

2018a). The relative point values intend to represent the relevant use of resources for each service to 

provide an adequate compensation.8 


             Similar to Medicare, by defining values per point annually, the point values are then converted 

into  monetary  reimbursement  amounts.  For  example,  in  2018,  the  value  per  point  was  10.654  euro 

cents (BMG 2018).9 For a colonoscopy for preventive reasons, including visits to prepare and inform the 

patient,  the  EBM  lists  1945  points  under  "fee  position"  (Gebührenordnungsposition)  01741  (KBV 

2018b).  Consequently,  the  total  basic  compensation  for  such  a  colonoscopy  would  be  207.23.10  In 

comparison,  for  the  statelevel  Medicaid  insurance  for  lowincome  populations  in  the  United  States, 




                                                       
8
   In  SHI,  when  physicians  provide  more  services  than  allocated  by  the  "standardized  service  volume'' 
("Regelleistungsvolumen"),  which  is  defined  by  the  sum  of  last  quarter's  services  and  the  average  in  the  specialist  group, 
the point value can decrease (§87b SGB V). However, since 2012, these budget caps, set by the sickness funds in cooperation 
with the ASHIPs are optional, see Simon (2017). For example, North Rhine still imposes budget caps (KVNO 2018). 
9
  Geographic adjustment factors take differences in regional living costs into account. 
10
   Interestingly,  the  reimbursement  rates  for  colonoscopy  in  the  U.S.  under  Medicare  are  similar.  Under  CPT  code  45380 
"Colonoscopy and biopsy", the Medicare feel schedule lists a reimbursement of $212.70 (CMS 2018b). 

                                                                   11 
Halpern  et  al.  (2014)  report  reimbursement  rates  between  $83.94  in  New  York  and  $598.20  in  Alaska 

for a colonoscopy. 


Reimbursement Rates in Private Health Insurance (PHI) 


             In PHI, the physician has a private contract with the patient. Patients have to pay providers first 

(after  receiving  an  invoice),  and  then  submit  their  claim  to  the  insurer  to  get  reimbursed.  In  PHI,  the 

"Fee  Schedule  for  Physicians"  (Gebührenordnung  für  Ärzte,  GOÄ)  lists  all  reimbursable  services  along 

with their baseline prices. As with SHI, each medical service has a specific number and point value; the 

latter  expresses  the  relative  resource  utilization  for  the  treatment.  Point  values  are  multiplied  with  a 

fixed value of 5.82873 euro cents to obtain the baseline reimbursement rate.  


             Depending on the complexity of the treatment and the time spent on its provision, the physician 

has  the  freedom  to  multiply  the  baseline  rate  with  "adjustment  factors"  between  1.15  for  laboratory 

services and up to 3.5 for personal services (§5 IIIV GOÄ).11 Also, the physician can perform and charge 

treatments  not  listed  in  the  GOÄ,  using  prices  of  similar  treatments  as  a  reference  (Simon  2017). 

Overall,  the  GOÄ  is  a  classic  feeforservice  schedule  without  any  budget  caps  or  cost  containment 

elements. For example, a standard colonoscopy is listed as number 687 with 1500 points and a baseline 

value of 87.43 (GOÄ 2018). 


Comparison of the SHI and PHI Reimbursement  


             A direct comparison of the SHI and the PHI reimbursement scheme is not straightforward as the 

treatments  and  services  in  each  schedule  usually  do  not  exactly  correspond.  Walendzik  et  al.  (2008) 


                                                       
11
   If the adjustment factor is larger than 2.3, the calculation must include a justification for the multiplier chosen regarding 
the degree of difficulty and time required for the treatment. 

                                                              12 
analyze  and  compare  differences  in  the  reimbursement  amounts  for  the  same  treatments  under  SHI 

and PHI using data from the largest German sickness fund. They find that providers charge 2.28 times 

higher reimbursement rates for privately insured patients.  


             One strength of our institutional setting is that price schedules are centrally set for both the SHI 

and  PHI,  and  not  individually  negotiated  between  insurers  and  providers.  In  addition  to  being  able  to 

look  up  the  exact  list  prices  for  the  treatments  of  our  experiment,  we  obtained  access  to  two  claims 

databases,  one  by  the  largest  public  and  one  by  the largest  private insurer.  This allows  us to  compare 

the average claim submitted to the insurer by ICDcode. Table 1 shows a comparison of what providers 

typically charge for the medical examinations inquired in our experiment (KBV 2017, 2018b, GOÄ 2018).  


             The first two columns of Table 1 show the points and euro values for publicly insured patients. 

Column  (3)  lists  actual  claims  by  ICD10  code  submitted  to  one  of  the  biggest  public  insurers  with  a 

market  share  of  roughly  35  percent  (Allgemeine  Ortskrankenkassen).  It  indicates  the  total  claim 

amounts  when  the  diagnosis  contained  ICD10  code  T78  ("allergies")  or  ICD10  codes  K29  ("Gastritis 

and  duodenitis"),  K30  ("Functional  dyspepsia")  or  K31  "(Other  diseases  of  stomach  and  duodenum, 

WIdO (2020).  


                                                          [Insert Table 1 about here] 


             Columns  (4)  and  (5)  yield  the  points  and  euro  values  for  the  privately  insured  and  column  (6) 

lists  actual  claim  amounts  by  the  same  ICD10  codes  as  above,  but  submitted  to  one  of  the  largest 

private insurers (Karlsson et al. 2016). 12 As seen, list prices for allergy tests are more than three times 



                                                       
12
  Note that managed care basically does not exist in Germany; private insurance essentially represents a purely financial 
contract (cf. Atal et al.2020). 


                                                                      13 
higher  for  privately  insured  (49  vs.  184);  actual  submitted  claims  that  contain  ICD10  codes  T78 

("allergies")  are  about  twice  as  high  (110  vs.  201).  The  absolute  and  relative  price  differences  for 

hearing tests are much smaller but rates for the privately insured are still higher (16 vs. 23). For upper 

gastrointestinal  endoscopies,  like  for  allergy  treatments,  list  prices  for  the  privately  insured  are  more 

than  two  times  higher  (89  vs.  204)  and  submitted  claims  for  specific  diagnoses  K2931  are  also 

significantly higher (172 vs. 245). 


        Finally, the Federal Statistical Office provides detailed statistics about the net revenue (revenue 

after costs) of outpatient practices by specialty and type of practice. Accordingly, the net revenue per 

specialist owning a practice was 183K for earnosethroat (ENT) doctors, 206K for internal medicine 

and 225K for dermatologists (Destatis 2018c).  


4.     The Experiment 

Selection of Counties  


        Before  sampling  outpatient  providers,  we  first  selected  a  set  of  counties  that  are  jointly 

approximately  representative  for  Germany.  We  considered  the  following  three  indicators:  household 

income  per  capita,  area  in  square  kilometers,  and  the  population  (BBSR  2018;  Destatis  2018a,  b). 

Appendix B describes in detail how we selected the counties.  


                                          [Insert Figure 1 about here] 


        Figure 1 shows Germany with its 401 counties, where the dark grayshaded counties are part of 

the field experiment. As seen, the geographic distribution of all 36 counties is relatively even across all 

16  German  states  as  well  as  between  East  and  West  Germany.  Comparing  the  monthly  household 

income per capita of the 36 counties to the monthly household income for the whole of Germany, we 

                                                         14 
only  find  minor  differences  (1,723  vs.  1,753).  Also,  the  physician  density  per  100,000  population  is 

almost  identical  when  comparing  the  36  counties  to  Germany  as  a  whole  (174  vs.  168  physicians  per 

100,000 population, see Versorgungsatlas 2018).  


Sampling of Outpatient Specialists and Treatments 


      Next, for these 36 counties, we randomly sampled outpatient specialists using Google Maps along 

with  the  websites  of  the  three  major  German  telephone  books  to  identify  currently  operating 

outpatient  specialists  in  each  of  the  36  counties;  we  used  "The  Telephone  Book",  "Yellow  Pages"  and 

"The Local" (Das Telefonbuch 2018).  


      In a pretest, we called specialists anonymously and scheduled appointments for six different non

urgent medical examinations in the cities of Berlin, Cologne, Bonn, Leverkusen, Hamburg and Munich. 

The  examinations  were  an  allergy  test,  a  hearing  test,  an  eye  examination,  a  gastroscopy,  a  magnet

resonancetherapy of the right knee, and a pulmonary function test.  


      After this pretest, in the remaining 30 counties, using the exact same protocol than in the pretest, 

we  called gastroenterologists,  otorhinolaryngologists,  and  allergists  to  schedule  appointments  for  the 

following three examinations: (a) an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, (b) an audiometry (hearing test), 

and  (c)  an  allergy  test.  We  chose  these  three  (out  of  six)  examinations  because  they  are  the  most 

popular, nonurgent routine examinations and are relatively easy to schedule. 13 




                                                       
13
    Making  appointments  and  eliciting  waiting  times  for  the  other  three  examinations  also  proved  less  feasible  in  the  pre
test.  For  example,  we  received  more  reasons  for  practice  exclusions  and  queries  about  the  experiment.  Nonetheless,  in 
principle,  the  other  three  examinations  would  also  have  been  suitable  for  the  study.  Due  to  limited  resources  for  larger 
samples,  we  could  not  generate  the  sample  sizes  necessary  for  all  six  examinations;  hence,  we  prioritized  and  focused  on 
the  three  specialties.  Note,  in  our  baseline  sample,  we  also  include  pretest  data.  In  a  robustness  check,  we  test  whether 
the results are robust to the exclusion of pretest data (see Section 7). 


                                                                    15 
Study Design 


             In  total,  we  called  991  private  practices  to  schedule  appointments.  The  same  test  person  (the 

"caller") made the calls over the course of one calendar year, between April 6, 2017 and May 3, 2018. 

Importantly, the test person called each practice twice and clearly indicated the insurance status of the 

fictional patient. 14 We randomized whether the caller would pretend to be privately or publicly insured. 

Moreover, we made the two calls in time intervals of at least two weeks to not raise any suspicion about 

being part of an audit study. Specifically, we randomized the (order of the) insurance status of the caller, 

conditional on (i) day of week, (ii) time of day and (iii) week of the year. However, we did not randomize 

(i) to (iii) which is why we control for these variables in our regression models, and why balance tables 

would only show variation in (i) to (iii) but in none of the other variables.15  


             During each call, we followed a predetermined standardized protocol on how to start and end 

the call and what answers to give in response to the most frequently asked questions (see Appendix C). 

We made all calls between Monday and Friday during the regular office hours of each practice.16 During 

the call, the caller mentioned that she had a referral by her Primary Care Physician (PCP). When asked 


                                                       
14
    When  asked  about  the  name  of  the  insurer,  we  provided  a  real  name.  Because  reimbursement  rates  are  centrally 
determined  for  publicly  and  privately  insured  (Section  3)  and  not  individually  negotiated  between  insurers  and  providers, 
the actual insurer is not crucial in the German setting. Note that we did not disclose to the practice manager or receptionist 
who  took  the  call that  they were part  of  as audit  study,  as  that  information  would  bias  the  results of  the  research  project. 
Riach and Rich (2004) argue that lack of veracity in the context of discrimination studies may justify deception of participants. 
Similarly,  Levitt  and  List  (2009)  argue  that  there  are  valid  arguments  for  not  making  informed  consent  the  rule  in  a  field 
experimental  context.  This  argument  holds  particularly  if  informed  consent  directly  interferes  with  the  ability  to  conduct 
the research (Levitt and List 2007). 
15
    Imagine  we  would not  randomize  and  always  pretend  to  be  publicly  insured  on  the  first  of  the  two calls.  Then  we  could 
not  disentangle  insurance  status  effects  from  weekofyear  seasonal  effects.  Depending  on  the  specific  setup,  such  a 
nonrandomized  design  may  also  confound  timeofday  and  dayofweek  effects  with  treatment  effects.  Obviously,  supply 
and  demand side factors vary systematically by  day  of week, time of  day  and week  of  year. We thank  an attentive referee 
for this remark. 
16
    If  voicemail  indicated  special  office  hours,  the  followup  calls  were  made  during  these  special  hours.  When  nobody 
answered the phone, the practice was flagged as "not available" after three unsuccessful attempts. When the line was busy 
in one of these three attempts, the maximal number of attempts was raised to six. 

                                                                     16 
for  the  name  of  the  PCP,  the  caller  gave  a  fictional  name  and  indicated  that  the  practice  was  in  her 

hometown. Note that, unlike previous studies such as Kuchinke et al (2009), we routinely disclosed the 

insurance  status  of  the  caller.17  This  is  very  common  in  the  German  outpatient  setting  and  does  not 

raise  suspicion  (Spiegel  2015).  Moreover,  it  facilitates  the  empirical  analysis  as  insurance  status 

disclosure  is  not  endogenous.  Finally,  the  caller  ended  all  calls  without  fixing  the  suggested 

appointment to not occupy a slot that could be used for a real treatment. Also, recall that all requests 

were for elective nonurgent treatments. 


             In total, we called 991 unique private practices in the 36 German counties displayed in Figure 1. 

Figure A1 in the Appendix shows the distribution of the contacted practices across the 36 counties. The 

number of contacted practices varies between 1 in two very small and low populated counties and 126 

in one big German city. The mean number of practices contacted was 26 per county. In most counties, 

all three specialists were available.  


5.           Data 

Sample Selection 


First,  we  exclude  practices  from  our  study  for  the  following  reasons:  (i)  the  specialist  is  not  active 

anymore  (19,  1.9%), (ii)  the practice  only  offers treatments  for  privately  insured  patients18  (43, 4.3%), 




                                                       
17
   In Kuchinke et al (2009), who study hospitals, only 25% inquired about the insurance status. However, this is not surprising 
as  hospital  reimbursement  rates  do  not  vary  between  publicly  and  privately  insured  in  Germany.  Only  in  case  of  selected 
special services like treatments by leading senior physicians ("Chefarztbehandlung') or for special service quality amenities 
like private rooms, hospital revenues differ structurally between publicly and privately insured. 
18
    Practices  have  the  option  to  entirely  opt  out  of  treating  publicly  insured  patients  and  declaring  themselves  an  exclusive 
practice for privately insured only and people who pay entirely outofpocket. These practices, however, are then not eligible 
to  charge  sickness  funds,  even  when  demand  from  private  patients  is  low.  We  do  not  consider  these  practices  as  relevant 
to the experiment.  

                                                                     17 
and (iii) other reasons19 (62, 6.3%). These reasons reduce the number of unique practices in our study 

by 124 from 991 to 867.  


             Second, there were additional reasons why practices were unresponsive and we could not make 

appointments; e.g., the (a) practice was closed for at least one week, for example during vacations; (b) 

the practice did not make fixed appointments; (c) the practice did not accept new patients temporarily 

or  (d)  the  practice  was  not  reachable  due  to  several  unsuccessful  attempts.  Some  of  these  practices 

were unresponsive in one wave (110 in wave 1 and 94 in wave 2) and others were unresponsive in both 

waves (101 practices). With 766 practices, we could successfully inquire about an appointment at least 

once.  In  other  words,  for  all  eligible  practices  that  are  not  entirely  excluded  from  our  sample  due  to 

reasons (i) to  (iii)  above, we  either tried to  make an appointment  during  the first  call  under insurance 

status A, during the second call under insurance status B, or during both calls. We call this unbalanced 

sample  "Sample  A;"  it  has  1,328  observations  from  766  unique  and  successfully  contacted  practices. 

Figure A4 shows a sample selection chart and Table 2 shows the descriptive statistic for this full sample.  


             By  contrast, our "Sample  B" only includes  callerappointment observations  where the practice 

offered an appointment to both fictional patients, the publicly and the privately insured. This sample is 

balanced, includes 502 unique private practices, and 1,004 callerappointment observations. 


Main Outcome Variables 


             We  generate  two  main  outcome  variables,  both  of  which  measure  access  to  the  health  care 

system.  The  first  variable  is  binary  and  called  apptm.  It  indicates  whether  the  successfully  contacted 




                                                       
19
   E.g. practices for children only and misleading telephone numbers. 

                                                            18 
practice was willing to schedule an appointment with the fictional patient. As seen in Table 2, in 92% of 

all cases, the practice was willing to schedule an appointment. 


             The second variable is continuous and called dayswait. It counts the number of workdays (which 

equal weekdays) from the calling date to the offered appointment.21 It has only valid values when the 

practice  offered an  appointment. Figure  A2 shows  the  distribution of  dayswait  and Table 2 shows  the 

summary statistic. As seen, the minimum wait time is an immediate appointment, when patients could 

be  seen  on  the  same  day.  The  maximum  wait  time  is  171  weekdays  and  the  average  wait  time  is  19 

weekdays (almost 4 weeks). Figure A2 shows a leftskewed distribution with a long right tail.  


Main Control Variables 


             The  main  variable  of  interest  is Privately  Insured.  Even  in  the  unbalanced  Sample  A  with  1,328 

callerappointment  observations,  this  variable  is  almost  perfectly  balanced  with  50.1%  of  all 

observations representing a privately insured fictional patient (Table 2).22 


             Other  important  control  variables  indicate  the  dayoftheweek,  the  exact  calendar  date,  the 

time  of  the  day  when  we  made  the  call,  whether  the  randomized  insurance  status  was  privately  or 

publicly  insured  during  the  first  call,  and  the  specialty  of  the  practice.  Recall  that  we  randomize  the 




                                                       
21
  We excluded weekends (Saturday, Sunday) as well as public holidays. In a robustness check, we also excluded weekdays 
between a  public  holiday  and  weekends  (Brückentage)  as  many  Germans  take  vacation days  during  these  days to  have  an 
extended weekend off. We call this variable dayswait II (see Table 1). 
22
    We  report  separate  descriptive  statistics  for  practices  that  only  responded  once  vs.  practices  that  responded  twice  in 
Table A2.  As seen, practices that successfully responded only once i) have a slightly higher average waiting time than those 
that  responded  twice  and  ii)  show  differences  in  other  variables  and  countylevel  controls,  for  example,  a  higher  share  of 
privately  insured  and  East  German  practices.  To  account  for  that  imbalance,  we  conduct  additional  robustness  checks  in 
Section 7. 
 


                                                                   19 
insurance status conditional on calling a specific practice on a specific day, which implies that controlling 

for these variables is relevant.  


CountyLevel Control Variables 


        The final panel in Table 2 lists the countylevel control variables. These have been provided by 

the  Federal  Statistical  Office  (Destatis  2018a,  b)  and  by  the  Federal  Institute  for  Construction,  Urban 

and Space Research (Bundesinstitut für Bau, Stadt und Raumforschung), see BBSR (2018). As seen, the 

average net income in the 36 counties is 1,789 and the average unemployment rate is 7.9%. 


6. Statistical Methods 

        Most important for causal inference in this setting is the fact that we set up a field experiment, 

where  a  test  person  called  each  specialist  practice  twice,  where  we  randomized  the  order  of  the 

insurance status. Calling each practice twice and randomizing the insurance status guarantees balanced 

covariates by design (except for dayofweek, timeofday and weekofyear, see above). Moreover, the 

design  allows  us  to  exploit  withinpractice  variation  when  analyzing  the  intensive  margin,  conditional 

on  appointments  being  offered.  Because  the  same  test  person  called  all  991  practices  and  strictly 

followed  a  predetermined  protocol,  simple  descriptive  statistics  and  nonparametric  bivariate  tests 

should yield first reliable evidence about access differences between the two insurance groups.  


        As  our  main  statistical  approaches,  we  run  OLS  and  count  data  regression  models  which 

routinely control for  the calendar  date,  the  dayoftheweek and  the  time  during the day  of  the  call--

in addition to practicelevel and countylevel controls. Our first model uses the unbalanced Sample A: 


                                                                                                  1  




                                                         20 
        where     stands  for  our  first  outcome  variable  apptm,  which  is  binary  and  indicates  whether 

practice    offered  the  fictional  patient   an  appointment  or  not.  The  main  variable  of  interest  is    

and indicates whether the caller indicated a public or private insurance status. The model also controls 

for a set of practicelevel controls  , in particular the specialty group, as well as a set of countylevel 

controls     such  as  the  countylevel  unemployment  rate  or  the  physician  density  (see  Table  1).  As 

mentioned,  the  model  routinely  controls  for  the  dayoftheweek  during  which  the  caller  called  a 

practice ( ) as well as the timeoftheday (                      of the call.  


        In the saturated specifications, we add calendardate fixed effects,  . Similarly, we replace the 

practicelevel  controls  with  practice  fixed  effects     in  some  specifications.  We  routinely  cluster  the 

standard  errors     at  the  practice  level  and  estimate  linear  probability  models  using  OLS.  (However, 

we  also  test  the  robustness  of  the  coefficients  using  probit  models  and  calculating  marginal  effects, 

Table A3.) 


        Our second model uses the balanced Sample B and is: 


       ln                                                                                       2  


        where     stands  for  our  second  outcome  variable  dayswait,  and  measures  the  wait  time  in 

weekdays for fictional patient   in practice p. It is continuous but skewed to the left (Figure A2), which 

is one reason why we replace 0s with 0.01 and take the logarithm. The coefficient estimates of the main 

variable  of  interest,   ,  then  approximate  the  wait  time  differential  between  publicly  and  privately 

insured  patients  in  percent.  The  other  control  variables  are  defined  as  above.  We  also  test  the 

robustness  of  the  results  by  using  the  plain     variable  and  running  negative  binomial  count  data 

models that consider excess zeros and overdispersion.  




                                                        21 
        In  extended  specifications,  we  test  for  effect  heterogeneity  by  interacting     with  regional 

and other variables and add these interaction terms to the model. 


7. Results  

Nonparametric Findings 


        We start by plotting nonparametric results. In a perfectly randomized setting, they should very 

well  approximate  the  parametric  findings  that  additionally  control  for  date,  dayofweek,  timeofday 

and practice fixed effects. 

        Figure  2  plots  bar  diagrams  of  the  first  outcome  variable  apptm  along  with  95%  confidence 

intervals.  As  can  be  seen  with  bare  eyes,  the  share  of  privately  insured  who  were  offered  an 

appointment (88%) is larger than the share of publicly insured who were offered an appointment (83%). 

A Fisher's exact test shows that this difference is significant at the 5% level (Fisher's exact = 0.002) level.  

                                               [Figure 2 about here] 

        Next, Figure 3 plots the distribution of the second outcome variable dayswait separately for the 

privately  and  publicly  insured  using  the  balanced  Sample  B.  Again,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  wait  time 

distribution for the privately insured is much more leftskewed than the wait time distribution for the 

publicly  insured.  The  former  has  a  lot  more  mass  over  the  0  to  20weekday  support  region,  and  the 

latter has more mass exceeding 20weekdays of wait time as well as a much longer right tail. 

                                           [Figures 3 and 4 about here] 

        Figure  4  plots  bar  diagrams  along  with  95%  confidence  intervals  to  illustrate  mean  differences 

in wait times between the publicly and privately insured, also using Sample B. As seen, the mean wait 

time  for  publicly  insured  is  almost  twice  as  long  and  25  weekdays,  whereas  the  mean  wait  time  for 

                                                           22 
privately  insured  is  below  12  weekdays.  The  confidence  intervals  clearly  do  not  overlap,  indicating  a 

highly significant difference in wait times, depending on the insurance status. The difference also holds 

for the median wait time, which is 15 for publicly insured and 6 for privately insured patients. This prior 

is confirmed by a twosided Wilcoxon SignedRank Test which is significant at the 0.1% level.23  

                                                          [Figures 5 and 6 about here] 

             Finally, Figures 5 and 6 show the same bar diagrams for apptm and dayswait but separately for 

the  three  specialist  groups.  In  conjunction  with  the  differences  in  reimbursement  rates  (Table  1),  this 

heterogeneity test links creamskimming to actual differences in patient profitability. On the extensive 

margin,  we  do  not  find  much  evidence  for  systematic  patient  cream  skimming  (although  privately 

insured  have  always  higher  appointment  rates  which  are,  however,  not  statistically  significant).  By 

contrast,  on  the  intensive  margin,  we  do  find  evidence  for  systematic  patient  cream  skimming  and 

significant  wait  time  differences  for  gastroscopies,  allergy  tests  and  hearing  tests.  Note  that  the 

differences  are  much  smaller  for  hearing  tests  where  reimbursement  rates  are  much  lower  and  the 

absolute and relative price differences much smaller (16 vs. 23).  


Parametric Findings 


             Next, we move on to our parametric findings and multivariate regression models. Table 3 shows 

the  findings  from  our  first  model  in  equation  (1),  which  uses  the  binary  apptm  measure  as  outcome 

variable. These models assess the effect of insurance status on being offered an appointment for non




                                                       
23
    Figure  A3  in  the  Appendix  shows  the  cumulative  density  functions  (cdf)  of  wait  time  in  weekdays  for  all  successfully 
contacted  practices  that  offered  an  appointment  under  both  insurance  types  (i.e.  Sample  B).  The  cdf  of  privately  insured 
patients dominates the cdf of publicly insured patients over the entire region of support. Note that the existence of practices 
that  only  offered  an  appointment  for  privately  insured  patients  as  shown  in  Figure  2  (33  practices)  exacerbate  the 
differences in waiting times between privately and publicly insured patients. 

                                                                      23 
urgent  treatments.  Each  column  in  Table  3  represents  one  model.  The  models  only  differ  by  the 

inclusion of different sets of covariates as indicated in the bottom panel of the Table. 

                                                          [Table 3 about here] 

             Table  3  shows  the  following:  First,  we  find  that  the  insurance  status  of  the  caller  has  a  highly 

significant impact on the willingness of practices to schedule an appointment. Two coefficient estimates 

are significant at the 1% level, and two are significant at the 5% level. Being privately insured increases 

the likelihood of an appointment by 3.8 to 5.2 percentage points or by between 4.2 and 5.7% relative 

to  the  mean.  Second,  the  estimates  are  robust  across  all  model  specifications  and  not  statistically 

different from one another. The inclusion of weekofyear fixed effects, county fixed effects, and even 

practice  fixed  effects  barely  alter  the  coefficients  although  the  inclusion  of  specialty  controls  slightly 

increases the effect sizes and the practice fixed effects slightly decreases them. Third, the findings are 

also robust to running probit models and calculating marginal effects (Table A3).  

             Table 4 follows the same setup as Table 3 but estimates our second model and equation (2). It 

is basically identical to equation (1), but uses the second continuous outcome variables dayswait, which 

counts  the  wait  times  in  weekdays.  The  coefficient  estimates  then  indicate  the  effect  of  a  private 

insurance  status  on  the  mean  wait  time  in  weekdays,  relative  to  publicly  insurance  status.26  In  the 

Appendix, in Table A4, we replicate Table 4 with count data models and in Table A5, we do not take the 

logarithm of the dependent variable.27 All eight models in Table 4, A4 and  A5 use our balanced Sample 


                                                       
26
    Table  4  uses  the  logarithm  of  the  wait  time  in  weekdays  as  dependent  variable.  For  example,  in  our  preferred  model  in 
column          (4),      the     difference         in       wait   times       in     percent        would        be      exp(1.1381)1=  
0.6796 or about 68%. In contrast, Figure 4 shows the unconditional mean differences which are 24.89 vs. 11.57 days wait 
time  or  a  (13.32/24.89)*100=  54%  difference.  See  Section  6  for  a  discussion  of  the  randomization  process  and  why  the 
regression models control for seasonal, regional and other covariates.  

27
    Table  A6  in  the  Appendix  replicates  the  main  regression  considering  only  the  first  successful  contact  for  each  practice 
(Panel  A)  and  considering  only  the  three main  specialist  groups  (Panel  B).  As  seen  in Panel  A,  restricting  the sample  to  the 

                                                                     24 
B  and  only  include  the  502  unique  practices  that  offered  specific  appointments  to  both  callers,  the 

publicly and the privately insured.  

                                                          [Table 4 about here] 

             Tables  4,  A4  and  A5  show  the  following:  All  12  model  coefficients  are  highly  significant.  The 

estimates  are  very  robust  to  the  sets  of  covariates  included,  reinforcing  that  our  randomization  was 

successful.  This  also  implies  the  absence  of  structural  differences  in  terms  of  the  weekoftheyear  or 

the county of residence. Moreover, because the differences are very close to the differences of simple 

nonparametric  tests,  it  also  suggests  the  absence  of  structural  imbalances  by  dayoftheweek  or  the 

time of the day of the call.  

             The  results  show  that  privately  insured  patients  wait  on  average  13  fewer  weekdays  for  an 

appointment, conditional on being offered one. In other words, publicly insured patients have to wait 

more  than  twice  as  long  for  an  appointment;  the  mean  wait  time  for  the  publicly  insured  is  24.9 

weekdays (or about 5 weeks on average), whereas the mean wait time for privately insured patients is 

only 11.6 weekdays (or a little more than 2 weeks on average).  


Differences by Specialist Group and Profitability 


             We already briefly discussed differences by specialty above. Recall that we know the list prices 

for  specific  SHI  and  PHI  treatments  as  well  as  the  average  claim  amounts  for  ICD10  code  T78 

("allergies")  as  well  as  K29  ("Gastritis  and  duodenitis"),  K30  ("Functional  dyspepsia")  or  K31  "(Other 

diseases of stomach and duodenum). It is clear from Table 1 that the requested endoscopy and related 

                                                       
first  successful contact provides  similar  results  than  our  baseline  analysis  but  the coefficients  for  the  extensive  margin  are 
slightly larger and the coefficients for the intensive margin are slightly. As seen in Panel B, considering only the three main 
specialties  yields  robust  results  as  well  but  slightly  smaller  coefficients  for  both  the  extensive  and  intensive  margin.  Table 
A7 reports results for the unbalanced Sample A. The results are very similar compared to the baseline analysis. 


                                                                     25 
diseases  are significantly more  profitable when  treating privately  insured.  The same  is true for allergy 

tests. Hearing tests, by contrast, show the smallest profitability differences both in relative and absolute 

terms. Table 5 shows our regression results for apptm and dayswait separately for the three specialist 

groups.  Figures  5  and  6  show  the  analog  nonparametric  visual  results  in  form  of  bar  diagrams  along 

with 95% confidence intervals. 

                                               [Table 5 about here] 

        As  mentioned  and  seen  in  Panel  A  of  Table  5  and  Figure  5,  when  differentiating  by  specialty, 

although  the  points  estimates  are  systematically  positive  and  smaller  for  the  less  profitable  hearing 

tests, the do not have enough statistical power to identify differences in a strict statistical sense.  

        However, as for the intensive margin in Panel B (dayswait) of Table 5 and Figure 6, the findings 

are  very  similar  to  the  main  analysis  and  statistically  significant  for  each  specialty.  Most  importantly, 

the effect size differences are largest for endoscopies and smallest for hearing tests, lining fully up with 

the  reported  differences  in  profitability  in  Table  1.  However,  although  these  results  are  highly 

suggestive, the differences are not different in a statistical sense due.  


Effect Heterogeneity by County Characteristics 


        Next, we test for heterogeneity in inequality in health care access. Technically, we interact our 

variable  of  interest  Privately  Insured  with  one  of  the  following  stratifying  countylevel  covariates: 

physician density, population density, household income, East Germany, and share of privately insured 

in  state.  Then  we  add  the  interaction  term  along  with  the  two  variables  in  levels  to  the  models  in 




                                                          26 
equations (1) and (2). Panel A of Table 6 shows the results for apptm and Panel B of Table 6 shows the 

results for dayswait.28 

                                                          [Table 6 about here] 

             As  seen,  only  one  of  the  interaction  terms  is  statistically  significant.  The  findings  for  physician 

density  (column  1),  household  income  (column  3),  East  Germany  (column  4)  and  share  of  privately 

insured patients (column 5) are all far from being significant in both panels. The only significant finding 

in  column  (2)  of  Panel  B  suggests  that  a  higher  population  density,  e.g.  in  cities  as  compared  to  more 

rural counties, is associated with more discrimination and inequality in access.  


Discussion 


             Our field experiment clearly shows that privately insured patients (i) are offered appointments 

at  significantly  higher  rates  and  (ii)  are  offered  appointments  with  shorter  wait  times,  compared  to 

publicly  insured  patients  with  lower  reimbursement  rates.  This  holds  in  the  German  context  with  its 

twotier health care system where reimbursement rates structurally vary between the two systems but 

are otherwise identical across plans within each system. We also find strongly suggestive evidence that 

the discrimination is larger when the reimbursement rate differences are larger, e.g., for gastroscopies 

(upper gastrointestinal endoscopy), and smaller when the reimbursement rate differences are smaller, 

e.g., for hearing tests.  

             However, as we randomized the insurance status of the fictional patient in our audit study, our 

"creamskimming"  interpretation  also  allow for  alternative  mechanisms.  However,  we  believe  that  all 

specific  alternative  explanations  can  ultimately  be  subsumed  as:  practices  structurally  select  more 


                                                       
28
     As a robustness check, Table A8 shows the same heterogeneity analyses for only the first successful contacts. 


                                                                  27 
profitable  patients:29First,  doctors  may  not  only  expect  a  significantly  higher  reimbursement  but  also 

deal  with  healthier  patients  who  have  fewer  comorbidities  (Table  A1).  Given  a  specific  diagnosis, 

healthier patients imply shorter treatments and interactions and are thus more profitable patients. On 

the other hand, comorbidities and the health status are less relevant for highly standardized treatments 

like hearing tests, allergy tests or gastroscopies. 

             Second,  one  could  hypothesize  that  doctors  prefer  bettereducated  patients  because  of  the 

patient's education itself. Some studies have shown that doctors prefer patients with a good job or high 

socioeconomic  status  (Olah  et  al.  2013;  Angerer  et  al.  2019).  We  would  argue,  however,  that  a  high 

socioeconomic status is simply a proxy for more profitable, wealthy patients (and not vice versa).30 

             Third,  in  Germany,  the  privately  insured  have  on  average  higher  incomes  (Table  A1)  and  their 

reimbursement is 100% feeforservice (Section 3). Hence, it may not just be the very narrowly defined 

onetime reimbursement rate differential in Table 1, but a broader definition of profitability that makes 

doctors creamskim the privately insured. For example, doctors may schedule profitable followup visits 

or  sell  additional,  potentially  medically  unnecessary  and  not  covered  services  to  the  more  affluent 

privately insured. On the other hand, SHI plans have basically zero costsharing and public insurers also 

directly  pay  providers  without  intensive  claim  reviews.31  Private  insurers  usually  share  costs,  review 



                                                       
29
    Note  that,  in  Germany,  no  official  quotas  or  rules  for  how  to  provide  appointments  for  publicly  and  privately  patients 
exist. Essentially, absent emergency cases, private practices determine how they schedule appointments. Unlike in the U.S., 
e.g. for Medicaid patients, 90% of the population are publicly insured and not seen as charity cases. Rather, lots of anecdotal 
evidence  suggests  that  the  privately  insured  are  regarded  as  particularly  profitable  and  thus  offered  faster  appointments 
and longer time slots during appointments (Soester Anzeiger 2019). 

30
  Moreover, there is anecdotal evidence that doctors consider highlyeducated, "empowered" patients as rather 
annoying, timeconsuming and difficult (Neuberger 2000; Rankin 2011). 

31
   In Germany, the review of SHIclaims is mainly the physician associations' task (see § 106d of the social code book V (SGB 
V)).  In  practice,  these  reviews  are  probably  less  strict  for  the  publicly  insured  than  for  private  patients  where  PHI  directly 
reviews  claims  and  have  a  strong(er)  incentive  to  deny  reimbursement.  E.g.  the  German  Health  Expert  Council 

                                                                      28 
claims, and do not pay providers directly; patients do and then submit the claims to their insurer. Hence, 

the risks of claim disputes and nonpayments are higher when treating privately insured.  

             Finally,  as  shown  in  Figure  6,  inequality  in  access  is  least  pronounced  for  hearing  tests  where 

the  absolute  reimbursement  rates  are  the  lowest,  and  the  relatively  difference  between  private  and 

public  rates  is  also  the  smallest  (Table  1).  To  us,  the  findings  by  specialist  groups  and  their  implied 

specific  treatment  profitability  strongly  suggest  that  the  specific  reimbursement  rate  differentials  do 

drive creamskimming of the more profitable privately insured.32 

             Although  our  research  identifies  drivers  of  structural  inequalities  in  health  care  access,  we 

deliberately abstain from drawing welfare conclusions. While structural differences in reimbursement 

rates  could  be  efficient,  wellinformed  consumers  as  well  as  consumer  choice  are  two  important 

ingredients for  efficiency  (cf. Handel and Kolstad 2015; Bhargava,  Loewenstein  and Sydnor 2017).33  In 

the German case, 77% of the population do not have the option to opt out of the public insurance and 

purchase  only  private  insurance,  which  provides  faster  and  better  access.  In  the  U.S.  case,  while 

consumers  theoretically  have  the  "choice"  between  employersponsored  private  coverage,  Medicaid 

and  Medicare,  all  insurance  schemes  are  inherently  intertwined  with  equality  in  opportunity,  race, 



                                                       
,,Sachverständigenrat  Gesundheit"  documented  very  low  recourse  claims  for  SHItreatments:  In  2008,  only  about  0.5  %  of 
practices had to pay money back due submitting incorrect claims (SVR Gesundheit 2014).  
32
   While it is most likely that the identified access differences by specialty are driven by the reimbursement rate differences, 
there  is  the  possibility  that  these  are  instead  driven  by  selection  into  specialties  and  associated  unobserved  practice 
differences.  For  example,  Li  (2018)  shows  that  medical  students  with  lower  degrees  of  altruism  tend  to  select  specialties 
with the highest expected income in the United States. In Germany, however, these income differences are much smaller. 

33
    Another  argument  by  German  private  insurers  and  doctor  representatives  is  that  the  higher  private  rates  help  cross
subsidizing the lower public rates. Although it may be true in single cases that doctors would have to give up their practice 
without  the  privately  insured,  it  is  also  true  that  the  medical  profession  is  the  occupational  group  with  the  lowest 
unemployment  rate  and  highest  average  incomes.  While  rural  areas  lack  specialists  and  primary  care  physicians,  policy 
reforms  that  substantially  increased  reimbursement  rates  in  those  areas  did  not  lead  to  a  strong  increase  in  the  supply  of 
doctors in those regions (SVR Gesundheit 2014). Insolvencies of physicians are low in Germany (Destatis 2019); thus, private 
patients do not seem to be instrumental for the economic survival of private practices in Germany. 

                                                                    29 
poverty  and  age.  As  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  inequality  in  access  to  health  care  is  just  one 

dimension  on  which  to  rate  health  care  systems.  Tradeoffs  with  other  dimensions  can  and  do  exist. 

However,  in  our  opinion,  this  should  not  preclude  health  economists  from  studying  this  important 

dimension, just as studying equality in incomes and wealth is an independent topic of inquiry. 


8. Conclusion 

         The  main  objective  of  this  research  was  to  implement  a  field  experiment  to  assess  the  impact 

of  publicprivate  insurance  status  and  related  reimbursement  rate  differences  on  health  care  access. 

We  use  the  German  institutional  setting  for  the  field  experiment  because  it  is  particularly  wellsuited 

as a clean testing ground. Germany is one of the very few countries with coexisting public and private 

insurance  systems  and  structurally  varying  provider  reimbursement  rates  between  the  two  systems. 

The reimbursement rates for the privately insured are about two to three times higher and have classic 

feeforservice schemes without caps or bundled payments. Importantly, reimbursement rates for both 

systems are standardized and centrally set, instead of being determined by negotiations between single 

insurers and providers. Provider networks and managed care do not exist in Germany and hence do not 

operate as a confounding factor in our setting.  

         Our  test  person  called almost  one  thousand private  specialist practices  over the course  of  one 

calendar year. The test person followed a strict protocol and revealed the randomized insurance status 

of the fictional patient during the call, as common in Germany. The fictional patient called each practice 

twice;  once  pretending  to  be  a  publicly  insured  patient  and  once  pretending  to  be  a  privately  insured 

patient.  In  each  case,  the  test  person  asked  for  an  appointment  for  a  nonurgent  medical  treatment: 

gastroscopies with gastroenterologists, hearing tests with otorhinolaryngologists, and allergy tests with 

allergists.  


                                                         30 
             Our  findings  show  that  structural  inequalities  in  reimbursement  rates  create  structural 

inequalities in health care access. We document higher access barriers for less profitable patients, both 

on the extensive and intensive margin. Publicly insured patients were between four and six percent less 

likely to be offered an appointment. Moreover, when offered appointments, publicly insured patients 

had  to  wait  13  weekdays  longer  (more  than  twice  as  long)  than  privately  insured  patients.  While  one 

could argue that a three week longer wait time for specific population subgroups should not be reason 

for  concern  in  nonurgent  settings,  recall  that  these  patients  may  suffer  three  weeks  longer  due  to 

undiagnosed allergies, hearing or stomach problems. Importantly, the main objective of this paper is to 

study  driving  forces  of  inequalities  in  health  care  access,  not  the  health  effects  of  such  inequalities.34 

What's more, despite the fact that only a small percentage of the population is privately insured, most 

Germans  seem  to  find  the  structural  differences  between  the  two  systems  unacceptable.  In  a 

representative  survey  among  Germans,  two  thirds  indicate  that  they  would  be  concerned  about  a 

publicprivate  "twoclass"  health  care  system  (DHBW  Mosbach  2014);  indeed,  the  equalization  of 

reimbursement  rate  differences  is  on  the  political  agenda  in  Germany  (Wasem  und  Walendzik  2019, 

Handelsblatt 2018).  

             The policy implications of our findings suggest that uniform reimbursement rates would reduce 

inequalities in health care access. Because, in the U.S. and Germany, healthier and wealthier individuals 

tend to have private insurance with higher reimbursements rates, such a system exacerbates structural 

inequalities in health  care  access  and  population health. However, uniform  reimbursement  rates  may 

have  unintended  consequences  and  could  result  in  welfare  losses  if  they  reduce  the  overall  supply  of 

                                                       
34
   At  least  for  stomach  problems,  there  exists  hard  evidence  that  health  care  access  or  long  waiting  times  have  adverse 
health  effects.  E.g.  a  treatment  delay  of  more  than  one  month  for  gastric  cancer--which  might  be  diagnosed  by 
gastroscopy--is associated with higher mortality rates (Yun et al. 2012). If a person receives treatment before the stomach 
cancer spreads, the 5year survival rate is 68 %; once it reaches distant organs, survival rates drop to 5%. 


                                                                   31 
physicians or increase taxes or premiums. How optimal reimbursement rates should be set in a health 

care system in practice is an important topic for future research. 


References 

Alexander, D., Schnell, M. 2017. Closing the gap: The impact of the Medicaid primary care rate increase on access 
      and health, FRB of Chicago Working Paper No. WP201710. 
Angerer,  S.,  Waibel,  C.  Stummer,  H.  2019.  Discrimination  in  health  care:  A  field  experiment  on  the  impact  of 
     patients' socioeconomic status on access to care, American Journal of Health Economics, 5(4): 407427. 
Asplin,  B.  R.,  Rhodes, K.  V.,  Levy,  H.,  Lurie,  N.,  Crain,  A. L., Carlin,  B.  P.,  Kellermann,  A.  L.  2005.  Insurance status 
      and  access  to  urgent  ambulatory  care  followup  appointments,  Journal  of  the  American  Medical 
      Association, 294(10): 124854.  
Atal,  J.,  H.  Fang,  M.  Karlsson,  Ziebarth,  N.  R.  2019.  Exit,  voice  or  loyalty?  An  investigation  into  mandated 
        portability of frontloaded private health plans, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 86(3): 697727. 
Baker,  L.  C.,  Royalty,  A.  B.  2000.  Medicaid  policy,  physician  behavior,  and  health  care  for  the  lowincome 
      population, Journal of Human Resources, 35(3): 480502. 
Bauhoff,  S.  2012.  Do  health  plans  riskselect?  An  audit  study  on  Germany's  social  health  insurance,  Journal  of 
     Public Economics, 96(910): 750759. 
BBSR   Bundesinstitut  für  Bau,  Stadt  und  Raumforschung  2018.  Inkar.  Indikatoren  und  Karten  zur  Raum  und 
     Stadtentwicklung. http://www.inkar.de (date of access: June 10, 2018).  
Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., Sydnor, J. 2017. Choose to lose: Health plan choices from a menu with dominated 
     option, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3): 13191372. 
BMG  ­  Bundesministerium  für  Gesundheit  2018. KM  6Statistik (gesetzliche  Krankenversicherung:  Versicherte), 
      in: www.gbebund.de (date of access: July 8, 2019) 
BMG ­ Bundesministerium für Gesundheit 2019. Statistik über Versicherte, gegliedert nach Status, Alter, 
     Wohnort und Kassenart 2018, in: https://www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/ 
     themen/krankenversicherung/zahlenundfaktenzurkrankenversicherung/mitgliederund
     versicherte.html (date of access: July 13, 2019) 
BrosigKoch,  J.,  KairiesSchwarz,  N.,  Kokot,  J.  2017.  Sorting  into  payment  schemes  and  medical  treatment:  a 
      laboratory experiment, Health Economics, 26(S3): 5265. 
Bünnings, C., H. Schmitz, H. Tauchmann, Ziebarth, N.R. 2018. How health plan enrollees value prices relative to 
     supplemental benefits and service quality, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 86(2): 415449. 
Candon M., Zuckerman S., Wissoker D., Saloner, B. 2018. Declining Medicaid fees and primary care appointment 
     availability for new Medicaid patients, JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(1):145146. 
Chen, Y., Persson, P., Polyakova, M. 2019. The roots of health inequality and the value of intrafamily expertise, 
      NBER Working Papers 25618. 
CMS  ­  Centers  for  Medicaire  and  Medicaid  Services  2018a.  Physician  Fee  Schedule,  in: 
     https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/MedicareFeeforServicePayment/PhysicianFeeSched/index.html, 
     (date of access: September 10, 2019).  
CMS  ­  Centers  for  Medicaire  and  Medicaid  Services  2018b.  CY  2018  Medicare  Fee  Schedule  Changes,  in: 

                                                                  32 
       https://gi.org/wpcontent/uploads/2018/01/MPFSFinal2018v2017Rates.pdf,                   (date     of    access: 
       September 10, 2019). 
Clemens, J., Gottlieb, J.D. 2014. Do physician's financial incentives affect medical treatment and patient health? 
     American Economic Review, 104(4): 13201349. 
Commonwealth Fund, 2014. Mirror, Mirror on the Wall 2014 Update: How the U.S. Health Care System Compares 
    Internationally,  by    Davis,  K.,  Stremikis,  K.  Squires,  D.  and  C.Schoen,  in: 
    https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fundreports/2014/jun/mirrormirrorwall2014
    updatehowushealthcaresystem (date of access: October 18, 2018). 
Commonwealth Fund, 2017. Mirror, Mirror 2017. International Comparison Reflects Flaws and Opportunities for 
    Better U.S. Health Care, by Eric C. Schneider, Dana O. Sarnak, David Squires, Arnav Shah, and Michelle M. 
    Doty,  in:  https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fundreports/2017/jul/mirrormirror2017
    internationalcomparisonreflectsflawsand (date of access: October 18, 2018). 
Cooper, C., Craig, S.V., Gaynor, M., Reenen, J.V. 2018. The price ain't right? Hospital prices and health spending 
     on the privately insured, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1): 51­107. 
Cullis, J. G., Jones, P. R., Propper, C. 2000. Waiting lists and medical treatment: Analysis and policies, Handbook 
        of Health Economics, 1(PART B), Chapter 23:12011249. 
Das Telefonbuch 2018. https://telefonbuch.tonline.de/ (date of access: June 10, 2018). 
Decker, S. L. 2009. Changes in Medicaid physician fees and patterns of ambulatory care, INQUIRY: The Journal of 
     Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 46(3): 291304. 
Decker, S.L., 2012. In 2011 Nearly onethird of physicians said they would not accept new Medicaid patients, but 
     rising fees may help, Health Affairs, 31: 1673­1679.  
Destatis    Federal  Statistical  Office  Germany  2019.  Unternehmen  und  ArbeitsstättenInsolvenzverfahren, 
      Fachserie 2 Reihe 4.1.  
Destatis  Federal Statistical Office Germany 2018a. Daten aus dem Gemeindeverzeichnis  Kreisfreie Städte und 
      Landkreise nach Fläche und Bevölkerung auf Grundlage des Zensus 2011 und Bevölkerungsdichte. 
      https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/LaenderRegionen/ 
      Regionales/Gemeindeverzeichnis/Administrativ/05staedte.html (date of access: July 12, 2019). 
Destatis  Federal Statistical Office Germany 2018b. Daten aus dem Gemeindeverzeichnis  Bundesländer mit 
      Hauptstädten nach Fläche und Bevölkerung auf Grundlage des Zensus 2011 und Bevölkerungsdichte, in: 
      https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/LaenderRegionen/Regionales/ 
      Gemeindeverzeichnis/Administrativ/02bundeslaender.html (date of access: July 12, 2019) 
Destatis   Federal  Statistical  Office  Germany  2018c.  Unternehmen  und  Arbeitsstätten:  Kostenstruktur  bei  Arzt 
      und Zahnarztpraxen sowie Praxen von psychologischen Psychotherapeuten, Fachserie 2 Reihe 1.6.1.  
DHBW  Mosbach  2014.  GfKUmfrage:  ZweiKlassenMedizin  in  Deutschland?,  Deutsche  Hochschule  Baden
    Würtemberg  Mosbach,  in:  https://www.mosbach.dhbw.de/news1/newsimdetail/gfkumfragezwei
    klassenmedizinindeutschland? (date of access: July 12, 2019) 
Ellis,  R.  P.,  McGuire,  T.  G.  1986.  Provider  behavior  under  prospective  reimbursement,  Journal  of  Health 
         Economics, 5(2): 129151. 
Felder, S. 2008. To wait or  to pay for medical treatment? Restraining expost moral hazard in health insurance, 
      Journal of Health Economics, 27(6): 14181422. 
GKV        Spitzenverband     2018.      Statutory     Health      Insurance,     in:     https://www.gkv
       spitzenverband.de/english/statutory_health_insurance/statutory_health_insurance.jsp,  (date  of  access: 
       September 10, 2018). 

                                                         33 
Goebel,  J.,  Grabka,  M.  M.,  Liebig,  S.,  Kroh,  M.,  Richter,  D.,  Schröder,  C.,  Schupp,  J.  2019.  The  German  Socio
     Economic  Panel  Study (SOEP),  Jahrbücher  für  Nationalökonomie  und  Statistik  /  Journal  of  Economics and 
     Statistics, 239(2): 345360. 
GOÄ  Gebührenordnung für Ärzte 2019. https://diego.one/go%C3%A4 (date of access: September 10, 2019). 
Gravelle, H., Siciliani, L. 2008. Optimal quality, waits and charges in health insurance, Journal of Health Economics, 
      27(3): 663674. 
Halpern, M. T., Romaire, M. A., Haber, S.  G., Tangka, F. K., Sabatino, S. A., Howard, D. H. 2014. Impact  of state
      specific  Medicaid  reimbursement  and  eligibility  policies  on  receipt  of  cancer  screening,  Cancer,  120(19): 
      30163024. 
Handel, B. R., Kolstad, J. T. 2015. Health insurance for "humans": Information frictions, plan choice, and consumer 
     welfare, American Economic Review, 105(8): 24492500. 
Handelsblatt     2018.    Krankenkassen      wettern     gegen      einheitliche  Arzthonorare,                               in: 
     https://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/deutschland/gkvundpkvkrankenkassenwetterngegen
     einheitlichearzthonorare/20905326.html (date of access: September 13, 2019) 
Heinrich, N., Wübker, A., Wuckel, C. 2018. Waiting times for outpatient treatment in Germany: New experimental 
      evidence  from  primary  data,  Jahrbücher  für  Nationalökonomie  und  Statistik  /  Journal  of  Economics  and 
      Statistics, 238(5): 375394.  
Holgash,  K.,  Heberlein,  M.,  2019.  Physician  Acceptance  Of  New  Medicaid  Patients:  What  Matters  And  What 
      Doesn't             [WWW               Document].            Health          Affairs         Blog,          in: 
      https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20190401.678690/full/ (date of access: July 28, 2020) 
Hullegie,  P.  and  Klein,  T.J.  (2012).  The  effect  of  private  health  insurance  on  medical  care  utilization  and  self
      assessed health in Germany, Health Economics, 19(9): 10481062. 
Jones, A.M., Rice, N., Robone, S., Dias, P.R. 2011. Inequality and polarisation in health systems' responsiveness: 
      A crosscountry analysis, Journal of Health Economics, 30(4): 616625. 
Jürges, H. 2009. Health Insurance Status and Physician Behavior in Germany, Schmollers Jahrbuch : Journal of 
      Applied Social Science Studies, 129(2): 297307. 
Karlsson, M., Klein, T., Ziebarth, N. R. 2016. Skewed, persistent and high before death: Medical spending in 
      Germany, Fiscal Studies (Special Issue: Medical Expenditures around the World), 37(34): 527559 
Kesternich, I., Schumacher, H., Winter, J. (2015). Professional norms and physician behavior: Homo 
      oeconomicus or homo hippocraticus? Journal of Public Economics, 131, 111. 
KBV  Kassenärztliche Bundesvereinigung 2017. Einheitlicher Bewertungsmaßstab (EBM), in: 
     http://www.kbv.de/media/sp/EBM_Gesamt___Stand_1._Quartal_2017.pdf (date of access: June 10, 
     2018). 
KBV  Kassenärztliche Bundesvereinigung 2018a. Aktuelles zu den Honorarverhandlungen 2019, in: 
     http://www.kbv.de/html/2054.php (date of access: September 10, 2018).  
KBV  Kassenärztliche Bundesvereinigung 2018b. Einheitlicher Bewertungsmaßstab (EBM), in: 
     http://www.kbv.de/media/sp/EBM_Gesamt___Stand_2._Quartal_2018.pdf (date of access: December 
     09, 2019). 
Kuchinke, B., Sauerland, D., Wübker, A. 2009. The influence of insurance status on waiting times in German acute 
      care hospitals: An empirical analysis of new data, International Journal for Equity in Health, 8(44). 
KVNO    Kassenärztliche  Vereinigung  Nordrhein,  2018.  Honorarverteilungsmaßstab  der  Kassenärztlichen 
     Vereinigung Nordrhein, in: https://www.kvno.de/downloads/honorar/hvm1801.pdf (date of access: June 


                                                              34 
       10, 2018). 
Laudicella, M., Siciliani, M., Cookson, R. 2012. Waiting times and socioeconomic status: evidence from England, 
      Social Science & Medicine, 74(9): 13311341. 
Levitt, S. D., List, J. A. 2007. What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the real 
       world? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 153174. 
Levitt, S. D., List, J. A. 2009. Field experiments in economics: The past, the present, and the future, European 
       Economic Review, 53(1): 118. 
Li, J. 2018. Plastic surgery or primary care? Altruistic preferences and expected specialty choice of U.S. medical 
         students', Journal of Health Economics, 62: 4559. 
Lindsay, C.M., Feigenbaum, B. 1984. Rationing by waiting lists, The American Economic Review, 74(3): 404417.  
Lüngen,  M.,  Stollenwerk,  B.,  Messner,  P.,  Lauterbach,  K.  W.,  Gerber,  A.  2008.  Waiting  times  for  elective 
     treatments according to insurance type: A randomized empirical study in Germany, International Journal 
     for Equity in Health, 7. 
Ramos,  A.L.,  Hoffmann,  F.  and  Spreckelsen,  O.  2018.  Waiting  times  in  primary  care  depending  on  insurance 
     scheme in Germany, BMC Health Services Research, 18(1): 191199. 
McGuire,  T.  G.  2000.  Physician  agency.  In:  Handbook  of  Health  Economics,  Eds.  Culyer,  A.  J.,  Newhouse  J.  P., 
      1(Part A) Chapter 9: 461536. Amsterdam: North Holland. 
Mackillop, William J., Zhou, Y., Quirt, C. F. 1995. A comparison of delays in the treatment of cancer with radiation 
      in Canada and the United States, International Journal of Radiation Oncology, 32(2): 531539. 
Maclean,  J.  C.,  McClellan  C.,  Pesko,  M.  F.,  Polsky,  D.  2018.  Reimbursement  rates  for  primary  care  services: 
     Evidence of spillover effects to behavioral health, NBER Working Papers 24805. 
Monstad, K., Birger, L., Ãeter, E., Espehaug, B. 2014. Waiting time and socioeconomic status: an individuallevel 
     analysis, Health Economics, 23(4): 446461. 
Neuberger,  J.  2000.  The  educated  patient:  new  challenges  for  the  medical  profession,  Journal  of  Internal 
     Medicine, 247: 610. 
Nicholson S., Pauly M.V., Wu A.Y.J., Murray J.F., Teutsch S.M., Berger M.L. 2018. Getting real performance out of 
      payforperformance, The Milbank Quarterly, 86(3): 435457. 
Olah,  M.E.,  Gaisano,  G.,  Hwang,  S.W.  2013.  The  effect  of  socioeconomic  status  on  access  to  primary  care:  An 
       audit study, CMAJ, 185(6): E263E269. 
Pilny, A., Wübker, A., Ziebarth, N. R. 2017. Introducing risk adjustment and free health plan choice in employer
       based health insurance: Evidence from Germany, Journal of Health Economics, 56(C): 330351. 
Polsky, D., Richards, M., Basseyn, S., Wissoker, D., Kenney, G M., Zuckerman, S., Rhodes, K. V. 2005. Appointment 
      availability  after  increases  in  Medicaid  payments  for  primary  care,  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine, 
      372(6): 537545. 
Rankin,  L.  2011.  When  Docs  Get  Annoyed  At  Empowered  Patients,  Psychology  Today,  Jul  19,  2011,  in: 
      https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/owningpink/201107/whendocsgetannoyedempowered
      patients, (date of access: July 7, 2019). 
Reif,  S.,  Wichert,  S.,  Wuppermann,  A.  (2018):  Is  it  good  to  be  too  light?  Birth  weight  thresholds  in  hospital 
        reimbursement systems, Journal of Health Economics, 59: 125. 
Reinhardt,  U.  E.  2011.  The  many  different  prices  paid  to  providers  and  the  flawed  theory  of  cost  shifting:  is  it 
      time for a more rational allpayer system? Health Affairs, 30(11): 21252133. 


                                                                35 
Resneck,  J.,  Pletcher,  M.J.,  Lozano,  N.,  2004.  Medicare,  Medicaid,  and  access  to  dermatologists:  The  effect  of 
     patient  insurance  on  appointment  access  and  wait  times,  Journal  of  the  American  Academy  of 
     Dermatology, 50: 85­92.  
Riach, P. A., Rich, J. 2004. Deceptive field experiments of discrimination: Are they ethical? Kyklos, 57(3): 457
       470. 
Richards,  M.  R.,  Polsky,  D.  2016.  Influence  of  provider  mix  and  regulation  on  primary  care  services  supplied  to 
       U.S. patients, Health Economics, Policy and Law, 11(2): 193213. 
Roll, K., Stargardt, T., Schreyögg, J. 2012. Effect of type of insurance and income on waiting time for outpatient 
       care, The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Issues and Practice, 37(S4): 609632.  
Sachverständigenrat  zur  Begutachtung  der  Entwicklung  im  Gesundheitswesen  2014.  Bedarfsgerechte 
     Versorgung    Perspektiven  für  ländliche  Regionen  und  ausgewählte  Leistungsbereiche,  Gutachten  2014 
     Taschenbuch ­ 1. Oktober 2014. 
Saloner, B., Polsky, D., Friedman, A., Rhodes, K. 2015. Primary care appointment availability and preventive care 
      utilization: Evidence from an audit study, Medical Care Research and Review, 72(2): 149167. 
Schmitz,  H.  (2013).  Practice  budgets  and  the  patient  mix  of  physicians  ­  The  effect  of  a  remuneration  system 
     reform on health care utilisation, Journal of Health Economics, 32(6): 12401249. 
Schmitz, H., Ziebarth, N. R. 2017. Does framing prices affect the consumer price sensitivity of health plan choice? 
     The Journal of Human Resources, 52(1): 89­128. 
Schwierz, C., Wübker, A., Wübker, A., Kuchinke, B. A. 2011. Discrimination in waiting times by insurance type and 
     financial  soundness  of  German  acute  care  hospitals,  European  Journal  of  Health  Economics,  12(5):  405
     416. 
Simon, M., 2017. Das Gesundheitssystem in Deutschland: Eine Einführung in Struktur und Funktionsweise. Bern: 
     Hogrefe Verlag.  
Siciliani, L., Hurst, J. 2005. Tackling excessive waiting times for elective surgery: A comparative analysis of policies 
        in 12 OECD countries, Health Policy, 72(2): 201215.  
Siciliani, L. 2006. A dynamic model of supply of elective surgery in the presence of waiting times and waiting lists, 
        Journal of Health Economics, 25(5): 891907. 
Skaggs,  D.L.,  Clemens,  S.M.,  Vitale,  M.G.,  Femino,  J.D.,  Kay,  R.M.,  2001.  Access  to  Orthopedic  Care  for  Children 
      With Medicaid Versus Private Insurance in California, Pedriatrics, 107: 1405­1408.  
Sommers,  B.  D.,  McMurtry,  C.  L.,  Blendon,  R.  J.,  Benson,  J.  M.,  Sayde,  J.  M.  2017.  Beyond  health  insurance: 
    remaining disparities in U.S. health care in the postACA era, The Milbank Quarterly, 95(1): 4369. 
SocioEconomic Panel (SOEP): Data for years 19842016, version 33, SOEP, 2019, doi: 10.5684/soep.v33. 
Soester Anzeiger 2019. Warum Patienten lange auf einen FacharztTermin warten, in: https://www.soester
      anzeiger.de/lokales/soest/manchefachaerztelehnenneuepatienten12927558.html, (date of access: 
      March 13, 2020). 
Spiegel 2015. Lügen für schnellen Arzttermin "Klar bin ich privat versichert", in: 
      https://www.spiegel.de/gesundheit/diagnose/arzttermindarfmansichalsprivatpatientausgebena
      1064882.html (date of access: July 28, 2020). 
Sundmacher,  L.,  Kopetsch,  T.  2013.  Waiting  times  in  the  ambulatory  sectorthe  case  of  chronically  ill  patients, 
     International Journal for Equity in Health, 12(1): 7787. 
van  Doorslaer,  E.,  Wagstaff,  A.,  van  der  Burg,  H.,  Christiansen,  T.,  De  Graeve,  D.,  Duchesne,I.,  Gerdtham,  U.G., 
      Gerfin, M., Geurts, J., Gross, L., Häkkinen, U., John, J., Klavus, J., Leu, R. E., Nolan, B., O'Donnell, O., Propper, 


                                                              36 
       C.,  Puffer,  F.,  Schellhorn,  M.,  Sundberg,  G.,  Winkelhake,  O.  2000.  Equity  in  the  delivery  of  health  care  in 
       Europe and the US, Journal of Health Economics, 19(5): 553583. 
Versorgungsatlas 2018. Versorgungsstrukturen, in: 
      https://www.versorgungsatlas.de/themen/versorgungsstrukturen/ (date of access: June 10, 2018). 
Viberg,  N.,  Forsberg,  B.  C.,  Borowitz,  M.,  Molin,  R.  2013.  International  comparisons  of  waiting  times  in  health 
      care  Limitations and prospects, Health Policy, 112(12): 5361. 
Walendzik,  A.  und  Wasem,  J.  (2019),  Ärztliche  Vergütung  ambulanter  und  ambulant  erbringbarer  Leistungen 
     Gesundheitspolitisch  zielgerechte  Integrationsmodelle  über  sektorale  Leistungsträger  und 
     Finanzierungssysteme,  Bertelsmann  Stiftung  (Eds.).  First  edition,  in:  https://www.bertelsmann
     stiftung.de/de/publikationen/publikation/did/aerztlicheverguetungambulanterundambulant
     erbringbarerleistungen/ (date of access: March 13, 2020). 
Walendzik,  A.,  Greß,  S.,  Manouguian,  M.,  Wasem,  J.  2008.  Vergütungsunterschiede  im  ärztlichen  Bereich 
     zwischen  PKV  und  GKV  auf  Basis  des  standardisierten  Leistungsniveaus  der  GKV  und  Modelle  der 
     Vergütungsangleichung, Diskussionbeitrag Universität DuisburgEssen, 165. 
WIdO 2020. AOKAbrechnungsdaten nach § 295 SGB V.  
Yun, Y. H., Kim, Y. A., Min, Y. H., Park, S., Won, Y. J., Kim, D. Y., ... , Lee, D. H. 2012. The influence of hospital 
      volume and surgical treatment delay on longterm survival after cancer surgery. Annals of Oncology, 
      23(10): 27312737. 
                                      




                                                               37 
Figures and Tables  

                           Figure 1: Selected Counties for Field Experiment 




                                                                                       
Source: Own illustration. The 36 counties selected for the field experiment are dark gray. Between one 
and four counties in each of the 16 federal states were selected (see Appendix B).  

                              




                                                 38 
 

                  Figure 2: Likelihood to be Offered Appointment by Insurance Status 

            1.0

            0.9

            0.8

            0.7

            0.6

            0.5

            0.4

            0.3

            0.2

            0.1

            0.0
                                 Publicly Insured         Privately Insured
                                                                                         
Source: Graph uses Sample A. The bars show 95% confidence intervals, derived from a regression of 
apptm on Privately Insured with standard errors clustered at the practice level. 
                              




                                                    39 
                      Figure 3: Distribution of Wait Times in Weekdays by Insurance Status 


                      0.08



                      0.06
            density




                      0.04



                      0.02



                      0.00
                             0             50                 100          150                200
                                                              days

                                            Privately insured          Publicly insured

                                                                                                     
Source: Graph uses Sample B. Xaxis shows the number of weekdays, counting from the dayofthecall 
until an appointment was offered.  

                                                          

                                                          

                                                          

                                                          

                                                          

                                                          

                                                          

 




                                                        40 
                         Figure 4: Average Wait Times by Insurance Status 

             30


             25


             20


             15


             10


               5


               0
                                Publicly Insured       Privately Insured
                                                                                          
Source: Graph uses Sample B. The bars show 95% confidence intervals, derived from a regression of 
dayswait on Privately Insured with standard errors clustered at the practice level. 
 
 




                                                41 
             Figure 5: Likelihood to be Offered Appointment by Insurance Status and Specialist 

                 1.0
                 0.9
                 0.8
                 0.7
                 0.6
                 0.5
                 0.4
                 0.3
                 0.2
                 0.1
                 0.0
                       Gastroenterologist            Allergist      Otorhinolaryngologist
                                        Publicly Insured          Privately Insured

                                                                                                   
Source: Graph uses Sample A. The bars show 95% confidence intervals, derived from separate 
regressions by specialty of apptm on Privately Insured with standard errors clustered at the practice 
level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




                                                     42 
                   Figure 6: Average Wait Times by Insurance Status and Specialist 

             60


             50


             40


             30


             20


             10


               0
                   Gastroenterologist             Allergist        Otorhinolaryngologist
                                     Publicly Insured           Privately Insured

                                                                                               
Source: Graph uses Sample B. The bars show 95% confidence intervals, derived from separate 
regressions by specialty of dayswait on Privately Insured with standard errors clustered at the practice 
level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               




                                                   43 
                           Table 1: SHI and PHI Reimbursement for Requested Treatments  

                                     EBM                                                    GOÄ                               
                           Points           Euros        Average claim          Points             Euros            Average claim 
                                                          amount per                                                 amount per 
                                                              visit                                                     visit 
Allergy test                 458            48.80            109.6                45               183.60              201.49 
Hearing test                 147            15.66             N/A                 158              23.02                N/A 
Gastroenterology             835            88.96            171.8                800              204.02              244.47 
Notes:  The  first  two  columns  display  public  reimbursement  rates  according  to  the  Einheitlicher  Bewertungsmaßstab 
(EBM) or "Unified Assessment Scale." The next column uses claims data from the biggest public health insurer group in 
Germany  ("Allgemeine  Ortskrankenkassen")  with  a  market  share  of  roughly  35  percent.  It  indicates  the  total  claim 
amounts when the diagnosis contained ICD10 code T78 ("allergies") or ICD10 codes K29 ("Gastritis and duodenitis"), 
K30 ("Functional dyspepsia") or K31 "(Other diseases of stomach and duodenum) (WIdO (2020). The next two columns 
display  private  reimbursement  rates  according  to  the  Gebührenordnung  für  Ärzte  (GOÄ)  or  "Fee  Schedule  for 
Physicians" assuming an adjustment factor of 3.5. Values for GÖA allergy tests are for 20 skin prick tests. The EBM does 
not differentiate between the number of prick tests. We used following GOÄ numbers: GOÄ 676 for gastroscopy, GOÄ 
385 for allergy tests and GOÄ 1403 for hearing tests. GOÄcode 676 is "Stomach examination under visual control using 
a camera to be used endogastrally, including photographs" and GOÄcode 683 "Gastroscopy including oesophagoscopy 
using  fully  flexible  optical  instruments,  including  sample  excision  and/or  puncture"  (both  gastroscopy).  We  used 
following EBM numbers: EBM 13400 for gastroscopy, EBM 30111 for allergy tests and EBM 20320 for hearing tests. The 
final  column  uses  claims  data  from  a  big  private  insurer,  which  is  roughly  representative  of  the  privately  insured 
population  in  Germany  (see  Karlsson  et  al.  2016  for  details).  It  indicates  the  total  claim  amounts  when  the  diagnosis 
contained ICD10 code T78 ("allergies") or ICD10 codes K29 ("Gastritis and duodenitis"), K30 ("Functional dyspepsia") 
or  K31  "(Other  diseases  of  stomach  and duodenum"); standard  errors  for  the  last column  and  "allergy  test" is  450.24 
and for the last column and Gastroenterology" is 372.38.  
                                         




                                                                  44 
                                                   
                                   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics 
                                    (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5) 
VARIABLES                          mean           sd            min           max           N 
Dependent Variables                                                                           
Apptm                              0.915        0.279             0            1          1,328 
Dayswait                           19.01        23.17             0           171         1,215 
Dayswait II                        18.36        22.71             0           171         1,215 
                                                                                              
Main Independent Variables                                                                    
Privately Insured                  0.501        0.500             0            1          1,328 
Allergy test                       0.215        0.411             0            1          1,328 
Hearing test                       0.363        0.481             0            1          1,328 
Gastroscopy                        0.159        0.366             0            1          1,328 
First call privately insured       0.486        0.500             0            1          1,328 
                                                                                              
CountyLevel Controls                                                                          
Unemployment rate in %             7.924        2.634          2.100         13.60        1,328 
Share Employees w/                 10.31        3.928          3.800         16.80        1,328 
academic degree in % 
HH income per capita,              1,789        318.2          1,362         3,451        1,328 
Physician density                  2.247        0.577          1.172         3.300        1,328 
Residents per km2 in 1000          2,174        1,590            55          4,668        1,328 
Eastern federal state              0.133        0.339             0            1          1,328 
Share PHI1 in %                    12.03        4.868          4.354         17.87        1,328 
Sources: See Section 4 and 5 for details. Countylevel controls are taken from BBSR (2018) and 
Destatis (2018a, b).1Available at state level. 
                                                    




                                                 45 
            Table 3: Impact of Insurance Status on Likelihood to be Offered Appointment 

                            (1)               (2)                  (3)                  (4) 
                          apptm             apptm                apptm                apptm   
                                                                                            
    Privately           0.0483***         0.0515***            0.0511***             0.0384** 
    Insured 
                         (0.0117)          (0.0117)             (0.0119)             (0.0164) 
                                                                                           
    Dayofweek 
    FE                       X                 X                    X                    X 
    Weekofyear 
    FE                       X                 X                    X                    X 
    Time of day              X                 X                    X                    X 
    Specialty 
    controls                                   X                    X                    X 
    Practice FE                                                                          X 
    County FE                                                       X                      
                                                                                           
    Observations          1,328              1,328                1,328                1,328 
    Rsquared              0.0225            0.0585               0.1125               0.8506 
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the practice level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * 
p<0.1. Each column is one model as in equation (1) using Sample A, see Section 5 for details. The 
mean of the dependent binary variable apptm indicating whether an appointment was offered is 0.85 
(see Table 1). 

 
 
 
 
                              




                                                  46 
                                  Table 4: Impact of Insurance Status on Wait Times 
                                      (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4) 
                                Log(dayswait)            Log(dayswait)         Log(dayswait)           Log(dayswait)    
                                                                                                                 
     Privately Insured            1.0700***                1.1073***             1.1218***              1.1381*** 
                                   (0.0871)                 (0.0885)               (0.0891)              (0.1276) 
                                                                                                                
     Dayofweek FE                      X                        X                      X                      X 
     Weekofyear FE                     X                        X                      X                      X 
     Time of day                       X                        X                      X                      X 
     Specialty controls                                         X                      X                      X 
     Practice FE                                                                                              X 
     County FE                                                                         X                        
                                                                                                                
     Observations                    1,004                    1,004                  1,004                 1,004 
     Rsquared                       0.1665                   0.2435                 0.3058                0.7270 
Notes:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses,  clustered  at  the  practice  level.  ***  p<0.01,  **  p<0.05,  * 
p<0.1. Each column is one model as in equation (2) using Sample B, see Section 5 for details. The mean of 
the  dependent  variable  dayswait  indicating  the  number  of  weekdays  until  the  offered  appointment  is 
24.89  for  publicly  and  11.57  days  privately  insured  patients  (see  Figure  4).  The  overall  mean  is  18.23  (all 
values  for  Sample  B,  not  shown  in  Table  1).  All  models  use  the  logarithm  of  dayswait  where  values  of  0 
have been replaced with 0.01. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    




                                                              47 
         Table 5: Impact of Insurance Status on Likelihood to be Offered Appointment and Wait Times 
                                                     (1)                         (2)                         (3) 
                                              Gastroscopy                   Allergy     test           Hearing     test 
    Panel A: apptm                                                                                               
                                                                                                                 
    Privately Insured                             0.0706                       0.0223                      0.0345 
                                                 (0.0600)                    (0.0670)                   (0.0231) 
    Observations                                     211                         286                         482 
    Rsquared                                       0.891                        0.923                       0.814 
                                                                                                                 
    Panel B: Log(dayswait)                                                                                       
                                                                                                                 
    Privately Insured                           1.482***                     1.225***                   0.834*** 
                                                  (0.341)                      (0.314)                    (0.206) 
    Observations                                     142                         180                         402 
    Rsquared                                       0.790                        0.779                      0.725 
                                                                                                                 
    Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on practice level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
    Each  column  is  one  model  as  in  equation  (1)  (Panel  A)  or  equation  (2)  (Panel  B)  using  the  according 
    subsample  for  each  specialty  of  Sample  A  (Panel  A)  or  Sample  B  (Panel  B).  Both  models  include  dayof
    week  FE,  weekofyear  FE,  calling  time  of  day  and  practice  FE.  The  coefficient  for  column  (1)  in  Panel  A 
    becomes  significant  when  dayofweek  FE  are  excluded.  The  sum  of  the  subsamples  is  slightly  smaller 
    than Sample A and Sample B in the main analysis as those samples also include pretestobservations for 
    the other indications (eye examination, a magnetresonancetherapy of the right knee, and a pulmonary 
    function test).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     



                                                            48 
                                           Table 6: Effect Heterogeneity  
                                (1)               (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5) 
                             Physician       Resident per        Household                              Share of PHI 
                              density            km2               income         East Germany             in state 
    Panel A: apptm                                                                                              
                                                                                                                 
    Privately Insured                                                                                            
    *[column]                 0.0022            0.0000             0.0000              0.0093              0.0016 
                             (0.0120)          (0.0000)           (0.0001)            (0.0495)            (0.0028) 
    Privately Insured         0.0482            0.0475            0.0554             0.0396**               0.0191 
                             (0.0538)          (0.0292)           (0.1054)            (0.0173)            (0.0348) 
    Column                    0.0232            0.0000             0.0002              0.0047               0.0022 
                             (0.0313)          (0.0000)           (0.0003)            (0.1415)            (0.0176) 
                                                                                                                 
    Panel B: Log(dayswait)                                                                                       
                                                                                                                 
    Privately Insured 
    *[column]                  0.1209          0.0002**            0.0004              0.3615               0.0161 
                              (0.0982)           (0.0001)         (0.0004)            (0.3957)             (0.0296) 
    Privately Insured          0.6148          0.7679***           0.3541           1.1814***            1.3296*** 
                              (0.4444)           (0.1974)         (0.7664)            (0.1356)             (0.3792) 
    Column                     0.2723             0.0014           0.0024            3.7602***           0.7537*** 
                              (0.2286)           (0.0010)         (0.0019)            (0.6305)             (0.1366) 
                                                                                                                
    Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the practice level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * 
    p<0.1.  Each  column  in  each  panel  is  one  model.  Panel  A  runs  models  as  in  equation  (1)  with  1,328 
    observations.  Panel  B  runs  models  as  in  equation  (2)  with  1,004  observations.  The  column  header 
    indicates  the  stratifying  variable  and  [column]  represents  these  variables.  The  physician  density  is 
    based on the average physician density of the three specialist groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


                                                          49 
Appendix A 
              Figure A1: Distribution of Number of Contacted Specialists by 36 Counties 




                                                                                                   
Notes: The histogram displays the number of contacted specialists by county. In total, 36 representative 
counties were included in the experiment (see Section 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




                                                  50 
 
                             Figure A2: Distribution of Wait Time in Weekdays 




                                                                                                             
Notes:  The  histogram  displays  the  wait  time  in  weekdays  for  all  successfully  contacted  practices  that 
offered an appointment, i.e., the 81% of practices in Sample A.  
 
                                  




                                                        51 
                          Figure A3: Distribution of Wait Time in Weekdays 


          1.0


          0.8


          0.6


          0.4


          0.2


          0.0
                0                 50                 100                 150               200
                                           wait time in week days

                                    Privately Insured               Publicly Insured

                                                                                                   
Notes: The cumulative density functions display the wait time in weekdays for all successfully contacted 
practices that offered an appointment under both insurance types (i.e. Sample B). The cdf of privately 
insured patients dominates the cdf of publicly insured patients, i.e. for each wait time in weekdays the 
cumulative density for privately insured is higher than the density for publicly insured. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               




                                                  52 
 
    Figure A4: Reasons for Exclusion of Practices 
                           




                                                      
 
 




                         53 
                        Table A1: Comparison of Publicly and Privately Insured in Germany  

                                                                                     Privately Insured 
                                Publicly        Privately       Civil           High             Self            Non
                                Insured         Insured         Servants        income           Employed  Employed 
    Age                         50.29           53.69           45.39           48.46            49.50           64.56 
    Female                      0.5254          0.3912          0.4976          0.2431           0.2095          0.4523 
    Smoker                      0.2691          0.1678          0.1852          0.1516           0.2530          0.1316 
    BMI                         26.56           25.86           25.69           25.97            26.11           25.86 
    Hospital stay last year     0.1369          0.1130          0.1005          0.0636           0.0234          0.1889 
    Hospital nights last year  1.4380           1.2717          1.3751          0.5016           0.1125          2.0833 
    Outpatient visits           2.3895          2.3865          2.6044          1.7043           1.3431          3.0272 
    Public sector employee  0.1126              0.3018          0.9782          0.1616           0.0091          0.0011 
    Fulltime employed           0.3686          0.5079          0.8234          0.8247           0.8736          0.0000 
    Parttime employed           0.1880          0.1145          0.1744          0.1753           0.1264          0.0000 
    Dropout                     0.0255          0.0078          0.0053          0.0050           0.0242          0.0039 
    High school degree          0.1830          0.5265          0.6948          0.5821           0.4114          0.4360 
    Monthly gross wage          2,403           4,708           3,833           6,059            5,341           4,039 
    Monthly net wage            1,564           3,118           2,922           3,769            3,140           3,029 
    Equivalized HH income  23,228               40,031          34,264          50,957           52,992          34,707 
    Observations                23,970          3216            773             460              457             1034 
    Notes: SOEP  (2016) v.33  95% sample. See Goebel et al. 2019 for details. All summary statistics are weighted 
    using  SOEP  cross  sectional  weights.  The  number  of  observations  indicated  in  the  last  row  is  smaller  for  the 
    following  variables:  smoker,  BMI,  outpatient  visits,  monthly  gross  and  net  wage  as  well  as  the  equivalized 
    household income.  
 




                                                               54 
               Table A2: Descriptive Statistics, Practices that responded Once vs Twicee 
Variables                                                        Responded once          Responded twice 
                                                                  (1)       (2)           (3)       (4) 
                                                                mean        sd           mean        sd 
Dependent Variables                                                                                     
Appointment                                                        1         0             1          0 
Waiting time in working days                                    22.80      25.80         17.28     21.42 
Waiting time in working days w/o                                22.06      25.36         16.70     20.80 
bridging days 
                                                                                                          
Main Independent Variables                                                                                
Privately Insured                                                 0.578       0.495      0.492       0.500 
Allergy test                                                      0.313       0.465      0.179       0.384 
Hearing test                                                      0.242       0.429      0.400       0.490 
Gastroscopy                                                       0.242       0.429      0.141       0.349 
First call privately insured                                      0.493       0.501      0.492       0.500 
                                                                                  
CountyLevel Controls                                                              
Unemployment rate in %                                            8.431       2.744      7.744       2.593 
Share employees w/ academic                                       9.614       3.472      10.61       3.983 
degree in % 
Household income per capita,                                      1,733       321.2      1,807       316.0 
Residents per doctor                                              2.213       0.538      2.266       0.589 
Residents per square km² in 1000                                  1,968       1,481      2,251       1,605 
East German state                                                 0.194       0.397      0.112       0.315 
            1
Share PHI  in %                                                   12.64       4.486      11.91       4.978 
Number of practices:                                               211         211        502         502 
  Sources:  See Section 4 and 5 for details. Countylevel controls are taken from BBSR (2018) and Destatis 
  (2018a, b).1Available at the state level. Columns (1) and (2) report the mean and standard deviation (sd) 
  for practices that only responded once and columns (3) and (4) report the mean and standard deviation 
  for practices that responded twice. 




                                                      55 
     Table A3: Impact of Insurance Status on Likelihood to be Offered Appointment (Probit & OLS) 

                                             (1)                     (2) 
                                           Probit                    OLS 
                                           apptm                   apptm   
Privately Insured                        0.0542***               0.0483*** 
                                          (0.0153)                (0.0117) 
Dayofweek FE                                  X                       X 
Time of day                                   X                       X 
Specialty controls                            X                       X 
                                                                        
Observations                                1,328                   1,328 
Rsquared                                                           0.0225 
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
Each column in each panel is one model using Sample B. Column (1) reports the 
marginal effects from the probit model, column (2) the results from the main 
analysis in the same specification for comparison. 




                                                 56 
           Table A4: Impact of Insurance Status on Wait Times (Poisson & Negative Binomial) 

                                    (1)                     (2)                   (3)                  (4) 
                               dayswait                dayswait                dayswait           dayswait    
    Poisson model                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
    Privately Insured         0.7194***                0.7262***            0.7435***            0.7570*** 
                                (0.0595)                (0.0586)               (0.0579)           (0.0592) 
                                                                                                          
    Dayofweek FE                     X                       X                     X                    X 
    Weekofyear FE                    X                       X                     X                    X 
    Time of day                      X                       X                     X                    X 
    Specialty controls                                       X                     X                    X 
    Practice FE                                                                                         X 
    County FE                                                                      X                      
                                                                                                          
    Observations                  1,004                  1,004                  1,004                1,004 
    Pseudo R                     0.151                   0.276                   0.353               0.693 
                                                                                                          
    Negative binomial model                                                                           
                                                                                                     
    Privately Insured         0.7534***                0.7064***            0.7464***            0.7932*** 
                                (0.0574)                (0.0555)               (0.0519)           (0.0549) 
                                                                                                          
    Dayofweek FE                     X                       X                     X                    X 
    Weekofyear FE                    X                       X                     X                    X 
    Time of day                      X                       X                     X                    X 
    Specialty controls                                       X                     X                    X 
    Practice FE                                                                                         X 
    County FE                                                                      X                      
                                                                                                          
    Observations                  1,004                   1,004                  1,004               1,004 
    Pseudo R                     0.026                   0.045                   0.062               0.209 
                                                                                                          
Notes:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses,  clustered  on  practice  level.  ***  p<0.01,  **  p<0.05,  * 
p<0.1. Each column is one model as in equation (2) using Sample B, see Section 5 for details. The mean 
of the dependent variable dayswait indicating the number of weekdays until the offered appointment 
is 24.89 for publicly and 11.57 days privately insured patients. The overall mean is 18.23 (all values for 
Sample  B,  not  shown  in  Table  1).  Panel  A  reports  results  from  the  poisson  model  and  panel  B  reports 
results from the negative binomial model. 




                                                         57 
                           Table A5: Impact of Insurance Status on Wait Times 
                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4) 
                              dayswait            dayswait              dayswait             dayswait   
                                                                                                    
   Privately Insured         12.5262***         12.6861***            12.9848***           13.1197*** 
                              (1.1075)             (1.1080)             (1.1385)             (1.6333) 
                                                                                                    
   Dayofweek FE                    X                   X                    X                     X 
   Weekofyear FE                   X                   X                    X                     X 
   Time of day                     X                   X                    X                     X 
   Specialty controls                                  X                    X                     X 
   Practice FE                                                                                    X 
   County FE                                                                X                       
                                                                                                    
   Observations                 1,004                1,004                1,004                1,004 
   Rsquared                    0.1314               0.2579               0.3448               0.7213 
Notes:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses.  ***  p<0.01,  **  p<0.05,  *  p<0.1.  Each  column  is  one 
model as in equation (2) using Sample B, see Section 5 for details. The mean of the dependent variable 
dayswait  indicating  the  number  of  weekdays  until  the  offered  appointment  is  24.89  for  publicly  and 
11.57 days privately insured patients. The overall mean is 18.23 (all values for Sample B, not shown in 
Table 1). In contrast to Table 4, this table does not take the logarithm of the dependent variable.  
 
                                                                                         




                                                      58 
                Table A6: Impact of Insurance Status, First Contact + Main Specialties  

                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4) 
                                apptm               apptm            Log(dayswait)         Log(dayswait)   
Panel A: Only first successful contact 
                                                                                                    
Privately Insured             0.0751***           0.0731***            0.9327***            0.9682*** 
                               (0.0180)            (0.0182)             (0.1192)             (0.1235) 
Dayofweek FE                       X                   X                    X                     X 
Weekofyear FE                      X                   X                    X                     X 
Time of day                        X                   X                    X                     X 
Speciality controls                                    X                                          X 
County fixed effects                                   X                                          X 
                                                                                                    
Observations                     766                 766                  699                   699 
Rsquared                        0.2428              0.3448               0.1784               0.2887 
                                                                                                    
Panel B: Only three main specialties 
                                                                                                    
Privately Insured             0.0396***            0.0361*             1.0148***            1.0491*** 
                               (0.0133)            (0.0199)             (0.1049)             (0.1547) 
Dayofweek FE                       X                   X                    X                     X 
Weekofyear FE                      X                   X                    X                     X 
Time of day                        X                   X                    X                     X 
Specialty controls                                     X                                          X 
County fixed effects                                   X                                          X 
                                                                                                    
Observations                     979                 979                  724                   724 
Rsquared                        0.0176              0.8689               0.1536               0.7185 
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each column in each panel 
is one model. Columns (1) and (2) report results for apptm and columns (3) and (4) report results for 
dayswait. Panel A  restricts the sample to solely the first successful contact and Panel B restricts the 
sample to the three main specialties. 




                                                  59 
                    Table A7: Impact of Insurance Status on Wait Times (unbalanced panel) 

                                         (1)                      (2)                    (4) 
                                    Log(dayswait)          Log(dayswait)          Log(dayswait) 
                                                                                            
    Privately Insured                1.0110***              1.0622***               1.0786*** 
                                      (0.0907)                 (0.0879)               (0.0879) 
                                                                                            
    Dayofweek FE                          X                        X                      X 
    Weekofyear FE                         X                        X                      X 
    Time of day                           X                        X                      X 
    Specialty controls                                             X                      X 
    County FE                                                                             X 
                                                                                            
    Observations                        1,215                    1,215                  1,215 
    Rsquared                           0.1612                   0.2414                 0.2964 
    Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each column in 
    each panel is one model as in Table 4 but using Sample A, the unbalanced panel. See main text for 
    details. 
 




                                                     60 
                           Table A8: Effect heterogeneity (only first successful contact) 

                                     (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)              (5) 
                                  Physician     Resident      Household          East        Share of PHI 
                                   density      per km2         income         Germany          in state 
        Panel A: apptm                                                                               
                                                                                                     
        Privately Insured                                                                            
        *[column]                  0.0079        0.0000         0.0000          0.0121          0.0005 
                                  (0.0160)      (0.0000)       (0.0001)        (0.0659)        (0.0036) 
        Privately Insured          0.1156       0.0994**        0.0592        0.0786***        0.0872* 
                                  (0.0748)      (0.0387)       (0.1110)        (0.0210)        (0.0491) 
        Column                     0.0027       0.0000*         0.0000          0.0495          0.0001 
                                  (0.0144)      (0.0000)       (0.0001)        (0.0550)        (0.0037) 
                                                                                                     
        Panel B: Log(dayswait)                                                                       
                                                                                                     
        Privately Insured                                                                            
        *[column]                   0.0544         0.0001     0.0000          0.1811            0.0083 
                                   (0.0874)        (0.0001)  (0.0004)        (0.3906)          (0.0250) 
                                  1.1904***                   0.9501        0.9784***        1.0606*** 
        Privately Insured                         0.7860*** 
                                   (0.4044)        (0.1829)  (0.7245)        (0.1236)         (0.3208) 
        Column                       0.0121         0.0001    0.0003          0.2755           0.0227 
                                   (0.0503)        (0.0001)  (0.0002)        (0.1840)         (0.0176) 
        Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each column in 
        each panel is one model. Panel A runs models as in equation (1) with only first successful 
        contact with 766 observations. Panel B runs models as in equation (2) with only first successful 
        contact with 699 observations. The column header indicates the stratifying variable and 
        [column] represents these variables. The physician density is based on the average physician 
        density of the three specialist groups.  
     
                                    




                                                        61 
Appendix B 
Selection of Treatment Counties 

We selected the 36 treatment counties using the following procedure based on official data from (BBSR, 
2018; Destatis, 2018a, b):  

1.           Within the 16 federal German states, we chose the number of counties to include based on the 
             population  and  the  geographic  size  of  the  counties,  such  that  at  least  one  but  at  most  four 
             counties per federal state were included.  

2.           We ranked all 16 states by their population and their area in km2. Then, we built four categories 
             based on these two rankings. The four categories then determined whether we included 1, 2, 3, 
             or  4  counties  of  this  state  in  the  field  experiment.  For  example,  Bavaria  is  the  largest  German 
             state  in  terms  of  size  (70,542  km2  or  27,236  miles2).  It  is  the  second  largest  German  state  in 
             terms  of  its  population  (12,930,751  residents  in  2017).  Hence,  we  included  four  Bavarian 
             counties in the experiment. 

3.           Within  a  state,  we  then  selected  counties  based  on  the  average  household  income.  First,  we 
             assigned  all  counties  to  one  of  five  income  categories.35  Then,  we  counted  the  number  of 
             counties in each of the five income categories. For example, Bavaria is a very prosperous state. 
             None of the 70 counties is in the lowest income category, 6 are in the second lowest, 13 in the 
             third lowest, 26 in the second highest and 25 in the highest. Because (2) determined to choose 
             four  Bavarian  counties,  we  selected  one  from  each  income  category.  As  another  example, 
             Brandenburg (a state in East Germany) is not very populous and prosperous. It has 15 counties 
             in  the  lowest  income  category,  2  in  the  second  lowest  and  1  in  the  third  lowest.  Because  (2) 
             determined  to  choose only one county  from Brandenburg due  to  the  relatively  low number  of 
             residents (2,494,648 in 2017), we included a county from the lowest income category.  

    4.       In  the  last  step,  we  randomly  selected  the  specific  county  to  be  included  within  the  income 
             category.  For  example,  steps  (2)  and  (3)  determined  to  choose  one  of  the  15  Brandenburg 
             counties  in  the  lowest  income  category.  We  randomly  draw  this  final  county.  It  is  gray  shaded 
             in Figure 1. 

                                                       




                                                       
35
     (1) 16.274  19.148, (2) 19.149  20.928, (3) 20.929  22.058, (4) 22.059  23.443, (5) 23.444  25.663. 


                                                              62 
Appendix C 
Experimental Protocol of Telephone Calls 

1. Start of Call 
SHI: LisaMarie Müller/KatharinaSophie Meier is here, hello. I am calling to ask for an appointment. I 
am insured at TechnikerKrankenkasse and I need an appointment for a gastroscopy/an allergy test/a 
hearing test. 
PHI: KatharinaSophie Meier/LisaMarie Müller is here, hello. I am calling to ask for an appointment. I 
am privately insured and I need an appointment for a gastroscopy/an allergy test/a hearing test. 
 
2. End of Call 
Oh, I just realize, I don't have my calendar with me. I need to call again. Don't block the slot for me, 
please, I just can't say whether I am free then. 
 
3. Answers to frequently asked questions 
Q: Have you been to our practice before? 
        A: No, I have never been at your place. I have just moved here. 
Q: Why do you need the appointment? Are you in pain? 
        A: No, it is not urgent. I went to see the GP and he gave me the referral to check it. 
Q: Who is your GP? 
        A: His name is Schmitz, but he is at my home town. 
Q: Do you have a referral and what does it say on the referral? 
        A: Yes, I do. But I don't have it with me right now. 
Q: When is your birthday? 
        A: My birthday is on 20/12/1988 
Q: What is your phone number? 
        Provision of a phone number that was not in use anymore. The actual number of the phone 
        the call was conducted with was suppressed. 
     




                                                     63 
