                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    HUMAN CAPITALISTS

                                       Andrea L. Eisfeldt
                                        Antonio Falato
                                       Mindy Z. Xiaolan

                                      Working Paper 28815
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28815


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank the seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute Micro Data and
Macro Models Workshop, the Society of Economic Dynamics Annual Meeting, the MIT Junior
Finance Conference, ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, the Macro Finance Society
Biannual Meeting, Texas Finance Festival, WUSTL, the Macroeconomics of Inequality Mini-
Conference, AFA, Boston University, Columbia University, the University of Minnesota, the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, the London School of Economics, the University of
Texas at Austin, MIT, Stanford, UC Davis, Northwestern University, the University of Chicago,
Carnegie Mellon University, Georgetown University, Princeton University, Upenn Wharton
School, University of Toronto for their helpful comments. Xiaolan gratefully acknowledges the
financial support from the faculty excellence research grant from the McCombs School of
Business at the University of Texas at Austin. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Antonio Falato, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Human Capitalists
Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Antonio Falato, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan
NBER Working Paper No. 28815
May 2021
JEL No. E0,E25,G3

                                          ABSTRACT

The widespread and growing use of equity-based compensation has transformed high-skilled
labor from a pure labor input to a class of "human capitalists." We show that high-skilled labor
earns substantial income in the form of equity claims to firms' future dividends and capital gains.
Equity-based compensation has dramatically increased since the 1980s, representing forty percent
of total compensation to high-skilled labor in recent years. Ignoring equity income causes
incorrect measurement of the returns to high-skilled labor, with substantial effects on
macroeconomic trends. In our sample, including equity-based compensation in high-skilled labor
income reduces the total decline in labor's wage-only income share relative to total value added
since the 1980s by over 30%. The inclusion of equity-based compensation also eliminates the
majority of the decline in the high-skilled labor share. Only by including equity pay does our
structural estimation support complementarity between high-skilled labor and physical capital
greater than that of Cobb and Douglas (1928). We also provide additional regression evidence of
such complementarity.

Andrea L. Eisfeldt                               Mindy Z. Xiaolan
Anderson School of Management                    University of Texas at Austin
University of California at Los Angeles          2110 Speedway B6600
110 Westwood Plaza                               Austin, TX 78703
Suite C4.10                                      mindy.xiaolan@mccombs.utexas.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu

Antonio Falato
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop #89
20th Street & Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20551
antonio.falato@frb.gov




A live draft link is available at
https://sites.google.com/site/andrealeisfeldt/human_capitalists.pdf?attredirects=0
1    Introduction

Human capitalists are corporate employees who receive significant equity-based compensation. Two

examples of this type of compensation are equity grants and stock options. These employees are

partial owners of US firms, and in return for their human capital input, human capitalists accrue

a share of firm profits through firm dividends and capital gains in addition to earning wages. We

construct the stylized facts that describe the evolution of human capitalists' income across US

firms and industries, and over time. We show that human capitalists have become an increasingly

important class of corporate income earners. Due to measurement challenges, prior work has

underestimated the importance of equity pay below the C-suite. We show that correctly measuring

the total income of human capitalists income substantially alters conclusions about changes in

factor shares and technological complementarity.

    Equity-based compensation represents almost 40% of compensation to human capitalists in the

most recent decade, and constitutes a 7% share of value added. As such, correctly accounting for

the total income earned by these skilled laborers has a dramatic effect on measured changes in

labor shares over the modern era. We include equity-based compensation in our sample, and this

inclusion reduces the decline implied by the wage-only income share of value added since the 1980s

by 32%. For high-skilled labor, the inclusion of equity-based compensation eliminates the decline

of skilled wage income share by 87%. Thus, correctly measuring the return to high-skilled labor can

resolve the otherwise puzzling lack of evidence of complementarity between high-skilled labor and

new-economy physical capital. Indeed, the high-skill share of total labor income increases from one

third at the beginning of the 1960s to two thirds in the 2010s when equity-based compensation is

included. Importantly, we show that equity-based compensation is widely used beyond the much-

studied executive level. In fact, recent data show that 78% of equity-based compensation went to

employees outside the C-suite.

    The most closely related studies to ours are the recent complementary studies of capital income

compensation in the private sector. Smith, Yagan, Zidar, and Zwick (2018) show that small private

business owners earn considerable capital income as compensation for their labor input. Bhandari

and McGrattan (2020) develop a theory of sweat equity, by which business owners are compensated

for their development of intangible assets. Also very closely related is the recent paper Koh,


                                                 1
Santaeul`
        alia-Llopis, and Zheng (2020), which points out the mechanical effect on the labor share

of the BEA's revision to the capital accounts to include intellectual property products in capital

income.1 As pointed out in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013), a large fraction of spending on

intangible assets such as knowledge capital is actually labor compensation, including equity pay,

making the BEA's allocation of R&D expenditures to capital income as detailed by Koh et al.

(2020) particularly problematic.

       Our study develops a measure of equity-based pay in public firms, and contributes important

new facts to the study of changing factor shares, and the implications for the study of income

and wealth in the face of declining investment goods prices. Elsby, Hobijn, and S
                                                                                ¸ ahin (2013) and

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) show that the labor share represented by wages has declined in

the US corporate sector since the early 1980s. Indeed, wage growth has been anemic relative to

the growth of corporate profits. These facts seem to indicate a secular shift of income away from

the providers of labor to the owners of physical capital. However, tackling the capital structure

question of who owns firms' profits is necessary to provide a concrete link between changing factor

shares and changing income and wealth shares. We show that human capitalists are an important

class of firm owners. Firms may use equity pay for several reasons, for example to provide incentives

for effort or retention, due to favorable tax treatment at the personal level, or as a way of boosting

earnings. Importantly, our estimation indicates that 91% of equity pay has been used to replace

wages as compensation for marginal product rather than to increase pay overall.

       Even with our more complete measure of the human capital share, we find that, in our sample

of firms, the total labor share has still declined since the 1960s. In addition, our sample is also

characterized by a relatively flat share of physical capital in value added, consistent with Barkai

(2017) and Rognlie (2015). In light of these trends, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018) coined the

term "factorless income" and documented measurement methods to reduce the share of income that

is unaccounted for by observable factors. By appropriately allocating profits earned in exchange

for labor inputs to the labor share of human capitalists, equity compensation is an important way

to reduce factorless income. In our sample, human capitalists' ownership share of public companies

is 10% in the 2010s. Thus, their share of profits reduces factorless income by this amount. The
   1
    See p. 2, "The current accounting assumption is to attribute the entire gross investment in business IPP to gross
operating surplus (GOS), i.e., to capital income."



                                                         2
fact that this ownership share, as well as corporate valuations, have risen substantially since 1980

implies that over the most recent decade, human capitalists have on average earned over $ 136

billion annually in equity-based compensation from publicly traded firms. This excludes capital

gains from prior grants. Importantly, not only have firm profits grown, the ownership share of

human capitalists grew as well.

   We start by carefully documenting the stylized facts describing the secular evolution of human

capitalists' income share. The key measurement challenge is to compute the annual flow of equity-

based compensation granted to human capitalists each year. There are two main reasons that the

majority of equity pay is missing from standard data sources for annual labor compensation such

as the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). First, a

substantial fraction of equity pay is qualified by the internal revenue service to be taxed at the

long-term capital gains tax rate. Second, equity pay is substantially deferred, on average by five

or more years. Thus, newly granted equity pay does not appear in standard data sources based

on current income tax or unemployment data, even if it will be taxed as income once it is vested

and exercised. Because equity pay has grown at a very high rate since the 1980s, vested and

exercised pay are a small fraction of new grants. We provide further details on the treatment of

equity compensation in standard data sources in Section 2.1 below, and describe how to estimate

and remove the small fraction of equity-based pay that is included in BEA compensation data.

The Census payroll series we add equity-based compensation to in order to compute total human

capitalist income for our main analysis is wages only.

   To surpass these measurement challenges, we use firm-level data on the value of shares reserved

for compensation. By law, firms must reserve shares against compensation grants in order to

disclose the resulting dilution to shareholders. Data on shares reserved for employees' unexercised

stock options or restricted equity grants are available annually for the universe of publicly traded US

corporations via their SEC filings. We obtain data on shares reserved for equity-based compensation

from 1960­2019 by combining datasets based on SEC filings when available, and hand collecting

the SEC data otherwise. Using the assembled data on the stock of reserved shares, along with its

law of motion, we construct a measure of the annual flow of new equity-based compensation grants

each year. We then aggregate to the industry level and add high-skilled wages from a merged

NBER-CES-public-firm sample to obtain a measure of total compensation to high-skilled labor.

                                                  3
Our merged NBER-CES-pubic-firm data set covers a very broad set of manufacturing firms and

contains a reliable measure of value added.2

    We perform several robustness checks on the resulting time series of equity-based compensation,

including using more detailed data on compensation grants from RiskMetrics for the period 1996­

2005 as well as using an expensed-based measure of total payments to human capitalists that we

construct using a fraction of firms' Selling and General Administrative expense (SG&A). A large

portion of SG&A expenses consists of wages, salaries, and any capital gains from stock grants or

exercised stock options. By all measures, human capitalists' share of income is substantial, and it

has risen dramatically over the last few decades.

    A rising share of human capitalist income, along with the observed decline in investment goods

prices, is consistent with technological complementarity between human and physical capital. We

explore this potential complementarity in two ways. First, we provide robust regression-based

evidence for complementarity between high-skilled labor and physical capital in industry and firm-

level panel data. Second, we conduct a structural estimation that highlights the importance of

equity-based compensation when evaluating evidence of complementarity between human capital

and physical capital.

    Our panel regressions first document a negative relationship within firms and within industries

over time between investment goods prices and high-skilled human capital owners' earnings and

wealth. Human capitalists' income has increased more in industries and firms that have experienced

larger declines in investment goods prices.3 Thus, the evidence suggests that human capitalists have

benefited disproportionately from declining investment goods prices. Next, we use the correctly

measured total return to human capitalists to show that within industries and over time, there

is a positive relation between the human capital share and the physical capital share (which is

consistent with complementarity). By contrast, and consistent with the cross-country evidence in

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), we find a negative relation between the wage-based low-skilled

labor share and capital shares. This evidence supports substitutability between low-skilled labor

and capital.
   2
     We show in the Online Appendix that the factor shares (excluding equity-based compensation) in our merged
sample are nearly identical to those in the broader NBER-CES data set.
   3
     See also Kehrig and Vincent (2020) for a detailed analysis of the dynamics of the labor share in the cross section
of production units.



                                                          4
   We develop and study a parsimonious model and then estimate its key parameters (a) to

provide structure for the facts that describe the rise of human capitalists and (b) to understand

the implications of these facts for shares of value added and income. Our model builds on the

model developed in Krusell, Ohanian, R`
                                      ios-Rull, and Violante (2000), who were the first to model

and document the complementarity between high-skilled labor and physical capital. Notably, their

sample ends in 1992, before the decline in the wage income of human capitalists accelerated in

the 1990s. The subsequent steep decline in the high-skilled wage shares implies a puzzling lack of

evidence for complementarity between high-skilled labor and the coincident introduction of new-

economy IT capital. In addition to constructing a more comprehensive measure of high-skilled labor

compensation, we modify their theoretical framework in two key ways. First, we treat high-skilled

human capital as a stock that can be accumulated through investment rather than as a flow labor

input. Second, in our framework, this stock of human capital earns an equilibrium return that can

depend not only on its current marginal product but also on its outside option (e.g., Eisfeldt and

Papanikolaou (2013), Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019)).

   Our model employs a CES production function with three inputs, physical capital, human cap-

ital, and (unskilled) labor. Technological progress occurs via a standard shock to (physical) invest-

ment goods prices (see Greenwood et al. (1997), Papanikolaou (2011), and Kogan and Papanikolaou

(2014)). We use our model to obtain quantitative estimates of the degree of complementarity be-

tween physical and human capital. We find that correcting human capitalists' income by including

equity-based compensation is crucial for identifying complementarity between physical and human

capital. Using wages only leads to the conclusion that physical and human capital are more sub-

stitutable than Cobb and Douglas (1928) when recent data is included. Importantly, we show that

only a small fraction of equity-based pay must be assigned to human capitalists' marginal product

in order to generate a degree of complementarity between physical and human capital that is larger

than the complementarity implied by Cobb­Douglas. Our estimate of the elasticity of substitution

between capital and unskilled labor is 1.21, and is not sensitive to the fraction of equity-based pay

assigned to marginal product. This finding on the substitutability between capital and unskilled

labor is broadly consistent with the estimates in the existing literature (e.g. Krusell, Ohanian,

R`
 ios-Rull, and Violante (2000), Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)).

   In order to determine the fraction of equity-based pay that is in fact attributable to human

                                                 5
capitalists' marginal product, we incorporate an estimate of the elasticity of substitution between

physical and human capital from the cross section of industries over the same time period. The cross

section evidence indicates strong complementarity (an elasticity of substitution equal to 0.66). This

estimate, combined with our time series estimation, implies that 91% of equity-based compensation

is attributable to human capitalists' marginal product. Thus, it appears that firms substituted

equity pay for wages, rather than considerably increasing pay overall. Our model at estimated

parameters and with correctly measured income shares is able to replicate the full set of stylized

facts we document when the economy receives the observed sequence of declining investment goods

prices.

   Our paper contributes to the following related areas of the literature. First, there is an ongoing

discussion on the secular evolution of factor shares (e.g., Elsby et al. (2013), Karabarbounis and

Neiman (2014), Lawrence (2015), Koh et al. (2016), Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Reenen

(2017), Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019), Kehrig and Vincent (2020)). This literature has established

the decline of the aggregate labor share measured using standard sources of realized income (mainly

wages). While our data also support a declining overall labor share, we significantly refine the

measurement of total compensation. Our new compensation series contributes important new

facts that help make to progress on the evolution of total income share dynamics for workers of

different skill levels. Hence, our paper is most closely related to Krusell, Ohanian, R`
                                                                                       ios-Rull,

and Violante (2000). Because that paper focused on an earlier sample, they find evidence of

complementarity between capital and high-skilled labor using wage-only compensation. Using

wages only, the changes in relative factor shares over time now imply that high-skilled labor and

physical capital are substitutes. However, the inclusion of equity-based compensation reconfirms

their finding of complementarity.

   Our focus on investment-specific technological change builds on the earlier macroeconomics and

asset pricing literature (e.g., Greenwood et al. (1997), Papanikolaou (2011), Kogan and Papaniko-

laou (2014), Krusell et al. (2000)). Despite this growing literature, there is still a limited amount

of direct cross-sectional evidence on the relation between investment goods prices and factor shares

(Acemoglu (2002)). We examine the implications of investment-specific technological change on

factor shares, and use new micro data to characterize the shape of an aggregate production function

which employs human capitalists. Our study also contributes to our understanding of who gains

                                                 6
and who loses from investment-specific technological change.4 Including equity-based compensation

greatly increases the observed disparity between the compensation of high and low skilled labor,

deepening concerns regarding the unequal sharing of the gains to technological progress highlighted

by Autor (2014) and Autor (2019).

    Our analysis has related implications for the broader debate on the income distribution between

capital and labor, and the concern regarding rising inequality (e.g., Piketty (2014), Caicedo et al.

(2016), Gabaix et al. (2016), Stokey (2016)), which on the finance side has generally focused on

the very top of the income distribution (e.g., Gabaix and Landier (2008), Kaplan and Rauh (2010),

Frydman and Saks (2010), Frydman and Papanikolaou (2015)). Given the data limitations, very

little was previously known about the total compensation to the intermediate levels of the income

distribution represented by high-skilled laborers. An important exception is Lemieux, MacLeod,

and Parent (2009), which documents increasing performance-based pay in the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics and the effects on income inequality, but does not focus on equity-based pay and

the implications for factor shares. Our analysis highlights the importance of equity compensation

paid to employees below the very top executive or founder level. Whereas total compensation at

the C-suite level appears to have peaked around the year 2000, equity-based compensation to a

broader set of high-skilled labor continues to rise. See the comprehensive summary of the facts

that describe executive compensation in Frydman and Jenter (2010).

    Finally, a growing literature in macroeconomics and finance highlights the importance of a

"missing factor," and in particular intangible capital embedded in, and partially owned by, human

inputs or organization capital (e.g., Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014), Koh et al. (2016), Barkai

(2017), Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018), Benzell and Brynjolfsson (2019)). We bring new mi-

crodata to the measurement of human inputs. Moreover, we examine the importance of the rents

generated by organizational capital from a national income accounting perspective, which, aside

from the notable exceptions above, has received limited attention thus far.
   4
     See also the recent study Jaimovich et al. (Forthcoming), who argue that incorporating the quality of goods
produced is crucial for measuring the interaction between skill-biased technical change and the skill premium, as well
as Caunedo et al. (2019) for a study of differential occupational exposure to capital-embodied technical change.




                                                          7
2     Empirical Facts

In this section, we first describe the extent to which standard sources largely exclude equity-based

pay. Then, we provide a detailed description of our method for measuring the total income to

human capitalists, including wages and new equity grants. Using corrected total human capitalist

income, we then document the implications of the revised labor income series for macro trends

in factor shares. Our main findings highlight the large magnitude of human capitalists' equity-

based compensation, which has grown markedly over the past four decades. Finally, we report new

stylized facts about the growth in human capitalist income across industries and firms, in particu-

lar providing motivating evidence for technological complementarity between physical capital and

human capital from high-skilled labor. Specifically, we show a robust negative relation between

investment goods prices and human capitalists' income shares, which holds in the time series in

the cross-section of industries, as well as within firms over time. We also provide evidence on the

relation between investment goods prices and human capitalist wealth.


2.1   Understanding the Underestimation of Equity Pay in Standard Data Sources

Two key features of equity-based compensation lead to equity income being substantially underes-

timated in standard data sources such as the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Bureau

of Labor Statistics (BLS). These two features are tax treatment and deferral. First, a sizable frac-

tion (one third to one half) of equity-based compensation is classified as incentive-based, and is

thus taxed as capital gains income rather than ordinary income. Second, even pay that is taxed as

ordinary income is only taxed after it vests and is exercised, rather than at the time it is granted.

While this would not result in mismeasurement if equity pay were constant, the very high observed

growth in equity pay in recent decades means that exercised or vested equity pay severely under-

estimates current grants. We discuss each feature in turn, and then provide a stylized example to

illustrate how tax treatment and deferral drive the underestimation of equity pay in standard data

sources.

    In most of the rest literature on the labor share, two main sources of payroll information are

used: BEA-NIPA (e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)) and the BLS Quarterly Census of

Employment and Wages (QCEW) (e.g., Elsby, Hobijn, and S
                                                      ¸ ahin (2013)). These measures include


                                                 8
only payments to employees under plans that are taxed at the personal income tax rate and are

either (a) reported as payroll by the employer on IRS Form 941 or (b) reported as wage income by

the employee on his or her W-2 form.5 For this reporting to occur, the equity compensation must

be both (i) issued under a plan which treats equity grants as ordinary income for tax purposes, and

(ii) vested and exercised following deferral.

       For measures of the labor share based on BEA-NIPA, the BEA technical methodology empha-

size that their labor compensation series only includes vested and exercised non-qualified options.

Specifically, they state that "wages and salaries in cash... includes employee gains from exercising

non-qualified stock options (NSOs)... NSOs are regarded as additional, taxable, income at the time

they are exercised; in contrast, incentive stock options do not require the reporting of additional

income and are taxed as long-term capital gains when sold. The detailed data required for treating

NSOs as compensation of employees when the options are granted (as the System of National Ac-

counts (SNA) recommends) are not currently available. Instead, NSOs are valued at the time that

they are exercised, and the difference between the market price at the time of the exercise and the

price paid by the employee at the time of the exercise is recorded as wages and salaries."6 For a

discussion of the SNA recommendations and the BEA's research on NSOs, see Moylan (2000).

       For measures of the labor share based on employer payroll records from the BLS (QCEW), as

detailed at the BLS website (https://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/cew/data.htm), the QCEW comes

from the administrative tax records of state unemployment insurance (UI) programs. It is similar to

NIPA and only includes taxable wages. As such, it includes only the exercise value of non-qualified

stock options (NSOs). In addition, as discussed in further detail in the BEA technical note, and

in the related paper by Moylan (2000), internal BLS surveys indicate that UI records are likely to

underestimate even the exercised value of NSOs. That reference states, at the top of page 3, that

"In addition, although it appears that large technology firms are reporting as wages the exercise of

employee stock options, it is not clear that all firms are doing so. Because the annual tax base for

UI wages and salaries is capped at $7,000 per employee, states may have little incentive to follow

up with firms to ensure correct reporting of special compensation items."

       Finally, two other measures of wages from the BLS have also been used in the macroeconomic
   5
     See Hall and Murphy (2003) for a detailed discussion of the tax treatment of stock options, and see Lebow et al.
(1999) and Moylan (2000) for details on BLS and BEA treatment of stock options.
   6
     See "Ch 10 compensation of employees," p. 2­3 of https://apps.bea.gov/national/pdf/chapter10.pdf.


                                                         9
literature on the labor share; namely, the employment cost index (ECI) and nonfarm compensation

per hour (CPH). The former excludes stock options altogether. The latter includes only exercised

NSOs, as detailed in Table 1 of the FRB technical note Lebow et al. (1999). Additional details

are provided in the Appendix, and the links to the relevant technical documentation also provide

clear explanations for the treatment of equity compensation for each source. We provide a method

for adjusting compensation in standard data sources to fully account for the flow of equity-based

compensation, and describe the impact of including equity pay on the labor share based on BEA

data, at the end of this section.


Equity pay and taxes           Employers can adopt an equity compensation program by approving

one of a variety of employee compensation plans, such as a stock option plan, a restricted stock

unit (RSU) plan, an employee stock purchase plan (ESPP), or an employee stock ownership plan

(ESOP), as well as by placing employee stock grants in retirement and 401(k) plans. For tax

purposes, earnings from equity-based compensation may be treated either as income or as capital

gains, depending on whether such compensation is derived from non-qualified or qualified plans,

respectively. Equity pay that is derived from a plan that is qualified under the IRS code as incentive-

based is tax-advantaged at the worker level, since the employee can, with proper execution, avoid

being taxed at the ordinary income rate and instead pay only long-term capital gains taxes.7

Preferable personal tax treatment may be one reason that equity pay has grown in importance.

      Qualified equity grants are never included in standard sources for labor compensation such as

the BEA or BLS. We estimate that the fraction of equity grants which are qualified for tax purposes,

and thus entirely excluded from standard sources, to be between one half and one third. Crimmel

and Schildkraut (1999) document that about half of plans surveyed by the BLS offer incentive-based

compensation that is qualified for tax purposes and excluded from standard sources. In ExecuComp

data, which covers firms' most highly compensated employees, the fraction of equity compensation

which is incentive-based and qualified is one third. Because there is a limit (currently $100,000) on

the maximum value of incentive-based options allowed under IRS rules, and it is more likely that

executive (vs. non-executive) compensation exceeds this limit, we argue that one third is a lower

bound on qualified equity pay for non-executive employees.
  7
      See https://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc427.



                                                  10
Vesting and Exercise        Employees receiving equity-based compensation are granted promises

of future equity shares, which can only be exercised or vested after a certain period of time has

elapsed. In addition to complicating the matching of pay to the year in which labor was provided

(and value added generated), the combination of deferral and the fast growth of equity pay means

that even the portion of equity pay that is taxed at normal income rates and should appear on W2

tax returns is a small fraction of current new equity grants. Indeed, in ExecuComp data, vested

and exercised options are an an order of magnitude smaller than the overall value of granted and

unexpired stock options (at about 1% of stock market capitalization relative to 9%, respectively;

see Table 1).


A Simple Example The following stylized example illustrates the joint effects of qualified equity

pay and the timing of new grants vs. exercise dates on the underestimation of equity pay in standard

sources. Assume that total new grants relative to value added grows at an effective annual rate

of 12% per year, which is the constant continuously compounded growth rate that connects the

beginning and end points of our data on total new grants. Assume also that, conservatively, of the

total, 2/3 of grants are non-qualified and that 100% of grants are exercised immediately after a

five year vesting period. Because the value of new grants grows each year at 12%, and grants can

only be exercised after the vesting period of 5 years, the value of vested and exercised non-qualified

grants (i.e. the portion that might be counted in standard sources) is equal to only 37% of total

current grants. With a constant growth rate, this fraction is also constant. It is important to note

that, as it is 63% of a growing series, the part of equity compensation that is missing from standard

labor share measures grows very substantially in levels in this example, as can be seen in Figure 1.


2.2   Measuring Total Human Capitalist Income

Data Sources We describe our main data sources. Additional details appear in the Appendix.

The income of human capitalists consists of two parts. The first is traditional compensation to high-

skilled human capitalists in the form of wages. The second part, which is novel to our analysis, is

compensation from restricted equity or stock option grants.

   Wages, value added, and investment goods prices are obtained at the four-digit SIC code level

from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database, which is based largely on the Annual


                                                 11
Survey of Manufacturing data sets (Becker, Gray, and Marvakov (2013)).8 The NBER-CES is

particularly useful for our purposes, as it provides a "clean" measure of wages; these data are

payroll only, and explicitly exclude fringe benefits and equity compensation, as we document in

the Appendix.9 Two other recent papers document important facts on the labor share in the

manufacturing sector. Kehrig and Vincent (2020) uses detailed microdata within the manufacturing

sector to show that a reallocation of value added to lower labor share units has been a key driver

of the decline in the labor share. Aum and Shin (2020a) shows that the decline in the labor share

occurred predominantly in the manufacturing sector.

      To surpass the challenges faced by standard data sources using employer or employee tax data,

we construct our baseline measure of equity-based compensation using widely available firm-level

data on shares reserved for employee compensation from public-firm SEC filings. We utilize firms'

reporting of shares reserved for employee compensation to construct our firm-level annual time

series of new equity grants. This data is reported by Compustat for the time period 1960-1995.

Compustat data are constructed from 10-K statements filed with the SEC and cover the universe

of publicly traded US firms. For the subsequent subsample, from 1996­2005, we utilize data from

RiskMetrics. RiskMetrics (formerly the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC)) covers

firms from the S&P 500, S&P midcap, and S&P smallcap indexes, and is also sourced from 10-

K statements filed with the SEC. The IRRC dataset is aimed at providing compensation and

governance information, and thus contains additional useful details on grants and vesting. For

the 2006­2019 period, we hand-collected the reserved shares data for the industries covered in the

NBER-CES dataset from firms' 10-K filings and/or proxy statements available from SEC Edgar.

      The merged public firm/NBER-CES data set covers all firms in the manufacturing and health

sectors, as well as roughly half of the firms in the consumer goods and high-tech sectors. The

combined data set for the 1960-2019 period is composed of 133 4-SIC industries and 5,271 firms.

The covered sectors represent over 40% of the aggregate value of sales in the public-firm universe.

We show in the Online Appendix that factor share dynamics using wage data only in the full
  8
     The NBER-CES data set includes 459 (140) unique industries at the 4-SIC (3-SIC) level. Most of the vari-
ables in the NBER-CES are taken from the Annual Surveys of Manufacturing, while price deflators and depreciation
rates are derived from other data published by the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics, and the Federal Reserve Board. NBER-CES data and documentation are available at
http://www.nber.org/nberces.
   9
     See     also   https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm/technical-documentation/questionnaire/
2019-annual-survey-of-manufactures-forms.html.


                                                      12
NBER-CES universe are nearly identical to those in our merged sample. When constructing our

measure of new grants relative to value added, we use industry-level sales from each data source

to scale the public firm data to match the public and private establishment data covered by the

NBER-CES data set.


Human Capitalist Income: Wages                  We designate the NBER-CES category of non-production

workers as high-skilled laborers, following the standard treatment of this category in labor eco-

nomics. The validity of utilizing the category of non-production workers to represent high-skilled

labor has been previously established in the labor literature by, for example, Berman, Bound, and

Griliches (1994), Pierce and Schott (2016), and Acemoglu, Dorn, Hanson, Price, et al. (2014).

The time series of high-skilled wages as a share of value added is plotted in Figure 2. Note the

pronounced decline in the high-skilled income share using wages only, from 17% in 1960 to 11%

in 2019. However, compensation using wages only is incomplete. Equity pay is crucial for fully

measuring the differential effects of technological progress on high and low skilled labor highlighted

by Autor (2014) and Autor (2019).


Human Capitalist Income: Equity Pay Our main measurement challenge is to gather com-

prehensive information on the equity-based component of current income, which comes from equity

grants in the form of restricted stock or unvested stock options. We overcome this challenge using

firm-level data on shares reserved for employee compensation to generate annual firm-level obser-

vations on the contemporaneous flow of equity-based pay. Securities law requires firms to disclose

shares reserved for compensation, in order to disclose the potential dilution to existing shareholders.

To be in compliance with the SEC, firms must reserve shares in an amount that reflects the mis-

pricing, and resulting dilution to existing shareholders, from issuing shares to employees at below

market prices. Reserved shares are authorized by the board of directors, and appear as a treasury

stock liability on firms' balance sheets. Compustat defines the reserved share (RS ) variable as the

item that ". . . represents shares reserved for stock options outstanding as of year-end plus options

that are available for future grants."10

       Reserved shares is a stock variable, whereas we are interested in the annual flow of new equity
  10
    It is our understanding from accounting rules that the reserved share variable also includes shares reserved for
restricted stock grants, but if not, our measure is conservative for that reason.


                                                        13
grants. Intuitively, we can convert the stock of reserved shares into an annual flow by dividing the

stock by the average time that a reserved share remains on the balance sheet before it is granted as

compensation. Denote this average granting period as gp. We provide a formal derivation of our

flow measure of equity-based compensation, new grants, or, N G = RS/gp, in Appendix 6.2.2 using

a law of motion for reserved shares which accounts for authorization, exercise, and expiration. We

then use the RiskMetrics data from 1996­2005 to estimate the weighted-average granting period

as the ratio of compensation grants to reserved shares. During this period, the weighted-average

granting period, gp, is 5.69 years.11 To be conservative, we then use a weighted-average granting

period of six years to estimate the annual flow of equity-based compensation grants from the end-

of-year stock of reserved shares.

       Our equity-based compensation data is obtained from publicly-traded firms' accounting state-

ments, while value-added is obtained from the aggregate NBER-CES industry-level database, which

includes survey data from manufacturing establishments of both public and private firms. After

dropping public firms in industries not covered by the NBER-CES Manufacturing Database, there

are two remaining potential mismatches when aggregating the firm-level value of N G to the in-

dustry level: First, the NBER-CES database includes private firms, causing a downward bias to

our NG/value-added ratio. Second, publicly-traded firms have foreign establishments, and they

may grant equity compensation to employees in foreign establishments while the NBER-CES data

covers domestic manufacturing establishments only. Therefore, to adjust the new grant series based

on public firms to the NBER-CES industry measures of value added, we scale each industry ag-

gregate N G by the corresponding sales ratio between the public-firm industry aggregate and the

NBER-CES industry value (see the Appendix for details).

       Figure 3 reports the aggregate N G as a share of aggregate value added in our sample. Income

from equity-based compensation grows from less than 1% of value added before 1980 to as much

as 7% in the 2010s. We also measure the share of total equity that human capitalists own. We

define the ownership share of human capitalists as the ratio of the value of shares reserved for

employee equity-based compensation (i.e., RS) to the stock market capitalization of the firm.12 This

share, plotted in Figure 4, captures the fraction of firm value which is employee-owned. Human
  11
    The median of the granting period across industries is 5.68 years.
  12
    Scaling the value of reserved shares by the stock market valuation helps alleviate the potential concern of market
timing. Companies may issue more equity-based compensation when stock prices are high.


                                                         14
capitalists have owned 10% of total public firms' market capitalization on average over the last

decade, compared to 3% in the 1980s. The rise of the ownership share indicates that the increase

in human capitalists' income is not just driven by rising corporate valuations. Human capitalists

have benefited disproportionately from increasing corporate profits because their ownership share

also increased.


Human Capitalist Income: Equity Pay, Robustness Checks                               We present several robustness
                                                                                                         RS
checks to our main measure of the annual flow of equity-based compensation, N G =                        gp ,   in Figure

5. The top panel of Figure 5 shows that using firms' actual granting periods from 1996 to 2005

from Risk Metrics data yields very similar dynamics to our measure using a constant six year

weighted-average granting period.13

       Next, we construct a measure of new grants to value added using the aggregate Black and

Scholes (1973) value of newly granted stock options (BS) from Risk Metrics for the period 1996­

2005. The middle panel of Figure 5 plots the aggregated BS value relative to value added, along

with our baseline measure including shares reserved for both options and restricted stock grants.

As is apparent in the Figure, these two measures are highly correlated for the shorter sample when

both are available. The time series correlation between the ratio of BS to value added and the

ratio of N G to value added is 0.52.14 There are a few reasons why the BS share of value added

is somewhat lower than our reserved-share measure. The main reason is that there is substantial

evidence (see, for example, Aboody, Barth, and Kasznik (2006)) that once firms were required to

expense option grants, they began to significantly understate their value. Another reason that

the BS share is lower is that it does not include restricted stock grants, which became increasingly

popular relative to options after the severe downturns in equity valuations in 2000 and 2008. Indeed,

Bachelder (2014) estimates that in recent years about half of equity-based compensation is in the

form of restricted stock.

       Note that, because our data are generated by firm-level data and not worker-level data, we

cannot identify the precise recipients of equity-based compensation. Auxiliary data sources, such

as levels.fyi, suggest that equity-based compensation is used heavily for engineers and for a broad
  13
      for the shorter time period, we also have information on whether a firm discloses all available reserved shares in
its 10-K filing. This is the case for 80% of the firms, further supporting the accuracy of our estimate for N G.
   14
      In pooled time series cross section data using 4-digit SIC industry-level observations, we find that the correlation
between the ratio of BS to value added and the ratio of N G to value added is 0.97.


                                                           15
set of managers. Using ExecuComp, we show that most equity-based compensation (78% in recent

years) goes to workers below the C-suite. We assume that equity-based pay goes to workers who

are not classified as production workers by the NBER-CES (i.e., those workers whom the prior

literature has classified as higher skilled). We use an expense-based measure below to provide

additional evidence that total compensation to white-collar workers has increased from 1980­2019.


Human Capitalist Income, Total: Wages plus Equity               Human capitalists earn both wages

and equity compensation. While human capitalists' wage share of value added has been trending

down, equity pay has replaced wage compensation in recent decades. To construct human capital-

ists' total income, we add equity pay to wages to form their total compensation. We plot the time

series of the total income share along with the wage share and equity-based compensation share in

Figure 2. The figure shows that the increase in equity-based compensation essentially offsets the

decline in high-skilled wage income. The human capitalists' total labor share declined by 1% from

1980s to 2010s compared to the 6% decline in human capitalists wage-only share from 1980s to

2010s. Including the equity-based pay cuts the decline in the wage-only human capitalists income

share by 87%. The fact that the total high-skilled labor share is essentially flat is consistent with

our estimate of the fraction of equity pay that is used to compensate marginal product, which is

91%, indicating that, in large part, equity has simply replaced wages, leaving the high-skilled labor

share fairly constant.


Human Capitalist Income, Total: Wages plus Equity, Robustness and Discussion                    Our

final robustness check compares our main approach to measuring total human capitalist compensa-

tion as the sum of equity-based compensation from reserved share data, and high-skilled wage data

from CES to an expensed-based measure of the total compensation to human capitalists. Specif-

ically, we compare our measure of total income to a measure based on accumulating the widely

available accounting variable selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A). As detailed

in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) and the associated Online Appendix, this variable typically

includes the salaries, wages, equity compensation and bonuses of firms' white-collar workers and

managers. However, since SG&A includes other expenses unrelated to employee compensation, we

follow the (imperfect) approach from the prior literature (e.g., Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014))



                                                 16
and scale the total SG&A expense by 0.3. Our second measure of human capitalist income shares

is then constructed in each year by aggregating the firm-level observations of 30% of SG&A to the

industry level and then computing the ratio of industry-level 0.3×SG&A to industry-level value

added (0.3×SG&A/VADD). The bottom left panel of Figure 5 plots the aggregate human capital

income share based on SG&A. This share was 8% at the beginning of the sample period, and

increases to 12% at the end of 2019. As expected, given that wages have trended downward while

equity compensation increased substantially, the SG&A based measure increases from 1980 to 2019,

but not as dramatically as the measure of equity compensation only.

       Our reserved-share approach to measuring equity-based compensation using reserved share data

has an important advantage over the expense-based measure. In particular, reserved shares are not

affected by changes in expensing practices for stock options that occurred over our sample period.

Equity-based compensation can be used effectively for retention and incentive purposes, but purely

accounting-based motivations have also played a role. In particular, historically, equity-based pay

was not always expensed, or was expensed at a low value, thereby boosting profits. The Appendix

contains further details. The fact that reserved shares on the balance sheet are not impacted by

changes in expensing practices leads us to use this measure as our baseline measure, with support

from the expense-based measure.

       Finally, we note that, in the cross section, the increase in equity-based compensation is even

more pronounced for small firms (See the Online Appendix).15 Although our sample focuses pri-

marily on publicly traded firms, the fact that human capitalists in smaller firms receive more

equity-based compensation as a share of total sales than those of larger firms indicates that our

time series for the share of N G relative to value added could be an underestimate for the whole

US economy, including private firms. This increase in equity-based compensation among smaller

firms also enhances the divergence between the average and the aggregate total labor share, which

is consistent with the evidence in Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019).
  15
    Using the sample for which we have full Compustat coverage (1970­1995), we show that smaller firms (i.e., firms
in the bottom quintile of the size distribution) offer 10% more equity-based compensation to employees relative to
firms in the top quintile.




                                                        17
2.3   Time Series Evidence: Main Facts

Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the key variables for our analysis. The average total labor

share is 39.5%, while the average skilled labor share is about 16.5%. Over the sample period from

1960­2019, both the grant-based measure (N G) and the expense-based measure of human capital

share (SG&A/VADD) experienced positive annual growth, while both the total labor share and

investment goods prices declined. From the RiskMetrics sample period (1996­2005), new grants

of employee stock options are about 8% relative to value added, and the majority of these grants

(78%) go to employees who are not the top five executives.

   Figure 3 shows the time series of human capitalists' flow of equity-based compensation as a share

of value added. Figure 2 shows this series along with the time series of human capitalists' wage, and

total (wages + equity), compensation as a share of value added. Strikingly, the sevenfold increase

in equity-based compensation relative to value added (i.e., a roughly 7 percentage point increase

from the 1960s to the 2010s) almost completely reverses the downward trend in high-skilled labor's

wage income share. In fact, Figure 6 shows that the increase in equity-based compensation is strong

enough to greatly dampen the decline in the overall labor wage share of value added. Including

equity-based compensation cuts the measured decline in the total labor share in our sample by

32%. Note that the wage-based labor share in the NBER-CES sample is lower than that for the

overall economy for two reasons. It is manufacturing only (no services), and it does not include any

fringe benefits or equity. Despite the lower level, the downward trend is consistent with the prior

literature using other labor compensation data. In line with these facts, the human capitalists'

ownership share (Figure 4) (i.e., shares reserved for employee equity-based compensation relative

to total equity shares outstanding) also displays a pronounced upward trend, increasing from about

1% before the 1980s to about 7% in 2010s. The increase in the ownership share was not driven

only by top executives' equity-based compensation, which was relatively stable at around 2.2% on

average in the 1990s and 2000s based on ExecuComp data.

   Figure 7 shows that, in the aggregate time series, there is a negative correlation between our

grant-based measure and our expense-based measures of human capitalists' income and investment

goods prices (-0.91 and -0.66). For reference, we also plot aggregate physical capital and total

labor shares from the NBER-CES database. Despite declining investment goods prices, the physical



                                                 18
capital share has been relatively flat in the U.S. since the 1960s (dashed red line), while the labor

share has declined steadily (solid blue line). This finding aligns with the cross-country evidence of

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014).


2.4      Adjusting the BEA Labor Share

In our main analysis we use NBER-CES payroll data, which only includes wages, to construct human

capitalists' total income series. However, in most of the existing literature on the labor share, the

standard data sources, from BEA (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014) or BLS (Elsby et al., 2013),

are employed to construct labor share measures. As detailed in Section 2.1, compensation data

from either of these two data sources only includes the fraction of equity-based compensation which

is both exercised or unrestricted and non-qualified for tax purposes.

      To evaluate the impact of including the equity-based compensation (N G) on the labor share

measures based on standard data sources (BEA), we first estimate a series for wage-only com-

pensation by subtracting income from exercised, non-qualified stock options. In ExecutiveComp

data, non-qualified equity-based grants are two thirds of total grants. Although it is likely that

non-executives are eligible for a higher fraction of qualified grants, we adopt the conservative as-

sumption that two thirds of grants to all employees are non-qualified. Then, to construct the

wage-only labor income in year t, we subtract two-thirds of the new grants from year t - 5 from

the BEA labor income estimates.16 The total labor share is then wage-only labor income plus the

contemporaneous estimate of new grants relative to value-added, as in our main analysis. Figure 8

reports the aggregate BEA labor share after adjusting for equity-based compensation (NG) for the

manufacturing industry. The manufacturing wage-only labor share declined by 17% since 1980s,

and including the equity-based compensation reduces the decline in the manufacturing labor share

based on the BEA data by 20%. Although our adjustment focuses on the manufacturing industry

broadly-defined, the inclusion of equity-based pay should still have large impact on the aggregate

labor share given the evidence in (Aum and Shin, 2020b) that the downward trend in the aggregate

labor share since the 1980 is mainly driven by the decline of labor share in the manufacturing

industry.
 16
      The BEA wage-only series is thus BEA compensation minus 2/3*N Gt-5 .




                                                      19
2.5   Cross-Sectional Evidence

We next show that cross-industry and cross-firm evidence is consistent with (a) a substitution

mechanism between human capital and labor and (b) complementarity between human capital and

physical capital. To motivate our cross-industry regression analysis, Figure 9 plots the equity-based

compensation share of value added by industry. Clearly, there is substantial heterogeneity across

industries, with the high-tech and health sectors represented within the NBER-CES manufacturing

database showing the largest increase. Our regression evidence supports the idea that the share

of equity based compensation relative to value added, and total human capitalists' share of value

added, is strongly and statistically significantly negatively related to the industry-specific path

of investment goods prices. Table 2 reports industry-level multivariate regressions of the human

capitalists' share in a given year on both the physical capital share and the unskilled labor share

at the 4-digit SIC code level of industry aggregation. Both the grant-based and the expense-based

shares are significantly positively (negatively) correlated with physical capital share (unskilled labor

share) within industry and over time.

   Table 3 reports (4-SIC) industry-level regressions of income shares on investment goods prices.

These regressions include year and industry fixed effects, and thus examine the change in industry-

level share variables across industries and years that were more vs. less exposed to the decline

in capital goods prices, because the capital mix across capital types which experienced different

price changes varies over time and across industries. The first three columns show that the share

of value added represented by equity-based compensation, total human capitalist income, and

the expense-based proxy for total human capitalist income are robustly negative and strongly

statistically significant for all measures of human capitalists' income shares. The estimates are

also economically significant, as they imply that a one standard deviation decline in investment

goods prices is associated with up to about 9.4% of a standard deviation increase in the log human

capitalists' income share (Column 2). Columns (4­6) examine the relation of wage shares and

investment goods prices. Columns (4­5) show that there is a weak negative relation between the

total wage share and investment goods prices, and a stronger positive relationship for the unskilled

labor wage share across industries. Although not significant, the negative relation between the total

wage share and investment goods prices aligns with the cross-country evidence in Karabarbounis



                                                  20
and Neiman (2014). Column (6) shows that the decline in the wage share of high-skilled labor is

negatively related to the investment goods prices in the cross-section of industries, indicating that

the skilled wage share declined less in industries which faced larger declines in capital goods price,

consistent with complementarity between high skilled labor and capital. Note that the coefficient on

investment goods prices is much smaller in absolute value in Column (6) vs. Column (1), meaning

that equity pay had an increasing share of total pay in industries and years in which capital

goods prices declined by more. Column (7) confirms this by showing that declining investment

goods prices are correlated with a change in the structure of human capitalists' pay, with equity-

based compensation increasing in importance. Column (8) reports the significant negative relation

between the ownership share (which corrects for generally rising share prices) and investment goods

prices. A one standard deviation decline in investment goods prices is associated with up to about

8.2% of a standard deviation increase in the human capitalists' ownership share. Overall, the

regression analysis confirms the negative time-series relation between investment goods prices and

human capitalists' income and ownership shares.

   Table 4 confirms the relation between investment goods prices and the human capitalists' income

and ownership shares at the firm level for specifications with industry fixed effects (Panel A) and

firm fixed effects (Panel B). Columns (1­2) show that human capitalists ownership shares increased

more in firm-years with larger investment goods price declines. The relation between investment

goods prices and the ownership share is also economically significant. We observe that a one

standard deviation decline in investment goods prices is associated with an increase of about 10%

of a standard deviation in the human capitalists' ownership share at the firm level, based on the

estimate in Column (2). Using sales to proxy for value added in the firm-level data for which

value added is not available, Columns (3­4) show that equity compensation to sales also increased

more in firm-years with larger investment goods price declines. The coefficient estimate in Column

(4) implies that a one standard deviation decline in investment goods prices is associated with an

increase of about 2.6% of a standard deviation in the human capitalists' income share of sales at

the firm level. Columns (5­6) show that the expense based measure of human capitalist income is

also negatively related to investment goods prices at the firm level.

   Next, we examine the growth of the human capitalists' share relative to the physical capital

share as investment goods prices decline. This is an important motivation for complementarity

                                                 21
between physical and human capital. Table 5 reports industry-level regressions of the growth

of human capitalists' share in a given industry-year relative to the growth in the physical capital

share on investment goods prices. We follow Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and use investment

relative to value added.17 The coefficient estimates for all measures of relative share changes are

negative and statistically significant. A one standard deviation decline in investment goods prices

is associated with 13% of a standard deviation faster growth (on average) of the human capitalists'

share relative to the physical capital share (Column (4)). These changes in relative shares drive

the identification in our structural analysis below.

         In Table 6, we split the sample by skill intensity to further corroborate the complementarity

mechanism. If firms optimally employ human capitalists because of their complementarity with

physical capital, the relation between human capitalists' shares and investment goods prices should

be stronger in industries that are more skill intensive. In line with this prediction, and robustly

across our measures, the relation between the human capital share and investment goods prices

displays systematic heterogeneity by the degree of skill intensity. The negative relation is much

stronger in relatively higher-skill-intensity sectors. Overall, the evidence of stronger complemen-

tarity in sectors that rely more heavily on skilled workers supports the economic mechanism at the

heart of our structural model.

         We also confirm that our main results are robust to sharpening our measurement by using the

more granular information on employee stock option grants that is available for the 1996­2005

period. Our baseline measure has the advantage of being available for a wide cross section of

firms over a long time series. For the 1996­2005 period, we have reported data on the value of

newly granted options and restricted stock, and we use this information to corroborate the relation

between equity-based compensation from granted stock options and investment goods prices. In

Panel A of Table 7, we confirm that the negative relation with investment goods prices also holds for

an alternative measure of human capitalists' equity-based compensation: the (Black­Scholes) value

of their earnings from stock option grants relative to the value added (sales) at the industry level

(firm level) (Columns 1­2 and 3­4, respectively). Another concern is that our measures include
    17
     Steady state capital share is investment to value added ratio multiplied by a constant scalar at the steady state.
I
Y
  ( 1/ -
       k
         1+k
             ). We assume the parameter  , k is constant across industry at steady state. Hence, in the regression,
                                                                                                   I
this scalar is absorbed in the constant term. Note that in a model with constant growth path, Y       = rK
                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                             as long as
the real interest rate equals the growth rate of GDP.



                                                          22
the compensation of the very top executives and, as such, our results may be driven solely by this

relatively small subset of human capitalists. Panel B of Table 7 shows that the negative relation

with investment goods prices holds even after we net out the value of stock option grants for the top

five executives. This means that the relation between declining investment goods prices and equity-

based compensation is stronger for employees outside the C-suite.18 Thus, our results for human

capitalists' income shares reflect the impact of broad-based employee stock-based compensation,

and not executive pay.

    Finally, we examine the relation between a measure of human capitalists' wealth and investment

goods prices across industries and firms. Table 8 repeats our main cross section analysis using the

(Black­Scholes) value of employees' current and past stock option grants relative to stock market

capitalization. This measure is broader than the income measure because it captures not only

new grants but also the capital appreciation of past grants. Thus, it is a proxy for the stock of

equity compensation human capitalists receive, or, equivalently, human capitalists' compensation

wealth. The negative relation with investment goods prices controlling for industry or firm fixed

effects is even stronger for this more comprehensive measure, which offers additional reassurance

that our baseline estimates indeed reflect an economically important relation between investment

goods prices and human capitalists' income.

    Additional robustness checks appear in the Online Appendix. In particular, employee stock

compensation plans lead to the dilution of existing shareholders in the absence of a parallel repur-

chase plan. We show that the same relationships as in our main tables between human capitalist

income and investment goods prices holds for the comparison between diluted and undiluted earn-

ings per share, and stock repurchases. Both of these variables should be correlated with equity

compensation grants at the firm level. We also show that our results on ownership shares are ro-

bust to expanding the sample to the entire public firm universe by including the non-manufacturing

sectors, for which we do not have value added data.
  18
     We take information on stock option grants for a firm's top five executives from ExecComp, which is a standard
source.




                                                        23
3         Model

In this section, we propose a simple framework to show that the stylized facts that describe factor

shares in both the time series and in the cross section can be explained by a unified equilibrium

macroeconomic model. The model features declining investment goods prices as a driving force,

and, at estimated parameters, features technological complementarity between physical and human

capital. Human capital's participation constraint accounts for the fact that human capital may earn

more than its marginal product in an economy with profits to be shared and outside options to

be met. However, our results indicate that almost all (91%) of equity compensation is earned in

return for human capitalists' marginal product. This section describes the model, and the following

section discusses its estimation.


3.1         The Economy

The economy is populated by a continuum of symmetric firms that produce intermediate goods

j using both physical capital k and human capital h. There are two sectors of households. One

household sector, physical capitalists, denoted by K , owns physical capital and provides low-skilled

labor, while the other household sector, human capitalists, denoted by H , produces human capital.

There is no uncertainty in the economy, and the decline in investment goods prices is known by all

agents in advance.


Final Goods Production                Final goods are produced using a continuum of intermediate goods,

j . Final goods production is perfectly competitive, and output is produced via a Dixit­Stiglitz

aggregator of intermediate goods. We have,

                                                          1     1       t
                                                                t
                                              Yt =            yj,t dj       ,                             (1)
                                                      0


where        t   > 119 is the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods j .

         Each intermediate good j 's price is pt (j ), which is endogenous and determined by solving for its

demand from the final goods producer's profit maximization problem. Given perfect competition,
    19
    By assuming > 1, we obtain curvature in the production of final goods: Each type of intermediate good j is
required for final goods production.




                                                              24
there are zero profits for the final goods producer, hence we obtain the standard symmetric demand

function for the intermediate goods j :

                                                                          t
                                                              pt (j )   1- t
                                   yj,t  Dt (pt (j )) = Yt                     .                                   (2)
                                                               PtY

The final consumption good is the numeraire, and it has a price PtY = 1.


Intermediate Goods Production Production of intermediate goods requires both types of

capital, k and h, and also (unskilled) labor, n, supplied by the households in the K sector.20 In this

simple model, we assume that there are no adjustment costs associated either with physical capital

investment or with adjusting labor. The required rates of return for physical capital and human
             k and Rh , respectively. Labor is compensated with a per-period market-clearing wage,
capital are Rt      t

wt . Firms produce intermediate goods j using k , h, and n according to a constant-return-to-scale

CES production function as in Krusell, Ohanian, R`
                                                 ios-Rull, and Violante (2000):

                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                        
   yj,t = f (zt , kt (j ), ht (j ), nt (j )) = zt c ((k kt (j ) + (1 - k )ht (j ) ) + (1 - c )nt (j )
                                                                                                               ,   (3)


where zt represents the level of factor-neutral productivity and i , i = k, c are share parameters.
                                                             1
The variable  governs both the elasticity of substitution ( 1-  ) between physical capital and labor,

and the elasticity of substitution between human capital and labor. The variable  governs the
                              1
elasticity of substitution ( 1-  ) between physical capital and human capital. A zero value for 

or  indicates the same degree of complementarity as Cobb­Douglas, and a value of 1 for  or 

indicates perfect substitution. A  >  indicates that physical capital is more complementary with

human capital than with unskilled labor, and a negative  indicates that the complementarity is

greater than that of Cobb­Douglas.

       The profit-maximizing intermediate goods sector is owned by both physical capitalists and

human capitalists. We assume that physical capitalists operate the firms in the intermediate sector.

They maximize their share of firm value V k (j ) subject to the participation constraint of human

capitalists. A residual fraction  of profits t (j ) is owned by these physical capitalists. This fraction
  20
    Alternatively, we can assume that labor is supplied either by the human capitalist or by both household sectors.
This assumption does not affect the result for the labor share of income. The supply of labor in equilibrium is
determined by the marginal cost of labor and the marginal benefit of consumption.


                                                        25
represents the remaining profits available for distribution after the necessary profit-sharing with

human capitalists.

   The profit-maximization problem P of each intermediate sector j is:


              Vtk (j ) =                  max                       ·             t t (j ) =  · t (j ) +  · Vtk
                                                                                                              +1 (j ),                (4)
                           pt (j ),kt (j ),ht (j ),nt (j ),yj,t ,
                                                                         t


subject to


                                                                    k            h
                                            t (j ) = pt (j )yj,t - Rt kt (j ) - Rt ht (j ) - wt nt (j )                               (5)
                                                                             t
                                               yj,t = pt (j ) 1- Yt                                                                   (6)
                 h                                h
                Rt ht (j ) + (1 - )Vt (j )  Ot = Rt ht (j ) + Vt (j ),                                                                (7)


where (6) is the demand for intermediate goods j from Equation (2), and (7) is the participation

constraint for human capitalists. The total firm value is Vt (j ) =                                            s
                                                                                                      s=t+1        s (j ),   which is the

accumulated present value of the residual profits after the marginal products of capital and labor

are paid. The fraction of firm value shared with human capitalists can be expressed as Vth (j ) =

(1 - )Vt (j ), which is the accumulated present value of profit-sharing that physical capitalists

promised to human capitalists before production. Hence, Vth (j ) + Vtk (j ) = Vt (j ) for j . Since we

will focus on a symmetric equilibrium, we will delete the index j going forward.

   Equation (7) describes the participation constraint for human capitalists. If human capitalists

remain with their present firm, they receive their marginal product Rh h as well as some promised

share of the firm (1 - )Vth . Firm owners set the latter component by adjusting  so that human

capitalists' participation constraint is satisfied. This practice is consistent with observed corporate

behavior, in which firms retain talent by granting deferred compensation in the form of restricted

equity or unvested options. If human capitalists leave to start a new firm, we assume they will still

receive their marginal product Rh h. Note that this marginal product can be paid with wages or

with equity-based compensation. In addition, at their new firm, we assume that they will accrue

a fraction  of the new firm's value. Marginal products, which are the same regardless of whether

the human capitalist remains with her existing firm or moves to a new firm, cancel out from both

sides. Profit maximization by physical capitalists implies that (7) is always binding, and  = 1 -  .


                                                                        26
   Note that the participation constraint (7) is expressed in terms of total firm value shared with

human capitalists, so Vth does not represent the flow compensation for human capitalists at period

t. The share of firm value 1 -  is promised to human capitalists in period t, but the income of

human capitalists due to retention motives should only include the incremental part (i.e., the flow)

of the firm shares granted in period t. For measurement, it is useful to note that the change in the

share of the firm owned by human capitalists is Vth  (1 - )V t  Vth      h
                                                                  +1 - Vt . Note that in a

steady state, the change in shares of firm value (1 - )Vt would simply be the fraction of current

profit (1 - )t , given the definition of Vt .

   At this point, we take no stand on what fraction of human capitalists' marginal product is

compensated using wages versus equity-based compensation. Equation (7) simply states that the

total value allocated to human capitalists equals human capitalists' marginal product plus any

additional shares of firm value needed to satisfy human capitalists' outside option and the partic-

ipation constraint. In theory, both wages and equity-based compensation can be used for either

the marginal product or the retention components of compensation. In practice, there are both

accounting motivations and tax motivations for using equity-based pay, as well as retention and

incentive reasons. To keep notation consistent, we denote the total flow of equity-based compensa-

tion as E h , of which a fraction  of E h is used to compensate human capitalists' marginal product,

and (1 - )E h = (1 - )Vt is then used for retention purposes. The marginal product Rh h is the

sum of the flow wage payment wh and the relevant fraction of equity-based compensation E h . In

our structural estimation, we show that only a small fraction of equity-based compensation must

be assigned as compensation to human capitalists for their marginal product in order to generate

complementarity between physical and human capital in the production function. Importantly, if

this fraction is too small, or equal to zero, then unlike in the sample studied by Krusell et al. (2000),

the updated shares data using wages only lead to an estimate suggesting substitutability between

human and physical capital. In the last part of our estimation exercise, we show that incorporating

the evidence from factor share dynamics in the cross section of industries suggests that, in fact,

most all equity compensation is attributable to human capitalists' marginal product.

   Given  , the first-order conditions (w.r.t. k , h, and n) of the profit-maximizing choice yield a
                                                                                             k,
simple markup over marginal cost under the constant returns-to-scale technology: pt fk = µt Rt
            h , p f = µ w , where the markup over marginal cost is µ =
pt fh = µt Rt    t n   t t                                          t         t.   The marginal product

                                                   27
                      y 1-       1-                                                                     y 1-      1-
of k is fk = zc k               k   ,     the marginal product of h is fh = zc (1 - k )                          h   ,
                                    1
                                                                                                        y 1-
where  = (k k  + (1 - k )h )  and the marginal product of n is fn = z (1 - c )                          n    .


Agents      This section describes the objective functions of the two sectors of households: A sector

of physical capitalists, K , that supplies physical capital k and labor n, and a sector of human

capitalists, H , who supply h.

      Physical capitalists own the production technology that produces physical capital k . We

assume a linear technology for producing capital goods. Households can invest final output goods

in order to increase the physical capital stock k at prices determined by the level of investment-

specific technological change.21 The law of motion for physical capital is


                                                       k
                                  kt+1 = (1 - k )kt + It , 0 < k < 1.                                              (8)


                            k are made each period. The capital stock k depreciates at the rate  .
      Investment decisions It                                                                   k

Define pk
        t as the relative price of physical capital investment goods over the numeraire. The price of
                                     ~ k =        pk         k represents the investment-specific technological
physical capital investment goods is p t           k,
                                                   t
                                                  zt
                                                        and zt

                                                ~k
(IST) shock. Following Greenwood et al. (1997), p t represents the effective conversion rate of final

output goods to equipment capital.

      We assume that the physical capitalist sector owns the firms that produce intermediate goods,

and it shares ownership of the profits t from this production. The physical capitalist sector also
                                                            f
has access to risk-free assets ft with an interest rate of Rt . The representative physical capitalist

maximizes her lifetime utility, defined as


                                            max               t U k (ck
                                                                      t , nt )
                                               k }
                                         {ct ,It  t=0



subject to the budget constraint:

                                                                       1
                  ck   ~k k                 f                               k
                   t + pt It + ft+1 - (1 + Rt )ft =                        Rt kt (j )dj + t + wt nt ,              (9)
                                                                   0


                1                        1
where t =      0 t (j )dj   = (µ - 1)   0 pt (j )yj,t dj .
 21
    We can extend the current setup to a general environment, as in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), which
includes an intermediate goods sector for k.


                                                              28
   Human capitalists own the production technology that produces human capital h, with the

law of motion,


                                                     h
                                ht+1 = (1 - h )ht + It , 0 < h < 1.                                       (10)


             h , can be interpreted as investing in obtaining skills or improving knowledge.
Investment, It

   The representative human capitalist maximizes expected lifetime utility, defined as


                                         max           t U h (ch
                                                               t)
                                             h }
                                       {ct ,It  t=0



subject to the budget constraint:

                                                           1
                                          f
                   ch    h
                    t + It + ft+1 - (1 + Rt )ft =
                                                                h
                                                               Rt ht (j )dj + Vth      h
                                                                                +1 - Vt ,                 (11)
                                                       0


where the right-hand side states the sources of income of human capitalists. The marginal product
                     h h , and (1 - )V  V h - V h is the change in the share of the firm value
of human capital is Rt  t             t  t+1   t

that accrues to human capitalists from t to t + 1 in the steady state, in which the firm grows at

the risk free rate. The change in the share of firm value accruing to human capitalists is implied

by the participation constraint at consecutive dates.


Equilibrium      We consider a symmetric competitive equilibrium defined as follows:


Definition 1 A Competitive Equilibrium in this economy is a sequence of prices {pt (j )}j and

quantities such that the following optimality and market clearing conditions hold: (a) Each house-

hold sector i = k, h maximizes its lifetime utilities max{ci   i 
                                                           t ,It }
                                                                               t Uti subject to the budget con-
                                                                        t=0

straint (9) or (11). (b) The owner of the final consumption goods sector solves the maximization

problem P . (c) The equilibrium is symmetric: pt (j ) = Pt = 1, kt (j ) = kt , ht (j ) = ht and yj,t = Yt .

And, (d) The market clears: Yt = ck    h   ~k k     h
                                  t + ct + pt It + It .


   Given the equilibrium definition, we obtain the standard intertemporal Euler equations for




                                                      29
consumption, investment, and labor supply:

                                                      i
                                                    Uc,t
                                      f
                                 1 + Rt +1 =         i
                                                            ,         i = k, h                                              (12)
                                                    Uc,t +1
                                                  k
                                                Uc,t
                                      k      ~k          ~
                                                        -p k
                                     Rt +1 = pt  k           t+1 (1 - k ),                                                  (13)
                                                Uc,t +1
                                                        h
                                                       Uc,t
                                           h
                                          Rt +1 =       h
                                                                 - (1 - h ),                                                (14)
                                                     Uc,t   +1
                                                     Un,t
                                            wt =          .                                                                 (15)
                                                     Uc,t


3.2   Factor Shares of Income

In this subsection, we describe the factor shares of income in our economy. The final output

is distributed among three sectors: physical capitalists, human capitalists, and labor. Physical
                                                              k k . They also receive the residual
capitalists receive the rental income from physical capital, Rt  t

profit share after human capitalists' equity compensation is allocated. Human capitalists receive

compensation equal to their marginal product plus any additional compensation necessary to satisfy
                                                                              h h + (1 - )V ,
their participation constraint. The sum of wages plus equity compensation is Rt  t         t

                          h h to wages alone as equity can also be used to compensate marginal
though one cannot equate Rt  t

product. Finally, labor receives wages, wt nt . We have:


             k       h
            Rt kt + Rt ht + wt nt + Vt
                        k                    h
      =                Rt kt              + Rt ht + (1 - )Vt           +     Vt           +           wt n t            ,
            Physical Capitalists Income    Human Capitalists Income        Profit Share       Low-skilled labor share


where, in steady state total income equals Yt and Vt = t . Note that, in our estimation, we use

the full time series data rather than comparing steady states.
                                                        h h +(1-)V
                                                       Rt  t       t
   The share of human capital income is then                 Yt      ,     while the physical capitalists' income
            kk
           Rt  t
share is    Yt .   The residual share of profits t is the profit share. We note that, while it is not

our main focus, our model highlights the distinction between shares of value added and shares of

income. While shares of value added are based on current output and value added flows, shares

of income can include compensation for contributions to firm value stemming from future output.

Indeed, in a dynamic model with uncertainty (e.g., Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019)), ex ante income


                                                        30
shares need not align with ex post shares of value added, and vice versa.

       We now derive the relationship between the factor shares and the rate of return of each factor.

For simplicity of exposition, we omit time subscripts. First, we characterize the relative shares of
                                         sk
the two types of capital income          sh :


                       sk        Rk k                    Rk k        Rh h      Rk k
                          = h                        =                       =      R ,                      (16)
                       sh  R h + (1 - )V                 Rh h Rh h + (1 - )V   Rh h

                     Rh h
where R         Rh h+(1-)V
                               is the fraction of human capital income that is the marginal product. The

relative capital share of income is driven by two factors: the relative rental payment, or marginal
                                Rk k
product, of k vs. h, D          Rh h
                                     ,   and the composition of human capital income, R . When human

capitalists' outside option  is higher, human capitalists' income is driven more by the participation

constraint share, 1 - R .

       The elasticity of substitution between k and h is crucial for the dynamics of relative rental

payments and hence the relative share of capital income. To further understand the mechanism,
                                                                                     k
we can substitute out the ratio between physical capital and human capital           h    denoting the relative

capital return as:

                                                           1                1         
                      Rk k Rk     k Rh                    1-
                                                                     k     1-   Rh   1-
                     D h = h ·                                 =                          .                  (17)
                      R h  R   (1 - k )Rk                          1 - k        Rk

              Rk k                                                                            Rh
The ratio     Rh h
                     can be increasing or decreasing in the relative price of h vs. k ,       Rk
                                                                                                 ,   depending on

whether h and k are substitutes or complementary. If  < 0 (complementary), D is decreasing in
Rh
Rk
   .    The intuition is that, as physical capital becomes cheaper, more h is adopted in production

due to complementarity. Hence, the relative share of h to k is increasing. On the contrary, if  > 0
                                         Rh
(substitutes), D is increasing in        Rk
                                            .   Hence, given the technology parameter , the relative income

share of h versus k in Equation (16) is driven by the relative prices of k and h and the composition

of human capitalists' income between marginal product and retention, R .

       Next, we can derive the total physical plus human capital share sk + sh as 1 - sn :

                                                    1   
                                                 1 1-      (1-)          1
                               1 - sn =               1-
                                                   c  k  C 1- Rk -1 + 1 - ,                                  (18)
                                                 µ                       µ




                                                          31
                                                      1
                                                      
                                      (1-k )Rk   1-
where C =           k + (1 - k )        k R h
                                                          .22 The total capital share of income includes the profit
          1
share 1 - µ and total rental payments to h and k , and depends on  , the capital­labor complemen-

tarity. In general, a declining rental rate of capital Rk along with capital­labor substitutability,

 > 0, leads to an increase in overall rental payments to capital.

         The dynamics of factor shares of value added are captured by Equations (13), (14), (16), and

(18). We next confront this system with the data to estimate the production function parameters

and examine their implications for the elasticities of substitution between the three input factors.



4         Estimation

In this section, we combine our model with the data to learn about the shape of the aggregate

production technology. Specifically, we estimate the elasticity of substitution between k and h,

(), as well as the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital, ( ). Finally, we combine a

cross-section estimate of  with our time series analysis to pin down the fraction of equity pay that

is compensation for marginal product vs. retention considerations.


4.1         Measurement Equations

We start with the system of first-order conditions (16), (17), and (18), with i.i.d. error terms:

                                                             1              
                                   sk,t            k        1-         h
                                                                      Rt   1-
                                          =                            k
                                                                                R,t + ut                      (19)
                                   sh,t          1 - k                Rt
                                                  1   
                                               1 1- 1-
                                                          (1-)   
                                                               k -1      1
                              1 - sn,t =         c  k  Ct 1- Rt     + 1 - + t,                                (20)
                                               µ                         µ

                                           k , and the return to human capitalists, Rh , are determined
where the return to physical capitalists, Rt                                         t

by households' intertemporal consumption and saving choices (13) and (14). We estimate this

system via maximum likelihood, assuming normally distributed error terms. This procedure yields

estimates for the constant elasticity parameters that enable the model to best fit the empirically
                                                          sk,t
observed trends in the relative capital share             sh,t   and the capital share 1 - sn,t .
    22
         See the derivation in Appendix 6.3.




                                                                 32
   Equation (19) is key to identifying the parameter . Dividing both sides by R yields:

                                                          1         
                            sk    Rk k           k       1-   Rh   1-
                                 = h =                                  .                          (21)
                          sh · R  R h          1 - k          Rk

The difference between the trends of rental payments to physical capital Rk k and human capital Rh h

identifies the parameter . To see the intuition, take logs of both sides of equation (21) and consider
                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                     Rt
the resulting log difference on the right-hand side. The trend in the marginal return to capital      k
                                                                                                     Rt

equals the difference between the growth in the rental return to human capital investment Rh and
                                                   
the trend of investment goods prices, scaled by   1- .   As the relative price of physical investment

goods trends downward, Rk declines faster than the return to human capital investment Rh . Given
                                                                                  sk,t
that  < 1, the relative share of physical capital compared to human capital      sh,t R   can decline in
~
p k only if  < 0 (i.e., only if k and h are complementary). In other words, the ratio between the


two capital shares is crucial for understanding the degree of complementarity between these two

types of capital in the production function.

   The estimation requires data on the marginal product of human capital, Rh h, as an input to the

left-hand side of Equation (21). In practice, what is observed is total human capitalists' income,

which is composed of wages wh and equity-based compensation E h . Each of these components may

include both compensation for the marginal product Rh h and any additional compensation required

to satisfy human capitalists' outside option (1 - )V . To account for this, we assume, as in the

existing literature, that all wage compensation is due to human capitalists' marginal product. For

equity-based compensation, we perform a series of estimations, assigning all values between 0% and

100% for the fraction  of equity-based pay attributable to human capitalists' marginal product.

We show that the structural estimation implies more complementarity than Cobb­Douglas between

physical and human capital for all but small values of the fraction of equity-based pay that is used

to compensate high-skilled labor for their marginal product.

   Note that we are being conservative by not assigning all equity-based pay to human capitalists'

marginal product. A reasonable baseline assumption would be that equity pay has simply replaced

wages, but not increased overall pay. There are several reasons why firms might substitute away

from wages and towards equity grants. First, equity-based pay is tax advantaged because qualified

grants can avoid being taxed at income taxes. Second, before 2004, companies could use equity-


                                                  33
based compensation without fully expensing it, thus boosting earnings.23 Third, equity-based

compensation is approved by the IRS as a justification for replacing dividends (taxed at the income

tax rate) with repurchases (taxed at the capital gains rate). Finally, we note that equity-based

compensation can be used to substitute equity-based compensation for wages due to incentive

alignment, retention motives, and relaxation of financial constraints by delaying a fraction of pay.

      Rather than taking as a baseline that one hundred percent of equity-based pay is simply a

substitute for wages, and used to compensate marginal product, we instead acknowledge that some

reasons for using equity-based pay may break the standard assumption that marginal product and

compensation are equated. The relative capital share on the left-hand side of Equation (21) can

then be represented as follows:
                                          sk   Rk k   Rk k
                                              = h = h       .
                                         sh R  R h  w + E h

The term wh is the measured flow wage income in the data, which represents only part of hu-

man capitalists' marginal product. The remainder of their marginal product is compensated with

equity E h , where E h is the observed equity-based compensation. Hence, Rh h = wh + E h is

the total compensation for human capitalists' marginal product, and (1 - )E h is any additional

compensation, beyond the marginal product, necessary to satisfy human capitalists' outside option

(1 - )V . Our estimation strategy then proceeds in two steps: First, we perform our estimation

for all   [0, 1], and show the impact of varying  on the estimated degree of complementarity

between physical capital and human capital. Then, we exploit the cross-industry data to infer the

value of  from a cross section estimate of .

      The correlation between the rental rate of capital k and the growth of the total capital share

drives the sign of  . To gain intuition, we can express the log growth of the total capital share as
                                                      (1-) ^   ^k
sc = 1 - sn , obtained from Equation (18): s
                                           ^c         1- C +  -1 R ,     where s
                                                                               ^ c denotes the change over

time in the total capital share, for example. If capital and labor are substitutes, a downward-trend

in the rental rate of physical capital drives up the total capital share. If physical and human capital

are complements, declining capital goods prices can be accompanied by an increase in the demand

for human capital despite the increase in its relative price.
 23
      Expensing was recommended but voluntary starting in 1996 and became mandatory in 2004.




                                                      34
4.2      Estimation Results

Equity-based compensation is critical when accounting for the rise in human capitalists' income

share and when investigating the elasticity of substitution between physical capital and human

capital. In this section, we first estimate our model using the time series data to show that

it is crucial to include equity-based compensation for the identification of the complementarity

between physical and human capital. When a small fraction of equity-based compensation is

included, we find greater complementarity between physical and human capital than that implied

by Cobb-Douglas. However, if equity compensation is ignored completely, we find instead greater

substitutability. In the final estimation step, we use cross sectional data to estimate the elasticity

of substitution between physical and human capital, and then we use that elasticity to pin down

the fraction of equity pay that is due to human capitalists' marginal product.

       We estimate our model to match the time series of factor shares for the sample period from

1980­2011. The reason for focusing on this time period is that the decline in investment goods

prices pk
        t started in the early 1980s. The set of parameters that we estimate includes physical

capital's share (k ), total capital share (c ), the elasticity of substitution (EOS) between k and

h, (), and the elasticity of substitution (EOS) between capital and labor n, ( ). The parameters

that govern the depreciation rate of capital k and h and the markup µ are calibrated.

       For the calibrated parameters, we set the depreciation rate of capital k to the average invest-

ment rate in our sample (0.08). The variable h is set to 0.15, which is equal to the depreciation

rate used by the BEA in its estimation of R&D capital in 2006 (Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)).

We set the markup parameter, µ to be constant at 1.3 throughout the sample period.24 The returns

to human and physical capitalists are determined by Equations (13) and (14), where the interest

rate Rf is the time series of real rates over the sample period.

       Recall that  measures the degree of substitutability or complementarity between physical

capital and human capital, while  measures the degree of substitutability or complementarity

between physical capital and labor. Estimates below zero indicate more complementarity than

Cobb­Douglas, while positive estimates indicate a greater degree of substitutability than Cobb­
  24
    De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) estimated the average markup in the sample of publicly traded firms and showed
that the average markup has increased from 1.21 in the 1980s to 1.45 around the mid-2000s. Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2018) showed that the average increase in markup among the same sample is milder when including SG&A
as variable costs.



                                                       35
Douglas. Estimates of 1 indicate perfect substitutability. The top panel of Figure 10 displays the

results for the estimate of .

   Our estimation shows that the parameter  is highly sensitive to including even a small fraction

of equity-based pay in the marginal product of human capitalists. When equity-based compensation

is completely ignored ( = 0), the estimated parameter  is positive, 0.12, which implies more

substitution between human capital and physical capital in the aggregate production function than

Cobb­Douglas (the EOS is 1.14). As  increases, the estimate of the elasticity of substitution

parameter  drops sharply. When only 23.33% of equity-based compensation is allocated to human

capitalists' marginal product, the estimated elasticity of substitution  becomes negative. In other

words, omitting a small fraction of equity-based compensation in the human capital income share

leads to an estimate of  with the "wrong" sign. In addition, the decline in the estimate of 

accelerates quickly as  increases.

   By contrast, estimates of  do not vary significantly for different assumed values of , as

seen in the bottom panel of Figure 10, which plots the estimates of the elasticity of substitution

between labor and capital. The average of estimate for  is 0.16, which implies a strong degree

of substitutability between capital and labor (an EOS of 1.21). Our estimate of the elasticity

of substitution between capital and labor,  , is similar to the findings in the existing literature.

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) estimate that the EOS between capital and labor is 1.28 on

average across countries. Krusell et al. (2000) report an EOS between capital and labor of 1.65

using their sample from 1963­1992. While substitution between capital and unskilled-labor can

explain the declining labor share (unskilled and total) since the 1980s, equity-based compensation is

crucial for understanding the elasticity of substitution between physical capital and human capital,

especially in the last thirty years.

   Thus far, we have remained relatively agnostic about what fraction, , of equity-based compen-

sation is attributable to compensation for human capitalists' marginal product. Our next estimation

exercise exploits the cross section data to pin down our estimate of , the degree of complementarity

between physical and human capital. By using the estimate of  from the cross section, we are able

to provide an estimate of  in our study of the time series. Our identification strategy is as follows:

Recall the first-order condition (19), which captures the dynamics of the relative income shares of

physical vs. human capital for each industry at each year. We take this equation to the data by

                                                 36
taking logs on both sides and adding an i.i.d. error term:

                                 1            1 - k                 k             h       1
  log sh,j,t - log sk,j,t =        log                  +      log Rj,t -    log Rj + log     +                j,t   (22)
                                1-              k           1-            1-              R,t

                                                 h are unobservable, we need to assume that
where j denotes industry j . Since both R,t and Rj

these variables are either fixed across time, or across industries to identify  from the coefficient on
     k . We include both year fixed effects and industry fixed effects in the estimation, and assume
log Rj,t
              h are absorbed by industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. We interpret the
that R,t and Rj
                                   h is different across industries by identical over time; and 2)
specification as assuming that 1) Rj

R,t is identical across industries but varies over time. Note that because we identify  from the
                    k , the alternative assumption that Rh varies over time but is constant across
coefficient on log Rj,t                                  j

industries, while R is constant over time but varies across industries leads to the same estimation

result for .

    We estimate (22) using the 4-SIC industry-level data for the sample period from 1980 to 2011.25

We find evidence of a strong degree of complementarity between physical and human capital in this

cross section regression, consistent with our findings in Section 2.3. The estimated coefficient on
     k is -0.34 and is highly significant (t-statistic of 6.48). This estimate implies that  = -0.51,
log Rj,t

and that the elasticity of substitution between physical capital and human capital is 0.66. We note

that our estimate of the elasticity of substitution between physical capital and human capital, using

data including equity-based compensation and more recent data, indicates greater complementarity

than that reported in Krusell et al. (2000) using wages only in data up to 1992. This is in stark

contrast to the estimate of substitutability resulting from wage data alone.

    Using this estimate of , we can back out the fraction of equity-based compensation allocated

to human capitalists' marginal product, , from the estimation results in Figure 10. As can be seen

in the figure, the estimate of  from the cross section of -0.51 implies that  is 91%. We argue

that this estimate is intuitive. It seems reasonable that, rather than increasing pay overall, firms

have substituted equity-based pay for wages due to its desirable tax, accounting, incentive, and
  25
     This empirical specification is the same as in Table 5 but with a different sample period. We do not use the longer
sample for our estimate of  in aggregate, since, as shown in Figure 7, investment goods prices were increasing in our
sample prior to 1980. It is the start of the IT revolution around the time investment goods prices began declining
that we argue drives complementarity between physical and human capital. For reference, the estimate of  implied
by the regression using data back to 1960 is -0.05.



                                                          37
retention characteristics. Table 9 presents the complete two-step estimation results, and, using the

estimate of =0.91%, the resulting model fit is shown in Figure 11.



5    Conclusion

Including equity-based compensation in human capitalists' total labor income is critical for ac-

curately measuring human capitalists' contribution to economic activity as well as their share of

income. In recent data, almost 40% of compensation to high-skilled labor appears in the form of

equity-based pay. Standard data sources severely understate this compensation, due to its standard

deferral, and to unique tax treatment at both the firm level and the individual level. We employ

data from firms' SEC filings to overcome this measurement challenge. Using only wages to measure

the high-skilled labor share leads to a puzzling lack of complementarity between declining capital

goods prices, mainly driven by e-capital, and high-skilled labor. A comprehensive measure of hu-

man capitalists income essentially reverses an otherwise declining trend in the high-skilled labor

share and reduces the decline in the overall labor share by 32%.




                                                38
References

Aboody, D., Barth, M. E., Kasznik, R., 2006. Do firms understate stock option-based compensation

  expense disclosed under sfas 123? Review of Accounting Studies 11, 429­461.

Acemoglu, D., 2002. Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market. Journal of Economic

  Literature 40, 7­72.

Acemoglu, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., Price, B., et al., 2014. Return of the solow paradox? it,

  productivity, and employment in us manufacturing. American Economic Review 104, 394­99.

Aum, S., Shin, Y., 2020a. Why is the labor share declining? Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

  Review 102, 413­28.

Aum, S., Shin, Y., 2020b. Why is the labor share declining? Tech. rep., Federal Reserve Bank of

  St. Louis Review.

Autor, D., 2019. Work of the past, work of the future. Tech. rep., MIT.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., Reenen, J. V., 2017. Concentrating on the fall of

  the labor share. Working Paper 23108, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Autor, D. H., 2014. Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the "other 99

  percent". Science 344, 843­851.

Bachelder, J. E., 2014. What has happened to stock options? Harvard Law School Forum on

  Corporate Governance and Financial Regulation .

Barkai, S., 2017. Declining labor and capital shares, W orking Paper, University of Chicago.

Becker, R., Gray, W., Marvakov, J., 2013. Nber-ces manufacturing industry database. Working

  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benzell, S. G., Brynjolfsson, E., 2019. Digital abundance and scarce genius: Implications for wages,

  interest rates, and growth. Working Paper 25585, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                39
Berman, E., Bound, J., Griliches, Z., 1994. Changes in the demand for skilled labor within us

  manufacturing: evidence from the annual survey of manufactures. The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 109, 367­397.

Bhandari, A., McGrattan, E. R., 2020. Sweat equity in us private business. Quarterly Journal of

  Economics .

Black, F., Scholes, M., 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political

  Economy 81, 637­654.

Caicedo, S., Robert E. Lucas, J., Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2016. Learning, career paths, and the distri-

  bution of wages. Working Paper 22151, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caunedo, J., Jaume, D., Keller, E., 2019. Occupational exposure to capital-embodied technology.

  Tech. rep., Society for Economic Dynamics.

Cobb, C. W., Douglas, P. H., 1928. A theory of production. The American Economic Review 18,

  139­165.

Crimmel, B. L., Schildkraut, J. L., 1999. National compensation survey collects test data on stock

  option plans. Compensation and Working Conditions pp. 17­20.

Cummins, J. G., Violante, G. L., 2002. Investment-specific technical change in the united states

  (1947­2000): Measurement and macroeconomic consequences. Review of Economic Dynamics 5,

  243 ­ 284.

De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., 2017. The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications.

  Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eisfeldt, A. L., Papanikolaou, D., 2013. Organization capital and the cross-section of expected

  returns. The Journal of Finance 68, 1365 ­ 1406.

Eisfeldt, A. L., Papanikolaou, D., 2014. The value and ownership of intangible capital. American

  Economic Review 104, 189­94.

Elsby, M. W., Hobijn, B., S
                          ¸ ahin, A., 2013. The decline of the us labor share. Brookings Papers on

  Economic Activity 2013, 1­63.

                                                40
Frydman, C., Jenter, D., 2010. Ceo compensation. Working Paper 16585, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Frydman, C., Papanikolaou, D., 2015. In search of ideas: Technological innovation and executive

  pay inequality. NBER Working Papers 21795, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Frydman, C., Saks, R. E., 2010. Executive compensation: A new view from a long-term perspective,

  1936­2005. The Review of Financial Studies 23, 2099­2138.

Gabaix, X., Landier, A., 2008. Why has ceo pay increased so much?*. The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 123, 49­100.

Gabaix, X., Lasry, J.-M., Lions, P.-L., Moll, B., 2016. The dynamics of inequality. Econometrica

  84, 2071­2111.

Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., Krusell, P., 1997. Long-Run Implications of Investment-Specific

  Technological Change. American Economic Review 87, 342­62.

Hall, B. J., Liebman, J. B., 1998. Are ceos really paid like bureaucrats? The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 113, 653­691.

Hall, B. J., Murphy, K. J., 2003. The trouble with stock options. Journal of Economic Perspectives

  17, 49­70.

Hartman-Glaser, B., Lustig, H., Xiaolan, M. Z., 2019. Capital share dynamics when firms insure

  workers. The Journal of Finance 74, 1707­1751.

Jaimovich, N., Rebelo, S., Wong, A., Zhang, M. B., Forthcoming. Trading up and the skill premium.

  NBER Macroannual .

Kaplan, S. N., Rauh, J., 2010. Wall street and main street: What contributes to the rise in the

  highest incomes? The Review of Financial Studies 23, 1004­1050.

Karabarbounis, L., Neiman, B., 2014. The global decline of the labor share. The Quarterly Journal

  of Economics 129, 61­103.

Karabarbounis, L., Neiman, B., 2018. Accounting for factorless income. Working Paper 24404,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                               41
Kehrig, M., Vincent, N., 2020. The micro-level anatomy of the labor share decline. The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics .

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., 2014. Growth opportunities, technology shocks, and asset prices. The

  Journal of Finance 69, 675­718.

Koh, D., Santaeul`
                 alia-Llopis, R., Zheng, Y., 2020. Labor share decline and intellectual property

  products capital. Econometrica 88, 2609­2628.

Koh, D., Santaeul`
                 alia-Llopis, R., Zheng, Y., 2016. Labor Share Decline and Intellectual Property

  Products Capital. Working Papers 927, Barcelona Graduate School of Economics.

Krusell, P., Ohanian, L. E., R`
                              ios-Rull, J.-V., Violante, G. L., 2000. Capital-Skill Complementarity

  and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Econometrica 68, 1029­1054.

Lawrence, R. Z., 2015. Recent declines in labor's share in us income: A preliminary neoclassical

  account. Working Paper 21296, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lebow, D. E., Sheiner, L., Slifman, L., Starr-McCluer, M., 1999. Recent trends in compensation

  practices. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 1999-32, Board of Governors of the Federal

  Reserve System (US).

Lemieux, T., MacLeod, W. B., Parent, D., 2009. Performance pay and wage inequality. The Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics 124, 1­49.

Moylan, C., 2000. Treatment of employee stock options in the u.s. national economic accounts. Bea

  papers, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Papanikolaou, D., 2011. Investment shocks and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 119,

  639­685.

Pierce, J. R., Schott, P. K., 2016. The surprisingly swift decline of us manufacturing employment.

  American Economic Review 106, 1632­62.

Piketty, T., 2014. Capital in the 21st century. Cambridge: Harvard University .

Rognlie, M., 2015. Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share: Accumulation or scarcity?

  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity pp. 1­54.

                                                42
Smith, M., Yagan, D., Zidar, O., Zwick, E., 2018. Capitalists in the twenty-first century. NBER

  Working Paper 25442 .

Stokey, N. L., 2016. Technology, skill and the wage structure. Working Paper 22176, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.




                                              43
6        Appendix

6.1        Discussion of Equity-Based Compensation in the Data and Literature
In this section, we establish facts about the measurement of equity-based compensation. First, we
document that the CES wages used in this paper are wages only. The Census form used to collect
the responses that constitute the CES data is at
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm/technical-documentation/questionnaire/
2019-annual-survey-of-manufactures-forms.html and we confirmed this with the contacts
listed at https://www.nber.org/research/data/nber-ces-manufacturing-industry-database.
We use the answer to the following question:




Note that the form explicitly states that benefits reported in lines F1 to F3 should be excluded
  Dopart
from    Not  E,Submit        - Foris
                 payroll, which        the CES variablePurposes
                                     Informational           "PAY" which      ONLY
                                                                                 we use toOMB   No.: 0607-0449
                                                                                            measure        wages. And, in the
text preceding
  Mailing          question
          this survey           F,
                      to the U.S.  the form
                                  Census      states
                                         Bureau       to fulfill
                                                does not  "Include:      Spread
                                                                 your reporting    on stock
                                                                                obligation   options
                                                                                           Approval        that
                                                                                                    Expires:       are taxable to
                                                                                                             04/30/2022




                                                                                                                                Do Not Mail - Report Online
employees at this 2019AnnualSurveyofManufactures(ASM)
                        establishment as wages". Stock options are included in question F3, which can
be downloaded at the link above.     MA-10000-AnnualSurveyofManufactures
                                            Question F is preceded by the following instructions:
F.EMPLOYER-PAIDANNUALCOSTFORFRINGEBENEFITS

(Thisistheemployer'sannualcostatthisestablishmentforlegallyrequiredprogramsandprogramsnotrequiredbylaw.Ifanyoftheitemshereare
maintainedinyourrecordsonlyatthecompanylevel,allocatetheircoststothemanufacturingestablishment.Youmaydistributethetotalonthe
basisoftheratioofthepayrollofeachmanufacturingestablishmenttothetotalcompanypayrollunlessyouhavedevelopedyourownmethodof
makingsuchallocations.SpecifythemethodusedandtheapproximateportionthathasbeenallocatedintheItem31:REMARKSsectionattheend
oftheinstrument.)

Include:
     Premiumequivalentsforself-insuredplansandfeespaidtothird-partyadministrators(TPAs)
     Spreadonstockoptionsthataretaxabletoemployeesatthisestablishmentaswages



Exclude:
     Employeecontributions
     Disbursementsfromtrustsorfundstosatisfyhealthinsuranceclaims

Whatweretheemployer'sannualcostsatthisestablishmentfor:
Thus, the CES data provide a "wages only" labor series. This is one of the reasons that the labor
share    using this -
  1. HealthInsurance?    data    is lower than in other standard sources, though the downward trend is shared
                          Insurancepremiumsonhospitals,
    medicalplans,andsingle-serviceplanssuchasdental,
with    standard      labor     share    series.             $        ,000.00   $         ,000.00
                                                                                                                                Do Not Mail - Report Online




    vision,andprescriptiondrugplans

     The main text (Section 2.1 provides detailed documentation of the fact that existing data sources
  2. RetirementPlans?
(based on BEA and BLS statistics) previously employed in the literature to measure the labor share
    a. Definedbenefitpensionplans(qualifiedand
include    only a-Plansthatspecifythebenefittobe
       nonqualified) small fraction of equity-based compensation. For inclusion in standard sources based
       paidtoemployeesuponretirement,generallyeither
on income        tax data records, equity pay must satisfy both of the following two criteria. First, the
       aspecificamountorapercentageofcompensation.
       Employercontributionsarebasedonactuarial
pay must        be non-qualified for tax purposes, since pay under qualified plans allow for taxation at
       computationsthatincludeemployee'scompensation
the lower       capital gains tax rate.26 Second,
       andyearsofserviceandarenotallocatedtospecific
                                                        
                                                           the
                                                             $
                                                               pay must   be both
                                                                      ,000.00   $
                                                                                  vested (or   unrestricted) and
                                                                                          ,000.00
       accountsmaintainedforemployees.
exercised, meaning that current tax data reflects only exercised grants from five or more years ago.
    b. Definedcontributionplans-Plansthatdefine
As detailed       in Section 2.1, given the fast growth of equity pay, by the time exercised grants appear
       theemployercontributionstoaseparateaccount
         providedforeachemployee.Theemployee
    26
   Qualifying     dispositions, or those held by a retained employee for a sufficient time period, are reported on Schedule
     "benefit"atretirementdependsontheamount
D andcontributedandtheresultsoftheaccount'sactivity.
       Form 8949.
         Examples:
             Profitsharingplans
             Moneypurchases(e.g.,401k,403b)
             Stockbonusplans(e.g.,ESOPs)                  
                                                                    44
                                                                    $            ,000.00       $              ,000.00



    3. Payrolltaxes,employer-paidinsurancepremiums,
                                                                                                                                Do




      andotheremployer-paidbenefits?
in income tax returns these past grants are a small fraction of the current flow of new equity pay
grants. Additional email communications with the BEA and BLS staff are available upon request.
    The advantage of the reserved share measure of equity-based pay over an expense-based measure
is that it is not affected by changes in accounting rules. Starting from 1996, and up to 2004, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) recommended that firms expense compensation
options using fair value (usually, Black-Scholes). However, this was only a recommendation, and
firms could and did value options at the intrinsic value, which is zero if options are granted at the
money. By doing so, firms boost current earnings. Due to strong incentives to inflate earnings,
there is still substantial evidence in the accounting literature (eg. Aboody et al. (2006)) that firms
continued to substantially undervalue their equity pay even after 2004 when FASB began requiring
valuation at fair value under rule FAS 123R. In general, the value of employee stock options is
reported on financial reports as a compensation expense that is spread over the period of vesting,
rather than being expensed at the time it is granted.27

6.2     Data Construction
6.2.1     Data Source
The sample for income shares and investment goods prices Our main source data for
constructing factor shares is the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. The NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database covers 4-digit SIC code-level information from 1958­2011 on
output, employment, payroll, investment goods prices, and value added. All variables are defined
at an annual frequency. We extend the time series for value added and aggregate payroll for the
period 2012 ­ 2019 as follows: We obtain the growth rates of manufacturing value added and
employee compensation from the NIPA tables available from the BEA, and compute the growth
rates for value added and payroll for the industries comprising the manufacturing sector. We then
project the CES data forward using these growth rates and the CES data from the end of our
sample.
    For corporate income shares (e.g., physical capital share, SG&A share) and other firm-level
variables, we obtain the data from the Compustat Fundamental Annual dataset from 1960­2019.
We include only the manufacturing firms (SIC codes 2001 ­ 3999) to match the sectors covered by
the NBER-CES sample.
    Our main analyses are conducted in the merged sample of the public-firm data (Compustat,
RiskMetrics, and hand-collection) and the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. This
merged sample covers 5,271 firms and 133 of industries (4-SIC) from 1960­2019.

The sample for reserved shares We obtain the data for reserved shares from publicly-traded
firms' accounting statements, which we gather from three sources: (a) the Compustat Fundamental
Annual 1958­1995, (b) RiskMetrics 1996­2005, which covers firms from the S&P 500, S&P mid-
cap, and S&P smallcap indices, (c) hand-collected data 2006 ­ 2019 from 10k filings and proxy
statements. We restrict our sample to U.S. companies with headquarters located in the U.S., and
with a native currency code of U.S. dollars. We also restrict the sample to public firms traded
in the major exchanges: New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange, NASDAQ-NMS
Stock Market, Midwest Exchange (Chicago) and Pacific Exchange. We exclude companies that
trade ADRs (American Depositary Receipts).
  27
     For example, if the vesting period is five years, one fifth of the value calculated at the time of the grant is expensed
for each of the next five years.




                                                             45
Merged Sample We merge the public firm and NBER-CES databases using four-digit SIC codes.
Since we only observe value added at the industry level, we exclude industries (4-SIC) which have
one or fewer firms in the NBER-CES-public-firm merged sample. In addition, to adjust for the
differential coverage of the NBER-CES data covering all firms public and private, and the public-
firm dataset covering only public firms (and possibly including some pay to employees abroad), we
scale our new grant series by the ratio of sales in Compustat to the ratio of sales in the NBER-CES
data at the four-digit SIC code industry level. Specifically, for each year and in each industry j , we
                                                       j Compustat Salesj,t
construct the scaling factor given by: Scalej,t =                           . We aggregate the firm-level
                                                     j NBER-CES Shipmentj,t

value of N Gk,t to the industry-level N~Gj,t by summing up over firms, N      ~Gj,t =
                                                                                       kind j N Gk,t . We
match the industry aggregate in public-firm data to the industry aggregate in the NBER-CES data
by dividing the industry-level N  ~Gj,t by the industry-level scaling factor Scalej,t . The adjusted
                                                         N~G
                                                          j,t
industry aggregate we use in our analysis is N Gj,t = Scalej,t
                                                               . We construct the industry-level share
of income from equity compensation as the ratio of industry-level N Gj,t to industry-level value
added.

6.2.2   Variable Definitions and Construction
Reserved shares (RS). Common shares reserved for conversion and future grant of employee
stock options, which are defined as follows:

  1. 1958­1983: CSHR (common shares reserved for conversion total) - DCPSTK (preferred
     stocks and convertible debt) (Compustat Fundamental Annual)

  2. 1984­1995: CSHRO (common shares reserved for stock options conversion). The Compustat
     manual states "This item represents shares reserved for stock options outstanding as of year-
     end plus options that are available for future grants." During this period, there are separate
     data items for preferred stock and convertible bonds, as well as the data item for total common
     shares reserved for conversion (CSHR).

  3. 1996­2005: Total available shares for future grants of employee equity-based compensation
     + total shares reserved for outstanding employee stock option grants (RiskMetrics)

  4. 2006­2019: Total shares reserved for both outstanding employee equity-based compensation
     (options, warrants and stock grants) and future grants of equity-based compensation. (Hand-
     collected data from SEC filings on Edgar)

Ownership share. The employee-owned fraction of firms is calculated as the value of reserved
shares (RS) divided by stock market capitalization.

Value Added We obtain the value added series from NBER-CES dataset from 1960 ­ 2011, and
extend the data to 2019 using BEA NIPA data as described above.

Human capital share. The total income to human capitalists as a share of value added.

  1. Grant-based measure. Total human capital income includes the wage income of high-skilled
     human capitalists and their equity-based compensation. Sample period is 1960­2019.

         · High-skilled wage share: skilled workers' payroll/value added (NBER-CES)



                                                   46
        · Equity-based compensation share: NG = (number of reserved shares × current stock
          price)/(weighted average granting period of five years). Equity-based compensation
          share = NG/value added
        · Industry level: human capital share = high-skilled wage share + equity-based compen-
          sation share of income

  2. Expense-based measure (i.e., selling, general, and administrative expenses). Sample period is
     1958­2019. Industry-level SG&A share: 30% of SG&A (Compustat) divided by value added
     (NBER-CES).

Physical capital share. Investment (NBER-CES) divided by value added (NBER-CES). This
is a 4-digit SIC code-level variable available from NBER-CES from 1960-2011 and extended using
BEA NIPA as described above.

Unskilled and total Labor share. The unskilled labor share is a 4-digit SIC code-level variable
available from NBER-CES from 1960-2011 and extended using BEA NIPA as described above.

  1. Unskilled labor share: production labor payroll/value added (NBER-CES)

  2. Total Labor share = human capitalist labor share + unskilled labor share

Constructing the New Grant Series In this section, we provide a formal derivation of our
baseline measure for the annual flow of deferred compensation. Our baseline measure is a fraction
of the shares reserved for employee compensation, since the stock of reserved shares is available for
a wide cross section of firms and a long time series of 53 years from 1958­2010. We calibrate our
measure to RiskMetrics data, which contain information on both reserved shares and share-based
employee compensation grants for the period 1996­2005. We also perform several robustness checks
on this measure. Our measure is conservative, in the sense that we do not include capital gains or
losses on share-based compensation that is granted but not vested, and share values have increased
substantially, on average, over our sample (see Hall and Liebman (1998)).
    We start with the following law of motion for the stock of reserved shares:

                            RSt+1 = RSt + N RSt - EXCt - EXPt ,                                   (23)

where RSt denotes reserved shares at the beginning of period t, and RSt+1 is the stock of reserved
shares at the beginning of period t + 1. As is standard for the law of motion of any stock, there is
both "investment" in the stock as well as "depreciation." Here, investment, or growth in reserved
shares, is denoted by N RSt . That is, N RSt denotes newly authorized reserved shares. All newly
authorized reserved shares are voted on by the board of directors, and they should be reported to the
SEC at least annually. However, comprehensive data on new share authorizations are not reliably
available electronically. The stock of reserved shares also depreciates due to exercised stock options
and vested restricted stock (denoted EXCt ) and also due to expired options or retired restricted
stock (denoted by EXPt ).
    In practice, the process of authorizing new reserved shares is lumpy. Similar to a plan for capital
expenditures, firms construct a plan for new share issuances (e.g., for compensation, warrants,
secondary offerings). When this plan is revised significantly, the firm authorizes a new block of
reserved shares, N RSt . These newly authorized shares are then used to grant options and restricted
stock compensation over the next gp years, where the granting period gp denotes the time between


                                                  47
the shares being authorized and being allocated to compensation grants. It should be noted that
firms also manage their stock of reserved shares, similar to the way firms manage their cash to
ensure a sufficient supply to satisfy liquidity needs but no more than this, due to opportunity costs.
They are required to reserve enough shares to satisfy compensation grants that are likely to be
exercised or vested. On the other hand, firms avoid reserving too many shares because investors
know that any new shares from employee compensation will result in the dilution of existing shares.
Thus, firms strive to authorize new shares in a way that balances these tradeoffs.
    Assume that the average granting period of the initial stock of reserved shares at time t, RSt ,
is gp0 . This means that, on average, any previously authorized share is expected to remain on the
balance sheet in the stock of RSt for gp0 years before being granted. We allow for the granting
period to differ for any given block of newly authorized shares, N RSt , and we denote the average
granting period for N RSt by gpt . What will be important for determining the fraction of the stock
of reserved shares that represents the current flow of employee compensation grants is a weighted
average of the granting period for all reserved shares on the balance sheet. For parsimony, we
assume that all newly authorized shares are evenly granted over the next gpt periods:
                                     t+gpt
                          N RSt =            Annual Grants(AG)k = gpt · AGt .                                (24)
                                      k=t

       For further simplification, we assume that

  1) On average, employees exercise a fraction e of the total reserved shares28

                                         EXCt = e · RSt 0 < e < 1.                                           (25)

  2) On average, outstanding restricted stocks or stock options display a constant attrition rate c
     due to forfeiture, expiration, or

                                            EXPt = c · RSt 0 < c < 1.                                        (26)

Using Equations (24), (25), and (26), we can rewrite the law of motion (23) as

                               RSt+1 = (RSt - EXCt - EXPt ) + N RSt
                                        = (1 - e - c)RSt + gp1 · AGt .

   To correctly capture the annual share-based compensation granted to employees at time t
(denoted by N Gt ) for "new grants," we must include the following two components:

   1. AG: annual grants from newly reserved shares, N RSt
                                                                                    RSt
   2. PG: annual grants from the stock of previously reserved shares,               gp0

Note, we can rewrite the law of motion for RSt+1 as

                                                                          RSt
                        RSt+1 =         (gp0 - e · gp0 - c · gp0 )            + gp1 · AGt .
                                                                          gp0
                                      average remaining granting period
                                        after exercising and expiration

  28
    Employees exercise stock options, or their stock vests, after e0 · gp0 periods. We assume that one outstanding
stock option has the right to purchase one common share of the firm. This is consistent with common practice.


                                                        48
                                          RSt+1                                                             RSt
Dividing both sides by                            RS                and multiplying by AGt +                gp0 ,   we obtain
                             (gp0 -e·gp0 -c·gp0 ) gp t +vp1 ·AGt
                                                     0
                                               RSt
                                         AGt + gp
                                                   0


                                             RSt                             RSt+1
                     N Gt = AGt +                      =                            RS
                                             gp0               (gp0 -e·gp0 -c·gp0 ) gp t +gpt ·AGt
                                                                                         0
                                                                                   RS
                                                                            AGt + gp t
                                                                                     0
                                                                              RSt+1
                                                       =                                                        ,               (27)
                                                                    (1 - e - c)gp0 0 + gpt 1
                                                               weighted average granting period
              RSt
              gp0                         AGt
where 0 =         RS     and 1 =              RS       .
            AGt + gp t                  AGt + gp t
                    0                              0
    Hence, the flow of share-based compensation at period t is RS t+1
                                                                 gp , where gp denotes the average
time that any existing or newly authorized reserved share remains on the balance sheet before being
allocated to a compensation grant. Since e, c  (0, 1), the weighted average granting period should
be a value between gp0 and gp1 .
    To match the theory to the data, we note that this derivation uses t to denote values at the
beginning of each period, as is standard in macroeconomic notation. However, since accounting
data are recorded at the end of each period, we use the end-of-period data to measure the deferred
compensation flow for the annual period ending at the date of the accounting entry. That is, we
use a fraction of the stock of reserved shares recorded at the end of year t to measure the flow of
new grants during year t.

6.3   Derivation of Equation (18)
Under the symmetric equilibrium, the returns to physical capital and human capital can be derived
from the first-order conditions of the profit maximization problem:

                                                               1-            1-
                                                           y            
                               fk = zc k                                           = µt Rk , and,                               (28)
                                                                        k
                                                                        1-          1-
                                                                  y            
                               fh = zc (1 - k )                                              = µt R h ,                         (29)
                                                                               h
                                        1
where  = (k k  + (1 - k )h )  . From the above equations, the ratio between physical and human
capital is a function of the relative return to the two types of capital:
                                                                         1
                                            h   (1 - k )Rk              1-
                                              =                                B.                                               (30)
                                            k      k R h

We can derive the total capital share sk + sh as 1 - sn as
                                                               Y 1-
                                             (1 - k )                   1- [k k  + (1 - k )h ]     1
            1 - sn = sk + sh =                                                                 +1-
                                                                         µY                        µ
                                    Y 1-                                                     -
                              c                  1-                     1   c        Y                    1
                         =                                     +1-        =                      +1-        .
                                            µY                          µ   µ                             µ



                                                                   49
       Y
Find       as a function of prices:

                     h = Bk
                                                  1                       1
                      = [k k  + (1 - k )B k  ]  = (k + (1 - k )B )  k  Ck.                        (31)

Since  is linear in k , we obtain the expression of capital (non-labor) share in the function of prices
as
                                                             1
                                 Y        Y      Rk         1-
                                      =      =                                                    (32)
                                          Ck   c k C1-
                                                         
                                          c c k C1- 1-       1
                             1 - sn =                    +1-
                                          µ    Rk            µ
                                             1   
                                          1 1-      (1-)          1
                                      =        1-
                                            c  k  C 1- Rk -1 + 1 - .                              (33)
                                          µ                       µ




                                                  50
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics


Panel A reports descriptive statistics (means, medians, and standard deviations) for our 4-SIC industry-
level sample between 1960 and 2011, which corresponds to industries in the NBER-CES dataset for which
information on their SG&A expenditures and/or reserved shares is available in Compustat and RiskMetrics.
The dataset includes 133 unique industries at the 4-SIC level. We report statistics for two measures of the
human capital share, both defined relative to value added. The first measure, the Skilled Labor Share, uses
the sum of non-production workers payroll and the value of reserved shares. The second measure, the SG&A
share, uses selling, general, and administrative expenses. We also report statistics for the structure of skilled
labor pay, measured by the ratio of equity-based pay to total pay. The time period is 1960-2019. Panel B
reports the average of major shares of value added and shares of income for the last four decades. The time
period is 1980-2019. See Section 2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable definitions.


                                         Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                                                           Mean     St.Dev    Median
                                                                            (1)       (2)      (3)
        Levels (pct.pt.):
        NG/VADD                                                              2.4     14.1       0.2
        Skilled Labor Share (Wage only)                                     16.5     7.5       15.2
        Equity Pay/Total Skilled Workers Pay                                10.0     13.8       4.6
        SG&A/VADD                                                           11.3     5.2       10.5

        Physical Capital Share                                              6.5      4.1       5.4
        Labor Share                                                         39.5     12.5      40.5
        Unskilled Labor Share                                                23      10.1      23.1
        Investment Good Prices                                              96.6     21.1      98.1

        Annual Changes (pct.pt.):
        NG/VADD                                                             0.22     5.27        0
        Skilled Labor Share (Wage only)                                    -0.09     2.13      -0.10
        Equity Pay/Total Skilled Workers Pay                                0.44     6.35        0
        SG&A/VADD                                                           0.09     1.93      0.05

        Physical Capital Share                                             -0.01     2.24        0
        Labor Share (Wage only)                                            -0.45     3.71      -0.43
        Unskilled Labor Share                                              -0.36     2.21      -0.30
        Investment Good Prices                                             -0.76     2.12      -0.62

        Additional Measures (1996-2005, pct. pt.)
        (Employee Stock Options, Black-Scholes Value)/VADD                  8.0      25.5       0.8

        (Employee Wealth, Black-Scholes Value)/Stock Mkt Value              9.3      21.3       4.1

        (Non-Executive Employee Options, Black-Scholes Value)/              78.1     18.4      82.7
                 (Employee Stock Options, Black-Scholes Value)

        (Value of Exercised Options)/Stock Mkt Value                        1.0       4.8       0.4

        N. of Industries=133
        N. of obs=6,303




                                                       51
                            Panel B: Time Series Stylized Facts

                                           1980­1989    1990­1999   2000­2009   2010­2019
Levels (pct.pt)
Human Capital Share - Wage Only                  17%       14%        12%         11%
Total Human Capital Share (NG + Wage)            18%       17%        18%         17%
Total Labor Share - Wage only                    38%       31%        25%         22%
Total Labor Share (NG + Wage)                    39%       34%        31%         28%
Equity Share of Value Added (NG)                  1%        3%         6%          6%

Ownership Share (NG/MktCap)                      4%        7%         12%         10%
Equity-Based Pay of Total Human                  7%        18%        33%         36%
Capital Income
Human Capital Share of Total Labor               44%       46%        46%         47%
Share - Wage Only
Human Capital Share of Total Labor               46%       51%        56%         58%
Share (NG + Wage)
# Skill Workers/Total Emp                        30%       30%        30%          NA

Equity-Based Pay (Billions $)                    4.1       29.1       79.5        116.1




                                            52
              Table 2: The Relation Among Factor Shares: Industry-Level Analysis


This table reports industry-level regressions of the human capital share in a given year on the
physical capital share at the 4-SIC level of industry aggregation. New grants (NG) are estimated
based on the value of reserved shares. We report results for two measures of the human capital
share. The main measure is defined as the sum of skilled wages and new grants relative to value
added. The second is the expense-based SG&A share. The unskilled labor share refers to production
workers wages relative to value added. To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard
deviation units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations
of the dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory
variable. For example, in the third column, a one standard-deviation change in the physical capital
share is associated with about 11% standard deviation change in the human capital share. The time
period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year) and industry effects. Standard errors are
robust, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See
Section 2.2 and Appendix 6.2 for detailed variable definitions.


                           Equity Comp Share=            Total H Share =          SG&A/VADD
                                NG/VADD           (Skilled Wages +NG)/VADD
                            (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)      (6)
  Physical Capital Share   0.004     0.056        0.113          0.094          0.010    0.031
                           (0.25)     (3.48)       (12.49)        (10.35)       (0.80)    (2.41)
   Unskilled Labor Share             -0.475                      0.171                   -0.187
                                      (-17.93)                    (11.48)                 (-8.98)
         Year FE             Y           Y           Y               Y             Y       Yes
       Industry FE           Y           Y           Y               Y             Y        Y
            N              6,207       6,207       6,207           6,207         6,222    6,222
           R2              0.330       0.364       0.054           0.074         0.123    0.134




                                                 53
                      Table 3: The Human Capital Share of Income and Investment Goods Prices: Industry-Level Analysis


     This table reports (4-SIC) industry-level regressions of the human capital share (Columns 1 to 3) in a given year on investment goods
     prices. New grants (NG) are estimated based on the value of reserved shares. We report results for two measures of the human capital
     share. The main measure is defined as the sum of skilled wages and new grants relative to value added (Column 2). The second is the
     expense-based SG&A share (Column 3). The unskilled labor share refers to production workers' wages relative to value added, and the
     skilled share refers to non-production workers. We also report results for the structure of skilled workers compensation, measured by the
     share of equity-based compensation to total skilled workers compensation (Column 7). To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed
     in standard deviation units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations of the dependent variable
     associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable. For example, in the second column, a one standard-deviation
     change in investment goods prices is associated with about 18% of a standard deviation change in the human capital share. The time
     period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year) and industry effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***, **, and * denoting
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See 2.2 and Appendix 6.2 for detailed variable definitions.




54
                                   Human Capital Income                            Wage Only Income                              Ownership
                            NG/       (Skilled Wages    SG&A         Total Labor   Unskilled Labor    Skilled Wages/   Equity Comp(NG)/    Reserved
                           VADD          +NG)/          VADD            Share          Share               VADD           Total Skilled    Shares/
                                          VADD                      (Wage-Only)                                              Income       Market Cap
                             (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)               (6)                 (7)           (8)
                                                                                           
         Inv. Goods       -0.187         -0.094        -0.130         -0.009          0.187             -0.119              -0.028           -0.082
           Prices          (-12.22)       (-10.89)      (-10.97)      (-1.13)          (27.28)           (-14.83)           (-1.69)           (-4.83)
          Time FE            Y              Y               Y            Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
        Industry FE          Y              Y               Y            Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
      Industry Controls      Y              Y               Y            Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
              N            6207           6,207           6,222        6,222            6,222             6,222             4,851             5,855
             R2            0.291          0.070           0.145        0.638            0.718             0.289             0.487             0.332
Table 4: The Human Capital Share, Stock Market Value, and Investment Goods Prices: Firm-Level
Analysis


This table reports firm-level regressions of the human capital share in a given year on investment
goods prices. Column (1 to 2) report results for the ownership share (value of reserved shares to
market capitalization ratio). Column 3 to 4 report results for the NG to sales ratio. Column 5 to
6 report results for the expense-based measure SG&A to sales ratio. In Panel A, we report results
for a specification with industry fixed effects, while in Panel B, we report results for a specification
with firm fixed effects. To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard deviation
units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations of the
dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable.
For example, in Column 1 of Panel A, a one standard-deviation change in investment goods prices
is associated with about 9.1% of a standard deviation change in the ownership share variable. The
time period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year) effects. Standard errors are robust,
with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Section
2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable definitions.

            Panel A: Industry & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for the Human Capital Share
                          Value of Reserved Share/ Equity Comp Share         SG&A/Sales
                              Stock Mkt Value            NG/Sales
                              (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)

       Inv. Goods Prices   -0.091       -0.102           -0.032     -0.026     -0.042     -0.052
                            (-14.12)     (-13.56)         (-7.26)    (-4.68)    (-9.27)    (-10.22)

       Industry FE            Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Firm FE                N             N               N          N          N          N
       Year FE                Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Firm Controls          Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Industry Controls      N             Y               N          Y          N          Y

       N                   73,027        50,629       73,027     50,629    69,308      47,654
       R2                   0.321        0.331         0.707      0.714     0.624       0.668
              Panel B: Firm & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for the Human Capital Share
                          Value of Reserved Share/ Equity Comp Share          SG&A/Sales
                               Stock Mkt Value             NG/Sales
                              (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)

       Inv. Goods Prices   -0.071       -0.076           -0.009     -0.012     -0.022     -0.042
                            (-9.93)      (-9.18)         (-1.85)    (-1.84)     (-6.37)    (-10.53)
       Industry FE            N             N               N          N          N          N
       Firm FE                Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Year FE                Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Firm Controls          Y             Y               Y          Y          Y          Y
       Industry Controls      N             Y               N          Y          N          Y

       N                    72,476        50,208          72,476     50,208     68,765     47,237
       R2                    0.625        0.633            0.830      0.834      0.899      0.907




                                                    55
Table 5: The Relative Growth of the Physical Capital and The Human Capital Share and Invest-
ment Goods Prices


This table reports results of additional industry-level and firm-level regressions of the human capital
share in a given year on investment goods prices. New grants (NG) are estimated based on the
value of reserved shares. We report results for two measures of the human capital share. The
main measure is defined as the sum of skilled wages and new grants relative to value added. The
second measure is the expense-based SG&A share. For each measure, we report results relative to
the physical capital share. To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard deviation
units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations of the
dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable.
For example, in Column 1, a one standard-deviation change in investment goods prices is associated
with about 6.4% of a standard deviation change in the NG share relative to the physical capital
share. The time period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year) and/or industry or firm
effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively. See 2.2 and Appendix 6.2 for detailed variable definitions.


                         ln(NG/VADD)         ln((Skilled Wages + NG)/VADD)         ln(SG&A/VADD
                       -ln(Invest/VADD)               -ln(Invest/VADD)            -ln(Invest/VADD)
                        (1)         (2)         (3)               (4)              (5)         (6)
                     1960-1980   1980-2011   1960-1980         1980-2011        1960-1980   1980-2011
 Inv. Goods Prices    0.381      -0.171       0.169            -0.131             -0.012     -0.201
                       (6.28)     (-6.64)      (3.89)           (-6.64)           (-0.29)     (-9.33)
 Year FE                 Y           Y           Y                 Y                Y            Y
 Industry FE             Y           Y           Y                 Y                Y            Y
 Industry Controls       Y           Y           Y                 Y                Y            Y
 N                     2,327       3,880       2,327             3,880            2,306        3,875
 R2                    0.116       0.242       0.203             0.206            0.204        0.168




                                                  56
Table 6: Corroborating the Complementarity Mechanism: Industry-Level Heterogeneity Analysis


This table reports cross-industry heterogeneity analysis of the human capital share in a given year
on investment goods prices at the 4-SIC industry level. We test for cross-industry heterogeneity
by splitting the sample into high-skill intensity (top 50% skill intensity) and low-skill intensity
(bottom 50% skill intensity) industries, which is measured based on the ratio of skilled workers to
total workers. New grants (NG) are estimated based on the value of reserved shares. We report
results for two measures of the human capital share. The main measure is defined as the sum
of skilled wages and new equity grants relative to value added. The second is the expense-based
measure using SG&A share. To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard deviation
units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations of the
dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable. For
example, in Column 1, a one standard-deviation change in investment goods prices is associated
with about 27% of a standard deviation larger change in the NG share for high skill intensity
industries relative to low skill intensity industries. The time period is 1960-2011. All specifications
include either time(year) or time(year) and industry effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***,
**, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. See Section 2.2 and
Appendix 6.2 for detailed variable definitions.


                        ln(NG/VADD)        ln((Skilled Wages+NG)/VADD)          ln(SG&A/VADD)
                         (1)      (2)         (3)              (4)                (5)         (6)
                        High      Low        High              Low               High         Low
  Inv. Goods Prices    -0.042    -0.027    -0.050              0.013           -0.135      -0.096
                       (-1.70)   (-1.00)    (-4.36)            (0.65)           (-8.69)     (-3.06)
      Year FE             Y         Y          Y                 Y                 Y           Y
    Industry FE           Y         Y          Y                 Y                 Y           Y
  Industry Controls       Y         Y          Y                 Y                 Y           Y
          N             3,096     3,111      3,096             3,111             3,099       3,123
         R2             0.448     0.245      0.111             0.143             0.201       0.069




                                                  57
                       Table 7: Human Capital Earnings, Factor Share, and Investment Goods Prices: Firm-Level Analysis


     This table reports industry- and firm-level regressions of an alternative measure of the new grants share based the Black­Scholes value of
     new grants of stock options for all employees (Panel A), and excluding the top executives (Panel B) in a given year on investment goods
     prices, in turn. The Black-Scholes value of new grants is relative to value added at the industry level and sales at the firm level. To ease
     interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard deviation units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in
     standard deviations of the dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable. For example,
     in the second column of Panel A, a one standard-deviation change in investment goods prices is associated with about 17% of a standard
     deviation change in the new grants share. The time period is 1996-2005. All specifications include time (year) and either industry or firm
     effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Section
     2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable definitions.
                             Panel A: Firm & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for Total Employee Stock Option Compensation
                                    (Employee Stock Options, Black­Scholes Value)/        ln(Employee Stock Options B­S Value/Employees)
                                                        VADD
                                      (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)       (7)             (8)
                                       Industry-level               Firm-level               Industry-level              Firm-level

          Investment Goods Prices   -0.210       -0.168       -0.848        -0.665       -0.414        -0.167      -0.382         -0.372
                                     (0.020)      (0.075)      (0.221)       (0.223)      (0.032)      (0.094)      (0.127)        (0.135)

          Time Effects                Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes




58
          Industry Effects            No           Yes           No           No            No           Yes         No             No
          Firm Effects                No           No            Yes          Yes           No           No          Yes            Yes
          Firm Controls               No           No            No           Yes           No           No          No             Yes

          N. of obs.                 1,282         1,282        3,357          3,314       1,111        1,111      3,104          3,300
          R2 (%)                     8.99          51.51        80.62          81.44       14.21        70.64      72.80          73.42
                 Panel B: Firm & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for Total Employee Stock Option Compensation Excluding Top Executives
                                    (Non-Exec Employee Stock Options, B-S Value)/        Non-Exec Employee Stock Options Relative to CEOs
                                                         VADD
                                      (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)       (7)             (8)
                                        Industry-level                Firm-level             Industry-level              Firm-level

          Investment Goods Prices   -0.205       -0.171       -0.841        -0.677         -0.040       -0.171      -0.629          -0.478
                                     (0.020)      (0.074)      (0.240)       (0.244)      (0.035)      (0.174)      (0.333)        (0.332)

          Time Effects                Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes
          Industry Effects            No           Yes           No           No            No           Yes         No             No
          Firm Effects                No           No            Yes          Yes           No           No          Yes            Yes
          Firm Controls               No           No            No           Yes           No           No          No             Yes

          N. of obs.                 1,282         1,282        3,017        2,982         1,111        1,111       2,496          2,546
          R2 (%)                     8.97          51.20        80.73        81.10         1.17         14.47       19.72          22.71
                        Table 8: Human Capital Wealth, Factor Share, and Investment Goods Prices: Firm-Level Analysis


     This table reports industry- and firm-level regressions of an alternative measure of the human capital ownership share based on the
     Black-Scholes value of past unexpired grant, and new grants of stock options for all employees (Panel A), and excluding top executives
     (Panel B) in a given year on investment goods prices, in turn. To ease interpretation, all variables are expressed in standard deviation
     units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change in standard deviations of the dependent variable associated with a
     one standard-deviation change in the explanatory variable. For example, in the first column of Panel A, a one standard-deviation change
     in investment goods prices is associated with about 10% of a standard deviation change in the human capital ownership share. The
     time period is 1996-2005. All specifications include time (year) and either industry or firm effects. Standard errors are robust, with
     ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Section 2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable
     definitions.
                                Panel A: Firm & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for Total Employee Stock Options Wealth
                                          (Employee Wealth, Black-Scholes Value)/            ln(Employee Wealth B-S Value/Employees)
                                                      Stock Mkt Value
                                        (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)       (7)            (8)
                                          Industry-level               Firm-level             Industry-level             Firm-level

           Investment Goods Prices   -0.163        -0.366        -0.362       -0.370       -0.406        -0.137     -0.580        -0.353
                                      (0.026)       (0.128)       (0.166)      (0.176)      (0.036)     (0.128)      (0.156)       (0.154)

           Time Effects                 Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes




59
           Industry Effects             No           Yes           No           No           No           Yes          No           No
           Firm Effects                 No           No            Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes
           Firm Controls                No           No            No           Yes          No           No           No           Yes

           N. of obs.                  1,111         1,111        2,506         2,714         1,111      1,111         2,498        2,659
           R2 (%)                      25.09         35.17        75.83         77.33         14.57      67.13         87.57        84.02
                         Panel B: Firm & Time Fixed Effects Estimates for Total Employee Stock Option Wealth Excluding CEO
                                          (Non-Exec Employee Wealth, B-S Value)/              Non-Exec Employee Wealth Relative to CEOs
                                                      Stock Mkt Value
                                        (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)
                                          Industry-level               Firm-level          firm FE, w/o controls    firm FE, with controls

           Investment Goods Prices   -0.394        -0.290       -0.568        -0.510       -0.022        -0.017       -0.339        -0.373
                                      (0.034)       (0.096)      (0.209)       (0.223)      (0.011)     (0.055)      (0.246)       (0.259)

           Time Effects                 Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
           Industry Effects             No           Yes           No           No           No           Yes          No           No
           Firm Effects                 No           No            Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes
           Firm Controls                No           No            No           Yes          No           No           No           Yes

           N. of obs.                  1,111        1,111         2,071        2,218        1,111        1,111        1,991        2,138
           R2 (%)                      13.77        59.50         78.22        78.62        1.00         75.56        68.06        68.43
                                           Table 9: Two-Step Estimation

This table reports estimated parameters from the two-step estimation. As the first step, we estimate the first-order
condition (22):

                                          1         1 - k                 k             h       1
           log sh,j,t - log sk,j,t   =      log             +        log Rj,t -    log Rj + log     +   j,t ,
                                         1-           k           1-            1-              R,t
where j stands for 4-SIC industry j . We perform a panel regression with industry and year fixed effects. We
                                       k
identify  from the coefficient of log Rj,t , and then infer , the fraction of equity-based compensation due to human
capitalists' marginal product given the mapping between  and  plotted in Figure 10. Second, given the value of
, we estimate the system of equations (19) and (20) using MLE on time series data. The table below reports the
estimated parameters from the second estimation. We calibrated the following parameters: k = 0.08, h = 0.15,
µ = 1.3, and Rf is the time series of the real interest rate over the sample period. Human capitalists' income share
is measured as the ratio of (wage income +N G) to value added in this estimation. The sample period is from 1980
­ 2011. Standard errors are in parentheses. Implied elasticities between human and physical capital, and between
all capital and labor, respectively, are given in the last row.




                                                            k            c            
                            0.91           -0.51         0.26           0.65         0.17
                             --           (0.09)        (0.01)         (0.06)       (0.07)
                                          1                                        1
                                         1- =0.66                                 1- =1.21




                                                            60
Figures


                             Figure 1: Equity-Based Compensation as a Fraction of Value Added

Stylized Example of Missing Equity Pay: We construct a stylized example to illustrate the effects of tax treatment
and deferral on missing equity pay. We plot total grants (solid line), grants included in standard data sources (dotted
line), and grants missing from standard data sources (dashed line). This example uses the observed share of new
grants relative to value added in 1975, and assumes that this share grows at a constant rate of 12%, which results
in grants as a share of value added which approximately match the empirical share in recent decades of about 6%.
From 1980 to 2019, the implied total grants are the top, solid line. The bottom, dotted, line denotes grants that
could appear in standard labor data, i.e. non-qualifed, exercised grants. We assume that two thirds of grants are
non-qualified, and that 100% of non-qualified grants are exercised five years after they are granted. The calibrated
assumptions result in 63% of current grants being excluded from standard data sources, while a minority of 37% are
included.

        0.07




        0.06




        0.05




        0.04




        0.03




        0.02




        0.01




        0.00
               1980
                      1981
                             1982
                                    1983
                                           1984
                                                  1985
                                                         1986
                                                                1987
                                                                       1988
                                                                              1989
                                                                                     1990
                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                        1995
                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                      1997
                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2019




                  Total grants = ISO (1/3) +NSO (2/3)                                                                   part in W2 = 100% of NSO of grants at t-5                                                                       part not in W2 (residual)




                                                                                                                                                61
                                                            Figure 2: Human Capital Share of Income: Reserved Share Measure

This plot reports human capitalists' total income share and its composition. The dashed blue line is the human
capitalists' flow wage income, calculated as the total labor income share minus the production labor income share
(from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database) minus an estimate of the total value of exercised employee
stock options. The dashed black line is the ratio of equity-based compensation (N G) to value added. The total human
capitalists' income share is the sum of the wage income share and the equity-based income share. Data source:
Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­1996), RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2011), and NBER-CES Manufacturing
Industry Database (1960­2005). The sample period is from 1960 to 2019.

                                                                                                                              0.24
        Equity-Based Compensation as Share of Vadd




                                                                    Wage Income (right axis)
                                                                    Total Income (right axis)




                                                                                                                                     Skilled Labor Income as Share of Vadd
                                                      0.1           Equity-Based Compensation (left axis)

                                                                                                                              0.2




                                                                                                                              0.16
                                                     0.05




                                                                                                                              0.12



                                                       0
                                                                                                                              0.08
                                                            1960     1970         1980        1990          2000   2010   2020




                                                                                               62
                                                  Figure 3: Equity-Based Compensation as a Fraction of Value Added

This plot reports the time series of our grant-based measure of human capitalists' equity-based compensation share.
The annual flow of total reserved shares for employees' equity-based compensation, N G, is calculated as the aggregate
value of outstanding reserved shares normalized by the average granting period of 5 years. Data source: Compustat
Fundamental Annual (1960­1996), RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2005), hand-collected data from SEC filings (2006­
2019) and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2011). The sample period is from 1960 to 2019.

                                                 0.08


                                                 0.07
            Equity-Based Compensation: NG/Vadd




                                                 0.06


                                                 0.05


                                                 0.04


                                                 0.03


                                                 0.02


                                                 0.01


                                                   0
                                                   1960      1970      1980       1990       2000      2010          2020




                                                                                63
                                                          Figure 4: Ownership Share: Employee-Owned Fraction of Public Firms

This plot reports the time series of the ownership share: the ratio of the value of reserved shares for employee equity-
based compensation to stock market capitalization. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­1996),
RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2005) and hand-collected data from the proxy statements and 10K footnotes. The sample
period is from 1960 to 2019.

                                                          0.14
            Total Reserved Shares/Market Capitalization




                                                          0.12


                                                           0.1


                                                          0.08


                                                          0.06


                                                          0.04


                                                          0.02


                                                            0
                                                            1960      1970      1980       1990      2000       2010      2020




                                                                                         64
          Figure 5: Measures of Equity-Based Compensation as a Fraction of Value Added

This plot reports the time series of our three grant-based measures and one expense-based measure of the aggregate
equity-based ratio of compensation to value added. In the top left panel, the solid blue line NG/Vadd reports the
annual flow of equity-based compensation using NG = RS/7, where 7 is the weighted average granting period. The the
dotted red line NG(Actual GP) is the aggregate value of reserved shares divided by the actual average remaining life
of RS on the balance sheets in the IRRC sample. In the top right panel, the dashed pink line BS/Vadd is the aggregate
Black­Scholes value of newly granted stock options relative to value added constructed using the IRRC sample from
1996­2005. The solid blue line is NG=RS/7. In the bottom right panel, the annual flow of equity-based compensation
is the expense-based measure 0.3SG&A. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­1996), RiskMetrics
(IRRC) (1996­2005), and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2005). The sample period is from
1960 to 2005.

                 0.2
                             NG/Vadd
                             NG(Actual GP)/Vadd
                 0.1



                   0
                  1960   1965     1970     1975     1980      1985    1990     1995     2000      2005

                 0.2
                             NG/Vadd
                             BSV/Vadd
                 0.1



                   0
                  1960   1965     1970     1975     1980      1985    1990     1995     2000      2005

                 0.2
                             0.3XSG/Vadd

                0.15


                 0.1

                  1960        1970         1980          1990         2000          2010          2020




                                                         65
                                                                          Figure 6: Aggregate Labor Share

This plot reports the aggregate share before and after adjusting for equity-based compensation. The dotted blue line
is the aggregate wage-only income from NBER-CES. The dashed black line is the ratio of equity-based compensation
(NG) to value added. The total labor income share is the sum of the wage income share and the equity-based
income share. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­1996), RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2005), and
NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2011). The sample period is from 1960 to 2019.

                                                     0.15                                                                        0.55
        Equity-Based Compensation as Share of Vadd




                                                                                         Wage Income (right axis)
                                                                                         Total Income (right axis)
                                                                                         Equity-Based Compensation (left axis)




                                                                                                                                        Labor Income as Share of Vadd
                                                                                                                                 0.45
                                                      0.1



                                                                                                                                 0.35


                                                     0.05


                                                                                                                                 0.25



                                                       0
                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                            1960   1970      1980      1990        2000         2010        2020




                                                                                        66
                                  Figure 7: Factor Shares of Income and Investment Goods Prices

This plot shows factor shares and investment goods prices over time. Total labor share is labor income divided by
value added. We present both of the grant-based and the expense-based measures of human capital share of income.
The grant-based total human capitalists' income share is the sum of the wage income share and the equity-based
income share. The expense-based measure is the flow income share of human capitalists, defined as 30%S&GA by
value added. Physical capitalists' income share is physical capital investment divided by value added. Profit share
is operating profits (OIBDP) divided by value added. The aggregate investment goods price is the employment
weighted average of industry-level investment goods prices. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­
1996), RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2005), and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2011). The sample
period is from 1960 to 2019.

                           1.5                                                                      0.6
                                                                           Investment Good Price
                                                                           Total Labor Share
                                                                           K Capital Share
                          1.34                                             H Capital Share (XSGA)   0.48
                                                                           H Capital Share (NG)
        Inv. Good Price




                                                                                                           Factor Shares
                          1.18                                                                      0.36




                          1.02                                                                      0.24




                          0.86                                                                      0.12




                           0.7                                                                     0
                                 1960     1970      1980      1990       2000       2010       2020




                                                               67
                                                              Figure 8: Aggregate Labor Share: Adjusting BEA Labor Share

The figure reports the aggregate labor share in manufacturing industry before and after the adjustment for NG. The
dotted blue line is the aggregate wage income minus the estimate of the total value of exercised employee stock options.
The dashed black line is the ratio of NG to value added. The total labor income share is the sum of the wage income
share and the equity-based income share. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual (1960­1996), RiskMetrics
(IRRC) (1996­2005), and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2011). The total manufacturing labor
income and value added data is from KLEMS industry dataset. The non-financial corporate sector labor income and
value added data is from NIPA Table 1.14. The sample period is from 1960 to 2019.

                                                     0.15                                                                         0.75
        Equity-Based Compensation as Share of Vadd




                                                                    Wage (net of exercised opts) Income (right axis)
                                                                    Total Income (right axis)
                                                                    Equity-Based Compensation (left axis)




                                                                                                                                         Labor Income as Share of Vadd
                                                                                                                                  0.65
                                                      0.1



                                                                                                                                  0.55


                                                     0.05


                                                                                                                                  0.45



                                                       0
                                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                            1960     1970         1980         1990         2000       2010   2020




                                                                                                68
               Figure 9: Equity-Based Compensation Share of Value Added: Industry

The plot report the aggregate equity-based compensation (NG) share of value added in the four sub-industries:
Consumer Goods, Manufacturing, High Tech and Health Products. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual
(1960­1996), RiskMetrics (IRRC) (1996­2005), and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (1960­2011). The
sample period is from 1960 to 2011.

              0.18
                              Consumer Goods
              0.16            Manufacturing
                              High Tech
                              Health Products
              0.14

              0.12

               0.1

              0.08

              0.06

              0.04

              0.02

                 0
                     1960         1970          1980         1990          2000          2010




                                                       69
               Figure 10: Elasticities of Substitution and Equity-Based Compensation
This figure shows estimates of parameters that govern the elasticity of substitution between physical and human
capital  and the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor,  , when allowing for different values of . In
the top panel, the solid black line is the estimated , where we apply a 2-year moving average to the target moment
in the data. In the bottom panel, the solid black line is the estimated  , where we apply a 2-year moving average to
the target moment in the data. Data source: Compustat Fundamental Annual, RiskMetrics (IRRC), and NBER-CES
Manufacturing Industry Database. The sample period is from 1980 to 2005.

                             0.2

                             0.1

                               0

                             -0.1

                             -0.2

                             -0.3

                             -0.4

                             -0.5

                             -0.6

                             -0.7
                                    0     0.2         0.4        0.6        0.8         1

                             0.3



                            0.25



                             0.2



                            0.15



                             0.1



                            0.05



                               0
                                    0      0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8         1




                                                            70
                                    Figure 11: Model Fit: Two-Step Estimation

The figure shows the model fit of the two-step estimation reported in Table 9. Panel (a) plots the model-implied time
                                                       sk
series of the relative ratio of marginal products:    sh R
                                                              (in red dashed line) and the actual time series from the data.
Panel (b) plots the time series of the unskilled labor share from the model and the data. Compustat Fundamental
Annual, RiskMetrics (IRRC), and NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. The sample period is from 1980
to 2011.
                                                                    sk
                                                             (a)   sh R
                             0.65
                                                                                          Data
                                                                                          Model
                              0.6


                             0.55


                              0.5


                             0.45


                              0.4


                             0.35


                              0.3
                               1980      1985        1990          1995   2000   2005     2010

                                                              (b) sn
                             0.24
                                                                                          Data
                                                                                          Model
                             0.22


                              0.2


                             0.18


                             0.16


                             0.14


                             0.12


                              0.1
                               1980      1985        1990          1995   2000   2005     2010




                                                                   71
                                           Internet Appendix:
                            Supplementary Materials: Not for Print Publication

I       Sample Comparison
Our merged NBER-CES-public-firm sample presents a high degree of similarity to the overall
NBER-CES universe. Figure IA1 shows the time series of labor shares in both the NBER-CES
sample and in the merged NBER-CES-public-firm sample. Without including equity-based com-
pensation, these two samples show similar levels and trends in all three labor share measures.

                             Figure IA1: Factor Shares Across Different Samples

The top panel shows the total labor share, unskilled labor share, and skilled labor share (without equity-based
compensation) in the NBER-CES sample and the merged NBER-CES-public-firm sample. The sample is from 1960­
2011.
                                                    Total Labor Share
               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2
                     1960    1965   1970   1975    1980   1985   1990    1995    2000    2005   2010

                                                   Skilled Labor Share
               0.2


              0.15


               0.1
                     1960    1965   1970   1975    1980   1985   1990    1995    2000    2005   2010

                                                  Unskilled Labor Share
               0.3                                                              NBER-CES
                                                                                CES-Compustat merged

               0.2


               0.1
                     1960    1965   1970   1975    1980   1985   1990    1995    2000    2005   2010




II      Diluted EPS and Share Repurchases
In Tables IA1 and IA2, we confirm that the relation is robust to two important sensitivity checks:
First, Table IA1 shows that the relation is robust to using a battery of alternative approaches
to measuring the human capitalists' income share, which are based on firm estimates of diluted
earnings from option exercise or based on the value of stock repurchases to offset expected dilution
from option exercise or small issues of new stock primarily related to option exercise (see table
legend for detailed definitions of these alternative measures). Second, Appendix Table IA2 shows
that the relation is robust to expanding the sample to the public-firm universe by also including


                                                          72
the non-manufacturing sectors.


III      Additional Cross Section Evidence
This document reports additional cross-sectional facts about equity-based compensation. All plots
are based on our Compustat sample from 1970­1995. We define the equity-based compensation
share as the ratio of N G to sales at the firm level. We analyze the cross sections of equity-based
compensation as a share of total output.
    First, equity-based compensation is not just a phenomenon of a subsample of large firms. In-
stead, we find that equity-based compensation is more concentrated among small firms in the
sample. In Figure IA2, We categorize firms into five quantiles based on their total assets, and we
plot the NG-to-sales ratio within each group over the sample period from 1970­1995. As a fraction
of output (measured by sales), small firms (solid blue line) offer 10% more equity-based compensa-
tion to employees than the largest quantile (yellow line). As a result, the average NG-adjusted total
labor income share should be higher than the aggregate trend, since smaller firms are overweighted
when calculating the average. In fact, the increase in equity-based compensation among smaller
firms enhances the divergence of the average and the aggregate total labor share (see Figure IA3)
found by Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019).

                          Figure IA2: Equity-based compensation as share of sales
This figure shows the equity-based compensation NG-to-sales ratios across size groups. Size is measured as total assets. Firms
                                                                                         i N Gi
are categorized into five quantiles based on total assets, and the NG-to-sales ratio is   Sales
                                                                                                ratio within each group. The
                                                                                        i     i
sample is winsorized at 1%. The sample is from 1970­1995, from the Compustat-CRSP merged database.

              0.25
                                Assets <20%
                                20% < Assets 40%
                                40% < Assets < 60%
                0.2             60% < Assets < 80%
                                Assets > 80%


              0.15




                0.1




              0.05




                 0
                 1970              1975             1980              1985             1990              1995




                                                             73
Table IA1: The Human Capital Share and Investment Goods Prices: Additional Industry-Level
Analysis


This table reports (4-SIC) industry-level regressions of alternative measures of the human capital
share in a given year on investment good prices. We report results for three alternative estimates of
the value of equity pay from stock options. All defined relative to value added. The first measure
is based on the value of diluted earnings per share (Column 2). The intuition for this measure
is that dilution reflects expected equity issuance from actual and/or expected exercise of options
grants. The number of shares from dilution is measured as the difference between common shares
used to calculate diluted earnings per share and common shares used to calculate basic earnings per
share. The value of dilution is equal to the product between the number of shares from dilution and
the stock price. The second measure is based on the value of stock repurchases (Column 3). The
intuition for this alternative measure is that firms repurchase stock to offset dilution from actual
and/or expected exercise of options grants. The third measure is based on the value of small stock
issuance (Column 4). Small stock issues are defined as those whose value is smaller than three
percent of total assets. The intuition for this alternative measure is that small stock issuance is
predominantly related to actual and/or expected exercise of option grants, while large issues are
predominantly motivated by financing needs (McKeon, 2013). To ease interpretation, all variables
are expressed in standard deviation units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the
change in standard deviations of the dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation
change in the explanatory variable. For example, in the first column, a one standard-deviation
change in investment good prices is associated with about 13% of a standard deviation change in
the baseline NG share. The time period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year) and
industry effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Section 2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable definitions.

                          Baseline NG/VADD        Diluted EPS    Repurchases    Small Issues
                                   (1)                 (2)           (3)           (4)
  Inv. Goods Prices             -0.187                -0.146       -0.051         -0.179
                                 (-12.20)              (-7.62)      (-2.68)        (-9.92)
  Year FE                            Y                    Y            Y              Y
  Industry FE                        Y                    Y            Y              Y
  Industry Controls                  Y                    Y            Y              Y
  N                                6,207                6,207        6,207          6,207
  R2                              0.531                 0.263        0.272          0.349
  Mean LHS (pct. pt.)
  All                              2.4                   5.2          4.6             1.5




                                                 74
Table IA2: The Human Capital Share, Stock Market Value, and Investment Goods Prices: Addi-
tional Firm-Level Analysis


This table reports firm-level regressions of the human capital share in a given year on investment
goods prices for an expanded sample that includes non-manufacturing industries. Specifically,
we add to the core manufacturing industries from NBER-CES (SIC 2000-3999) information on
investment good prices from Cummins and Violante (2002) for the following non-manufacturing
industries: Agriculture, Forestry, & Fishing (SIC 0100-0999), Mining & Construction (SIC 1000-
1999), Transportation (SIC 4000-4999), Wholesale & Retail Trade (SIC 5000-5999), Finance (SIC
6000-6999), and Services (SIC 7000-8999). We report results for the ownership share (Columns 1
to 2), which is defined relative to stock market value, the results for NG/Sales ratio (Columns 3 to
4) and the results for SG&A to sales ratio (Column 5 to 6). To ease interpretation, all variables are
expressed in standard deviation units. The interpretation of each reported coefficient is the change
in standard deviations of the dependent variable associated with a one standard-deviation change
in the explanatory variable. The time period is 1960-2011. All specifications include time (year)
effects. Standard errors are robust, with ***, **, and * denoting significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively. See Section 2.2 and Appendix 6.3 for detailed variable definitions.


                                       Equity Comp Share           SG&A/Sales
                                            NG/Sales
                                          (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)
                  Inv. Goods Prices    -0.020      -0.025        -0.031    -0.031
                                        (-4.44)        (-4.86)   (-5.31)    (-6.45)
                  Firm FE                 N           Y             N          Y
                  Industry FE             Y           N             Y          N
                  Firm Controls           Y           Y             Y          Y
                  N                    110,688     109,611       98,130     97,140
                  R2                    0.636       0.771         0.578      0.877




                                                  75
                          Figure IA3: Aggregate and average total share of income
This figure shows the time series of the aggregate and average capital income and labor income-to-sales ratio. The total labor
income consists of the extended staff expenses (following Donangelo (2016)29 ) plus NG. The capital income is OIBDP minus
NG. The total labor share is the (extended XLR + NG)/sales. The top figure plots the time series of the average (extended XLR
+ NG)/sales as well as the aggregate                i   (OIBDP - NG)i /         i   salesi . The bottom figure plots the time series of the average
(oibdp-NG)/sales, and the aggregate             i   (OIBDP - NG)i /         i   salesi . The sample is from 1970­1995, from the Compustat-CRSP
merged database.

                                                                 Total Labor Income/Sales
                                       0.4                                                                       0.24
                                                                                                     Aggregate
                                                                                                     Average
                                      0.38                                                                       0.22



                                      0.36                                                                       0.2




                                                                                                                         Aggregate
                            Average




                                      0.34                                                                       0.18



                                      0.32                                                                       0.16



                                       0.3                                                                       0.14



                                      0.28                                                                       0.12
                                             1970         1975       1980            1985     1990      1995

                                                            (Corporate Profit - NG)/Sales
                                      0.2
                                                                                                     Aggregate
                                                                                                     Average
                                      0.1

                                                                                                                 0.165

                                        0                                                                        0.16
                                                                                                                          Aggregate




                                                                                                                 0.155
                           Average




                                      -0.1                                                                       0.15

                                                                                                                 0.145

                                      -0.2                                                                       0.14

                                                                                                                 0.135

                                      -0.3



                                      -0.4
                                             1970         1975       1980           1985     1990      1995




                                                                                76
