                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT CAN DEVELOPING CITIES TODAY LEARN FROM THE URBAN PAST?

                                       Edward L. Glaeser

                                      Working Paper 28814
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28814


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




I am grateful to Jimmy Lin for research assistance and for Margaret Brissenden for editorial
support. Laurent Gobillon and two referees provided excellent comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
What Can Developing Cities Today Learn From the Urban Past?
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 28814
May 2021
JEL No. N90,O18,R00

                                           ABSTRACT

The downsides of density, including traffic congestion, contagious disease and crime, were
common in Victorian London and classical Rome, just as they are today in Sao Paulo and Lagos.
Our urban past provides lessons for developing world cities today. The first lesson, that I
highlight, is that political power, not commerce, has long driven the growth of the world's largest
cities, and that fact remains true for many developing world mega-cities today. The second
lesson is that while market access fundamentally shaped the cities of the past, the power of
transport to determine urban fortunes has declined. Transportation infrastructure no longer
transforms cities unless it is accompanied by complementary investments, such as education. The
third lesson is that infrastructure, such as sewers and roads, functions best when combined with
incentives, which can ensure the adoption of sewers and discourage the abuse of highways. The
fourth lesson is that the development of many western cities relied on a nexus of property rights
for landowners, including the right to build, buy, alienate, mortgage and rent, that are far more
limited in many developing world cities. The fifth lesson is that there is a menu of institutions for
managing infrastructure, including direct public control, independent public authorities and
public private partnerships. Local conditions, especially the level of public capacity, will
determine the best choice among those institutions.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
   I.       Introduction


Can developing-world cities today learn from the urban history of the West? This essay argues
that there are at least five broad lessons from the urban past that remain relevant to the growing
cities of South Asia, Africa and Latin America, and there are surely many others. Urbanization
today is, of course, different from the past because of new health, transportation and agricultural
technologies, and because of cultural and institutional differences. Yet there are core elements of
urban governance that are as important today as they were in Rome 2000 years ago.
The first lesson is that politics shapes space, which was certainly true during the time of the
Caesars. The urban systems of developing-world countries are often dominated by a single
primate city that is typically the national capital. While such dominance may look unusual to
twenty-first-century Americans or Germans, it was the norm for much of urban history, during
which population followed power. Jakarta's primacy within Indonesia today resembles the
primacy of Edo within seventeenth-century Japan or Baghdad within the eight-century Abbasid
Caliphate. All cities face negative externalities from crowding, but these are typically offset by
positive agglomeration economies, which may be limited in cities that form for largely political
reasons.
The second lesson is that while transportation costs have long determined urban fortunes and
urban structure, the impact of new transportation technologies has become less important over
time. The introduction of urban streetcars and elevated railroads increased the speed of urban
commuters more than fivefold and consequently enabled the horizontal expansion of nineteenth-
century cities. American suburbs were built around highways (Baum-Snow, 2007), but
America's late twentieth-century investments in intra-urban rail appear to have had little impact
on either mobility patterns or urban form, probably because they did little to increase travel
speeds (Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005).
A third lesson is that incentives have been necessary complements to infrastructure in the fight to
reduce the downsides of density. For twenty-five years after the Croton Aqueduct opened, New
York City still suffered from Cholera outbreaks because poorer property owners and renters
typically didn't pay to connect to the system. These connections were only made after 1866,
when Dr. Stephen Smith and the City's Department of Public Health began fining tenement
owners who didn't pay for piped water and sewerage. In sub-Saharan Africa today, even when
water and sewer-related infrastructure exists (and often it does not), that infrastructure frequently
does not reach poorer urbanites. Just as there was in nineteenth-century New York, and for the
same reason, there is often a "last-mile problem," which can be solved by giving residents
stronger incentives to use the infrastructure. Financial incentives, such as congestion pricing,
can also ensure better use of roads by limiting excess traffic.
A fourth lesson is that well-defined property rights played a critical role in past urban
transformations. The enforcement of hygiene regulations in nineteenth-century New York was
easier because the city government knew who owned the properties. Over the course of that
century, all major European and American cities saw a transformation in which land parcels with

                                                  2
one or two-story homes were transformed by deep-pocketed developers who built taller rental
properties. A clear system of ownership and limited regulation made it possible for those
builders to assemble land, erect large structures and then have confidence that they would be able
to earn returns over time from their investment. The private construction often served lower-
middle income urbanites, and it is much harder in an environment where property rights are
poorly defined and public land use regulation is extensive.
A final lesson is that western cities were built on appropriate--and sometimes inappropriate--
institutions as much as they were on bricks, mortar and steel girders. Over the centuries, cities
have experimented with private and public provision of services, from street cleaning to
transportation. Sometimes privatization has lowered costs while maintaining quality (LaPorta et
al. 1998), but in other cases, private companies have expropriated public resources while
providing little in return. The proper role for public, private and hybrid institutions depends on
the strength of public capacity and the nature of the problems that are being faced. The history of
western cities provides many object lessons of institutions gone wrong, although every
developing-world city will have to determine which of those lessons apply to its own situation.
Before turning to those lessons, I highlight the institutional similarities and technological
differences between developing-world cities today and western cities during the past. To many
observers, developing-world cities seem strikingly poor and often poorly governed. Poverty has
been the norm throughout human history, and that is true of western cities as well. Corruption
and brutality were also normal parts of urban life historically. The striking differences between
urban past and present are technological, and they include the car, the Green Revolution,
effective medicine and reinforced concrete. After stressing the similarities and differences, I turn
to the five lessons and then conclude.


    II.     Similarities and Differences between Poor Cities of the Past and the Present


The mass urbanization of the poor world is one of the most striking social phenomena of the past
50 years. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a per capita income of about 580 dollars
(about 1,000 dollars if purchasing power parity adjusted) and an urbanization rate that now
exceeds 44 percent. More than 14 million people live in Kinshasa alone. The Congo is extreme
but not unique. Urbanization rates exceed 50 percent in Nigeria, Ghana Syria, which all have
levels of per capita G.D.P. that are below $2,500 (or between $5,100 and $6,200 adjusting for
purchasing power parity). 2
The mass urbanization of the poor world is a uniquely modern phenomenon. There were no cities
with more than two million inhabitants and no countries with more than a fifty percent
urbanization rate until 1851, when Great Britain crossed both of those thresholds. Yet large

2
 The non-PPP adjusted figures are from the World Bank. Data for Ghana and Nigeria refer to 2019. Syria's data
refers to 2007, but assuredly GDP is lower now after a decade of civil war. PPP-adjusted GDP comes from the
Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015).

                                                       3
cities, defined as having more than 500,000 residents, have existed for millennia, and many of
them, including classical Rome, Abbasid Baghdad and Sung Dynasty Kaifeng, have emerged in
societies that were poorer than Nigeria or Ghana today. While income estimates for ancient
societies are always debatable, per capita output estimates for those time periods are generally
well below $5,000. Even in 1851, the Maddison Project estimate for income in the United
Kingdom is less than $6,000 (Bolt et al. 2018).
Yet even if incomes seem similar, the technological differences between historical periods and
today are enormous, and poor world cities are still shaped by rich world technologies.
Agriculture is much more efficient than in the past. Transportation is much faster. We have
medical treatments for most contagious diseases. These technologies mean that developing-
world cities today can grow larger, spread out further, and survive despite limited investment in
public hygiene.
Historically, the growth of cities was limited by the need for large numbers of people to work on
farms. Rome's population could reach one million 2,000 years ago, only because it was the
center of a 50-million-person empire. Grain flooded into the city from Mediterranean
breadbaskets like Egypt and Spain. Even in 1522, 68 percent of men in England worked in
agriculture (Broadberry et al. 2011).
In some poor countries today, like the Democratic Republic of the Congo, employment remains
overwhelmingly agricultural. But the share of agricultural workers can fall dramatically, even in
places that remain poor by modern standards. The improvement of crop yields and the
mechanization of agriculture means that a small number of people can produce enormous
amounts of food, and then ship that food across the planet. In 2002, over 60 percent of Nigeria's
workforce were farmers, but only seventeen years later, that share had fallen to 35 percent
(World Bank). Nigerians could move rapidly from subsistence agriculture to urban life, because
its farms became more productive and because it could import food produced by the highly
mechanized agricultural sectors of Brazil and the U.S.
The ability to import food, of course, also relies on the transportation technologies that are quite
different than in the past. Cities have always served as hubs of transportation networks, but the
networks today are much larger. The ability of these networks to transfer knowledge and goods
makes developing-world cities even more economically important than their historical
predecessors. The ability of these networks to transfer disease makes them vulnerable to the
spread of pandemics, like Covid-19.
Improvements in inter-urban transportation help explain why newer urban systems feature fewer
small cities and more urban giants. The European hinterland is dotted with mid-sized cities and
towns that served as local markets during an era when transportation was limited to the ox cart,
and the barge. Even the poorest countries today have access to trucks, which mean that--despite
rutted roads-- moving goods is far easier than in Medieval Europe. Just as the new economic
geography models predicted (Krugman, 1991), the value of mid-sized agglomerations located
within the agricultural hinterland declines as the costs of shipping agricultural goods falls.



                                                  4
The more visible impacts of new transportation technologies can be seen in the internal structure
of the city. Historically cities relied on foot travel for humans and animals for the movement of
goods. These technologies helped keep cities both dense and compact. Today, packed minibuses
enable the commuters of the poor urban world to travel long distances, which allows developing-
world cities to sprawl far more than their historic antecedents.
Traffic congestion has troubled cities since Julius Caesar banned wheeled vehicles from Roman
streets during daylight hours. But in the era of the streetcar and the subway, traffic congestion
became less problematic because public transportation ran on dedicated infrastructure and was
managed by a planning agent (private or public) who could internalize crowding externalities. In
developing-world cities today, automobiles and minibuses are ubiquitous, uncontrolled and use
more space than the pedestrians who crowded the streets of Medieval Paris. Traffic often
overwhelms cities like Sao Paulo and Jakarta. The transportation technology revolution has
created a particularly severe road management problem, which is likely to need congestion
pricing as well as road-building, because new roads encourage more driving (Duranton and
Turner, 2011).
Before 1750, cities had limited knowledge of the causes of death and few tools that could slow
the spread of contagion. Quarantines, which emerged after 1377, were the only effective
technology against the spread of pandemic, and they seemed to work imperfectly against
diseases that were spread by insect, such as Yellow Fever, or through infected water, such as
Cholera. Over the past 200 years, we have gained knowledge which has produced vaccines and
treatments, although the experience of Covid-19 illustrates the profound limits to our knowledge.
In the nineteenth century, public health investments, such as aqueducts and sewers, were the
primary means of reducing disease, even before Dr. John Snow discovered the water-borne
nature of Cholera in 1854. The alternative to those investments was death. In the twenty-first
century, cheap generic antibiotics and simple but effective oral rehydration solutions have
radically reduced the health costs of many contagious disease. This change has allowed
developing-world cities to grow largely without massive pandemics, but the world may pay a
cost if the massive use of antibiotics leads to the spread of antibiotic-resistant superbugs.
Many observers of developing-world cities today are surprised, if not shocked, by institutional
weaknesses. But urban corruption in the developing world today seems well in line with the
corruption of American cities during the nineteenth century. If anything, the Tweed Ring's
looting of New York City during the 1860s still sets a global standard for organized public theft
of taxpayer money in a democracy. Nineteenth-century European countries experienced regular
coups and revolutions (France), arbitrary autocracies (Russia) and extremely weak states (parts
of Italy before unification). The United States descended into a Civil War that produced
mortality levels that were comparable to the Rwandan Genocide or the First Congo War.
Nonetheless, there are at least two institutional differences between the urban past and present
that seem particularly relevant for urban policy today. First, all the world's largest cities before
1800 were capitals of empires, which meant that their governments were at least initially capable
of subduing their near neighbors. Consequently, those imperial cities typically had some public

                                                 5
strength at the center. Second, Anglo-Saxon countries had the stability of the Common Law,
which was particularly developed in the area of real estate, primarily because land had been the
primary form of wealth throughout history. While some courts were certainly subverted and
nineteenth-century legal disputes could stretch on for years, there was at least some capacity to
establish and protect ownership of urban property.
There are also vast cultural differences between London in 1750 and Kinshasa in 2020, just as
there were between London in 1750 and Constantinople in 1750. The world's cultural variety
does matter for urban policy, but since culture is so local, I can write nothing general about it,
other than to emphasize the importance of considering local cultural norms before making urban
policy. I now turn to the connection between politics and space.


   III.     Lesson # 1: Politics Shapes Space


Jane Jacobs (1969) fancifully imagined that the first cities emerged along primitive trade routes
and both preceded and caused the agricultural revolution. Archeological findings have not been
kind to her speculations (Smith, Ur and Feinman, 2014). Cities appear to have clearly come after
agriculture. Moreover, the earliest cities were places of power more than trade that resembled
Washington, D.C. more than Jacobs' New York.
Smith (2020) cites Tell Brak as the "best candidate" to be the world's first city, and it is a place
marked by "ancient grandeur" that is "spread out over nearly a mile." Ur et al. (2011) describe "a
complex of buildings including the north-western corner of a monumental structure with two-
meter thick walls and a massive basalt threshold" that existed in Tell Brak six thousand years
ago. Other archeologists have found mass graves at Tell Brak, with bodies of young and old, men
and women, packed together, showing signs of a violent death, perhaps caused by internal, civil
conflict (McMahon, 2014).
That first city does show evidence of manufacturing and specialization, just as Adam Smith
witnessed in London and Edinburgh six millennia later, but even more, it reveals evidence of an
architecture of power and a legacy of violence. Tell Brak's more famous southern neighbor ­
Uruk ­ appears to have been even more of an imperial city. Uruk's famous ziggurats probably
performed both religious and political functions, possibly including the distribution of grain.
Uruk's successors, including Thebes, Babylon, and Memphis, all of which served primarily as
political and religious capitals. Mohenjo-daro's hyper-planned uniformity gives the impression
of some strong central authority.
Military power played such a primary role in pre-modern cities, such as classical Rome, because
cities need to be fed, and the easiest way to get farmers to provide food for urbanites is just to
take it at the point of a spear. Poor farmers have only a limited agricultural surplus which limits
their willingness to spend on manufactured urban products. Other basic needs, like apparel, were
created by agriculturalists themselves. Cities, including Uruk and Tell Brak, had copious artisans
and merchants, but much of their output was probably sold to other urbanites.

                                                 6
Political forces drove the rise and decline of capital cities. Rome's population rose to about one
million people at the time of the late republic, because the legions had been able to control the
grain producing regions of Spain and Egypt, but not to subdue more local unrest. Consequently,
Rome's leaders bought the local peace with grain doles, which were provided to hundreds of
thousands of people. The city swelled with migrants eager for the public largesse (Ades and
Glaeser, 1995). Five hundred and fifty years later, the western Empire was in ruins and the city
may have lost ninety-five percent of its population.
The physical structure of imperial cities also reflects political power. Neither Washington, D.C.,
nor Beijing has the functional designs and high-density levels found in their more commercial
counterparts of New York and Shanghai. Instead, these capitals have broad boulevards and
impressive central space. Vistas are cultivated, and everywhere the two mightiest governments in
the world present themselves in concrete and steel. Astana is an even more extreme example of a
political city that is built to impress the power of its leadership on any visitors.
Many developing-world countries have had non-democratic political regimes that distribute rents
disproportionately to residents of the capital city. These rents can flow to empowered insiders,
such as the friends of Suharto, the value of whose connection to the leader was measured by
Fisman (2001). Alternatively, the rents might go to those favored by formal government policies,
such as Peronist import substitution embraced which encouraged the industrialization of Buenos
Aires. Rents can even occasionally go to poor urbanites, including some of those Romans who
received the bread doles. The growth of the capital is checked most in highly constitutional states
that put strict limits on the disproportionate distribution of rents to the capital region, but those
limits are rarer in the developing world.
Historically, Federalism has provided a check on the dominance of any one city, because
political power is then shared across levels of government and across different state capitals
Henderson and Wang (2007) empirically document that Federalism is associated with more
dispersed urban systems. The relocation of the Brazilian capital from the former Emperor seat
of Rio de Janeiro to Brasilia was called for in its Federalist constitution of 1891. Juscelino
Kubitschek finally implemented the move. He had been the governor of a non-coastal state
(Minas Gerais). The quasi-federal structure of the Holy Roman Empire also helps explain the
proliferation of medium-sized cities in Germany.
While power matters most for the capital cities, power can also complement the commercial
activities of non-capital cities. For example, Dantzig and Lubeck successfully led the Hanseatic
League in their fight against 15th century England, and their victory reaffirmed Hanseatic trading
power in northern Europe. Spain's control over the Americas during the 15th century benefitted
not only Madrid, but also Seville which became a major port for ships crossing the Atlantic. In
the same way today, Chinese soft power benefits Shenzhen as well as Beijing.
The first implication of the political roots of many developing world mega-cities is that their size
may not reflect any fundamental economic forces. Consequently, the capital may be "too large"
relative to any economic optimization because the population has grown because of rent-seeking.
Mid-sized cities may be too small because they did not enjoy the same political advantages.

                                                 7
While there is always the possibility that city sizes are not exactly optimal, that possibility is
distinctly larger the sizes are determined by political favoritism more than economic
productivity.
A second implication is that political change will impact city growth. If the country has a civil
war, then the central city's population is likely to swell even further. If a country transitions from
dictatorship to democracy, then secondary cities may expand faster, because their entrepreneurs
no longer need to be close to power.
A third implication is that government leaders will face the quandary of both wanting to placate
the residents of capital cities to reduce unrest, and desiring reduce the further growth of the city,
which exacerbate urban problems and make future unrest more dangerous. Consequently, they
may seek advice from urban economists about how to make their neighbors unusually happy and
unusually sparse. That task can only be achieved with truly effective barriers to mobility, such as
those (arguably) enforced during some years by the Soviet passport system. Moreover, even if
rural-urban migrants bring negative externalities in the short run, the growing size of the capital
can eventually help the transition to a more functional democracy (Glaeser and Steinberg, 2017).
A fourth implication is that the internal structure of the capital is likely to be blessed and cursed
with the legacy of power. At its best, a centralizing despot can leave beautiful amenities, such as
Louvre or the Colosseum. At its worst, that power can lead to vast empty areas in the center of
the city that were once allocated to the monarch or the military. Planning around political uses of
space creates extra challenges for urban design.
Finally, the political nature of urbanism in many developing-world cities means that significant
urban policy change may often require intervention at the national level. For Americans,
changing zoning or bus routes in Washington, D.C., are largely local concern, handled by the
District's Zoning Office and Department of Transportation. 3 Even in India, reforming Delhi
requires mainly the signoff from the government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. But
in Uganda, change for Kampala becomes a matter of national importance, and little is likely to be
achieved without the support of the president. When cities are shaped by national politics, then
national politicians take a distinct interest in the shape of the city.


    IV.      Lesson # 2: Transportation Still Shapes Cities, but less than in the past


Imperial cities that are fed by their legions need not depend on their economic endowments, but
commercial cities must trade and produce to survive. The economic advantages of urban
proximity ultimately come from the reduction of transportation costs for goods, people and ideas.



3
 To be precise, the District runs the D.C. Circulator buses. The express buses are run by the Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, which is responsible to the states of Virginia and Maryland, as well as
Washington, D.C.

                                                         8
Consequently, transportation technologies have played an outsized role in determining urban
locations, urban fortunes and the internal structure of cities.
The central place theory of Losch (1940) and Christaller (1933) depicted a hierarchy of cities
dispersed throughout an agricultural hinterland, trading off the advantages of proximity against
the benefits of specialization and scale that come from concentration. Krugman (1991) depicted
geographic concentration as a dance between firms' desire to reduce costs of transportation with
dispersed agriculturalists and with fellow manufacturing firms. More modern work, such as
Heblich, Redding and Sturm (2020), formally estimates the link between transportation networks
and the location of economic activity.
Inter-city transportation technologies have long shaped the location and fortunes of cities. Before
the coming of the railroads, moving goods by water was far cheaper than moving goods by land,
and consequently, water was crucial to the success of cities from Frankfurt to Mumbai to
Shanghai. The importance of Bruges ­ an urban giant of 14th century Europe ­ dimmed after the
silting of the Zwijn, the river which provided the city with access to the North Sea. Every one of
the twenty largest American cities in 1900 was on a waterway, from the Chesapeake Bay to the
Pacific Ocean. Bleakley and Lin (2015) show that nineteenth-century cities located on the fall
lines of rivers, and that those fall lines continue to predict urban density even today.
Intra-city transportation technologies shape the internal structure of the city. Older European
cities, including Rome, contain the tangled web of narrow streets that reflect the legacy of our
pedestrian past. The advantages of straight roads and grids increased as cities switched to the
wheeled transport, such as streetcars and the horse-drawn omnibuses pioneered by Blaise Pascal
in 17th century Paris. Since cars are a point-to-point transportation technology that requires
essentially no walking, they enable the vastly lower density levels that are visible in American
cities, like Phoenix, Arizona, that were built during the second half of the twentieth century.
American car-based living, in turn, partially reflects low gas taxes and implicitly pro-car policies,
such as building and subsidizing the interstate highway system.
Yet just as western history illustrates the importance of transportation technology, that history
also suggests that inter-city transportation has become successively less important over time,
largely because transportation costs have declined everywhere and become more homogeneous.
In 1840, watery access to eastern markets gave Buffalo, Chicago and St. Louis a huge advantage
relative to other locations within the American interior. The spread of the U.S. highway system
now means that market access is good almost everywhere. The decline of the Rustbelt reflects
the reduced importance of older transportation technologies, and the relatively greater
importance of non-transportation advantages, such as the pro-business regulations emphasized
by Holmes (1998).
The power of intra-city transportation investment also appears to have declined. Streetcars and
then highways had a sizable impact on urban form because they radically reduced the cost of
commuting to distant suburbs (Baum-Snow, 2007). Conversely, the post-1973 investments in
metro systems seem to have done little to impact urban population patterns, because they didn't
significantly reduce commute times relative to the car (Baum-Snow and Kahn, 2005). Moreover,

                                                 9
there is little evidence that train access leads to suburban population booms when those suburbs
already had fast car commutes into the central city.
The first implication of this history for the developing world is that we should only expect
transportation technologies to create major economic changes when those technologies
significantly reduce the cost of mobility. In many cases, goods that are shipped to the outside
world will come through container ships and airplanes, which are mature technologies. Added
investments may do little to increase the ability of goods to reach the outside world. By contrast,
Campante and Yamigazawa-Drott (2018) find that exogenous variation in the direct flights that
enable the movement of people seems to have a significant impact of urban growth in the
developing world.
A second implication is that a transit linkage may not be enough to turn a remote locale into a
thriving city. National governments from Egypt to India to China, often hope to alleviate the
population pressure on primate cities by building satellites connected by rail or bus rapid transit.
Yet the track record of utopian new communities is mixed at best, and recreating the
agglomeration economies of a thriving city takes more than a rail stop. Much of America's
Eastern Heartland is well connected with highway and rail, and yet there is still plenty of
economic dysfunction there (Austin, Glaeser and Summers, 2018). Local economic success
requires other assets, like human capital and strong institutions, as well as market access.
A third lesson of western history is that many transportation systems built since 1970 have over-
promised and under-delivered, both in terms of direct use and in terms of larger benefits. The
case for new investment in the developing world is generally stronger, because of the limited
level of current infrastructure, but there is just as much likelihood of bad spending decisions,
such as building expensive metro systems with little ability to reach dispersed informal
settlements.
The west would have experienced fewer failures if western governments had more assiduously
applied rigorous cost-benefit analysis that focus on the direct benefits to the riders and whether
those benefits exceed construction and operating costs. Detroit would have never built its under-
utilized People Mover Monorail without magical thinking about how that investment would
revitalize the central city. Politics has often driven transport investment far more than serious
analysis (Glaeser and Ponzetto, 2019).


   V.      Lesson # 3: Cities Need Incentives as well as Infrastructure


In 1842, New York City opened its Croton Aqueduct, which brought clean water into the city.
This engineering achievement did not, however, end New York City's Cholera problem.
Somewhat surprisingly, the city would continue to suffer from cholera outbreaks for another 24
years. The persistence of cholera was not a puzzle to Dr. Stephen Smith, who led a team of
doctors during the 1860s that trooped through the city and produced the 1865 "Report of the



                                                 10
Council of Hygiene and Public Health of the Citizen's Association of New York Upon the
Sanitary Conditions of the City."
New York City had piped water, but water connections were expensive and tenement owners
avoided the expense. Poorer renters lacked both resources and the incentive to internalize the
wider health benefits of sanitation. New York City even had about 2,300 hydrants that dispensed
free water, but using hydrants requires carrying water significant distances. Consequently, poorer
New Yorkers continued to use shallow wells and pit latrines and they continued to die from
cholera.
Smith's report then produced the legislation that created New York City's Board of Health, and
Smith became its first leader. He began a system of inspections and fines that pushed tenement
owners to connect to the water system. The Board's inspection service was independent of the
corrupt police force controlled by the Tammany Hall Machine. The doctors who set atop the
Board's leadership seemed to have been reputable men, like Smith, whose preferences (and
reputations) kept them from striking corrupt bargains with those property owners who preferred
not to pay for clean water.
While there is no clean identification strategy for estimating the impact of the Board so far, the
time series data suggest that it was effective. New York never again experienced a major cholera
outbreak after 1866. Mortality rates declined dramatically over the late nineteenth century. Cutler
and Miller (2005) provide compelling evidence of a tight link between clean water and mortality
during those years.
Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto (2016) interpret the episode to mean that there can be substantial
numbers of poor people for whom the cost of sanitary infrastructure is above the private benefit
but below the social benefit, then water adoption will be too low. Widespread adoption therefore
requires either a subsidy or penalty or both. Subsidies create the possibility of waste, since a
subsidized water system may end up being quite inefficient. Moreover, subsidizing urban water
use will artificially swell the number of urbanites.
Fines creates the possibility of abuse or extortion by the inspectors. Fines may also harm the
most vulnerable, and may just be politically impossible in many developing world cities.
Imposing regulations on the poor directly is harder politically and logistically than imposing
regulations on landlords who rent to the poor, even if the ultimate incidence is the same.
Regulating New York was made because it was a city of landlords, not homeowners, and
because ownership records were clear. This suggests that the fine system adopted by Smith will
be efficient in settings where the judicial system is relatively efficient but where the executive
system is wanting. 4
Many developing-world cities are in roughly the same place that New York was in 1865.
Infrastructure has been built, but poor households are expected to pay for connection to that
infrastructure. In Lusaka, the setting for the work of Ashraf et al. (2017), the connection fee

4
 For a broad range of parameter values, the optimal system combines a fine which is small
enough to avoid extortion of the innocent with a subsidy.
                                                 11
could be over $1,000, and that was a substantial fraction of one year's pay. Consequently, poor
people continue to use pit latrines and shallow wells, just as they did in New York City. The
world has come to describe this situation as a last mile problem.
The direct health consequences of that problem are not as severe as they were in 1865. We now
have antibiotics and effective remedies for cholera. Yet Ashraf et al. (2017) still find adverse
consequences that follow when water supply is temporarily broken, including both stomach
illnesses and respiratory sickness. While the direct impact of clean water on water-borne illness
is more important, hand washing depends on water supply. As the emphasis on hand-washing
during the early-stages of the Covid-19 pandemic suggests, the ability to wash one's hands can
reduce the risk of some air-borne illnesses.
Dr. Stephen Smith's regulations were not the first use of incentives to regulate urban pollution
and congestion. In Aldred's Case, decided in 1610, an English judge ruled that a man has "no
right to maintain a structure upon his own land, which, by reason of disgusting smells, loud or
unusual noises, thick smoke, noxious vapors, the jarring of machinery, or the unwarrantable
collection of flies, renders the occupancy of adjoining property dangerous, intolerable, or even
uncomfortable to its tenants." Consequently, an urban pig farmer could be sued for abatement or
damages. Yet while the Tort system may have worked when the source of harm was an
immediate and obvious piggery, the harm done by failing to connect to the sewer system is hard
to measure. Common Law remedies work poorly when the chain between action and harm is
difficult to establish.
With sewers, incentives need to encourage adoption. With roads, incentives need to discourage
overuse, which was a point made by Pigou himself. William Vickrey conceived the idea of
congestion pricing in New York in the 1950s, but his idea was first implemented by Singapore in
1975. Drivers needed to purchase and then display a paper certificate to enter the city center
during peak hours. London's congestion pricing system, implemented in 2003, also followed
this model. In 1998, Singapore switched to electronic road pricing, which can more flexibly
change prices based on usage over the day. The city-state's roads face relatively little congestion
because of the combination of road pricing and high taxes imposed on car buyers.
The implementation of congestion pricing faces the twin challenges of political resistance and
enforcement. Singapore's government in 1975 was not particularly susceptible to democratic
opposition, and was comfortable imposing strict penalties on its citizens. Hong Kong
experimented with electronic road pricing in 1983, but the government ultimately failed to
convince the public. In the U.S., tolling new roads is politically feasible, but imposing
congestion pricing on formerly free roads seems impossible. The enforcement of congestion
pricing in developing world cities is at least as difficult as imposing sanitary regulations on slum
dwellers. Rationing systems, such as those which allow only even numbered license plates to
drive on particular days, seem easier to enact and enforce if less efficient.
The central lesson of this history for the developing world today is that infrastructure is unlikely
to eliminate urban problems on its own. Water pipes will not reduce urban illness if poor families
do not connect to those pipes. More roads will not eliminate congestion if those roads generate

                                                 12
more driving, as in Duranton and Turner (2011). Infrastructure requires incentives either to
ensure adoption or to discourage overuse. Taxing the poor to induce them to internalize
externalities can sometimes improve the quality and length of life for the poor themselves.
The second lesson is that the level of incentives needed depends on the gap between private and
social benefit. Households are more willing to pay for water than for sewers. Much of the
benefit of clean water goes to the household itself, but if the household can dump its waste on the
street, then almost all of the benefit from sewers comes from positive externalities. That
difference explains why in some cities, like Manila, revenues from water are used to cross-
subsidize waste disposal.
A third lesson is that the appropriate tool for creating incentives depends on local political
conditions and institutions. Smith was able to use the state government to bypass the corrupt city
government and create his own parallel quasi-judicial authority. In some developing-world
countries today, that system might work well, but only if the independent authority has strong
leadership that faces incentives of its own. Parastatal enterprises can often provide less
accountability and worse service than direct government provision in the developing world
today. I will return to these issues in Section VII.
A fourth lesson is that cities often react to urban problems with a considerable lag. New York
had grown to more than 800,000 inhabitants by 1860, yet it did not have enough sanitary
infrastructure in place to reduce terrible cholera outbreaks. It took decades to build the structure
and institutions that made the city safe. We should not expect developing-world cities to solve
their problems overnight.
A final lesson is that sometimes we need both to encourage adoption and limit overuse. Smith
did not try to make all water free, because that would have eliminated the incentive to conserve a
scarce resource. Smith made sure that water users paid a price for water that limited waste, but
property owners faced a second price is they didn't adopt the system. Those two prices ensured
connection and limited abuse.


   VI.     Lesson # 4: Western Cities were Built on a Nexus of Property Rights


Dr. Smith's fight to reduce contagion in New York City took advantage of the city's clear
records of property ownership. Early in his career, he discovered that over twenty typhus cases
came from a single residence on east Twentieth Street. In the legal haze of an informal
settlement, it would be almost impossible to find anyone to hold accountable, but in nineteenth
century New York, Smith found the wealthy owner of the property by going through the tax
records. While the law gave Smith few remedies, the Doctor was able to threaten the owner with
public exposure in the New York Evening Post and the owner acquiesced to Smith's demands
(Glaeser and Cutler, 2021).
Today, we cannot know how many prominent and wealthy Indians exercise some control over
unsanitary homes in the slums of Mumbai, because property rights are too murky. That

                                                 13
murkiness makes it difficult to impose either Pigouvian incentives or property taxes. The
residents of poor areas cannot use their property as leverage to finance entrepreneurship (DeSoto,
2000). Land cannot be easily sold or assembled, and that means that slums may persist in prime
urban areas and investors are unable to upgrade structures.
The development of western cities, especially in the nineteenth century, involved a physical
transformation from low rise, low quality homes to high rise, durable structures. That
transformation, in turn, rested on a system of property rights that had been developed over a
millennium. As land was the primary source of wealth in the pre-modern world, the rights
associated with ownership of land were a primary focus of litigation and judicial rulings for
centuries (Pollock and Maitland, 1898).
Ownership of land is traditionally associated with a bundle of rights (Ellickson, 1993), including
the right to occupy, develop, and alienate permanently or temporarily, which includes the right to
sell, rent and mortgage. These rights are rarely unlimited. Since Aldred's Case, English Common
law has limited the right to occupancy, so that owners may not house pigs that harm the
neighborhood. Most of the world's jurisdictions have land use controls that limit the right to
build. The right to rent is limited by rent control laws, and other regulations about tenants' rights.
In the nineteenth century, the prevailing model of urban development did, however, depend on
relatively robust rights to occupy, build, sell and rent. Building the towers that define western
city centers first required land assembly, which meant purchasing land from small landholders,
and then construction. The builders then typically rented their units: more than 95 percent of
New Yorkers were renters in 1890. The willingness to build also depended on the ex post
security of property rights, since the bankers would have been unwilling to lend to developers
without the right to take buildings in the event of default.
A variant of this model also enabled East Asian urbanization. Real estate played a
disproportionate role in the Asian financial crisis of 1997, largely because real estate makes
better collateral than factories. A bank can more easily resell an ordinary class A office building
than it can operate a failed garment business. As real estate is a particularly fungible asset, it is
particularly important to banking sectors early in the development process. Consequently, bank
failures often revolve around real estate (Glaeser, 2017). The Chinese model includes an unusual
combination of limited property rights (the government technically owns all land) with implicit
public subsidies of new development through a combination of eminent domain and public
lending.
By contrast, neither property rights nor subsidized construction occur in the informal settlements
of Africa and India. In these communities, poorer residents typically have some sense of security
against expropriation, but they have little ability to sell, rent or develop. Even when governments
engage in widespread titling programs, the residents of poorer communities often fail to maintain
these titles, presumably because they contain few extra rights that deliver value (Galiani and
Schargrodsky, 2016).
The history of the West suggests that it will be necessary to build many more large structures if
decent living space is going to be provided for middle income urbanites in the developing world.

                                                 14
Developing-world cities do have large buildings but they are typically limited to commercial
structures, luxury housing and government edifices. Western history suggests that large scale
construction requires a robust bundle of property rights associated with land ownership.
In the West, residential units were typically rented not sold, which means that they can be
allocated to people who have little ability to borrow on their own. Renting also reduces some
mobility costs, which is attractive for transient urban populations. Yet rental contracts are
difficult in places with strict rent control. India, for example, have some of the strongest rent
control rules in the world, but these bind only in the formal housing sector. Consequently, there
are two parallel housing markets that coexist in cities like Mumbai: a high-end and quite
expensive market, where units are owner-occupied, and an informal market, where renting is
common and structures involve little investment. Western cities created a middle range of rented
housing only because landlords could adjust rents and evict tenants that didn't pay.
The historic development of western cities was also easier because there were relatively few
limits on the size and nature of structures that could be built. While Dr. Stephen Smith, and his
followers, imposed basic sanitary laws on tenements, there were no functional restrictions on the
height of New York City buildings until the Zoning Ordinance of 1916. 5 Yet since 1968, Indian
cities have faced draconian land use controls based on the British Town and Country Planning
Act (Bertaud, 2011). If the right to build is limited to a floor-area ratio of 1.33 or less, then it is
difficult to erect large amounts of usable space on a small amount of land.
Western history is also replete with examples where robust property rights and enthusiastic
speculation combine to create urban real estate bubbles (Glaeser, 2017). These bubbles typically
lead to new construction, like the 1920s skyscraper boom in New York that produced the Empire
State and Chrysler Buildings (Nicholas and Scherbina, 2013). Those bubbles can also lead to
financial wreckage, and widespread vacancy. 6 That lesson suggests that if property rights are
strong enough to permit massive amounts of urban building, then bank regulators ought to expect
at least the possibility of bank over-lending.
The final lesson is that robust property rights can sometimes stymie urban development, and
there is at least a theoretical case for eminent. Land assembly can be defeated by the holdout
problem in which a small landholder waits to sell and then demands all of the surplus from the
development. The expectation of that problem then prevents new development in the first place.
Eminent domain, which gives the government the right to seize private property, is the typical
legal solution for this problem. The massive transportation projects that Robert Moses built in
New York would have been impossible without eminent domain. Yet the allegations of wanton
neighborhood destruction levelled against Moses by Caro (1973) and others reminds us that
these powers can be abused.




5
  Even that ordinance did not restrict heights, but instead required buildings to become narrower as they rose from
the ground, which created the ziggurat structure that is common in older New York City skyscrapers.
6
  Empire State was long referred to as the Empty State Building.

                                                        15
   VII.    Lesson # 5: Urban Services Need Appropriate Institutions


Historically, there are four common institutional arrangements for providing a road or a bridge or
a water system. First, the service can be provided directly by an entity that is part of the
executive branch of government and controlled by its leadership (direct public provision).
Second the service can be provided by a public entity that is independent of local government,
with leadership that is typically appointed by a higher level of government (indirectly public
authority). Third, the service can be delivered by a private for-profit company, which is either
paid by the public sector or by user fees or both. Fourth, a non-profit company can deliver the
service.
Nineteenth-century London was the capital of a world empire and the Thames flows right past
the Houses of Parliament. The city's water quality mattered to the mighty. Benjamin Disraeli
himself, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, made the case in the House of Commons for better
sewers declaring the Thames "which has hitherto been associated with the noblest feats of our
commerce and the most beautiful passages of our poetry, has really become a Stygian pool,
reeking with ineffable and intolerable horrors" (Glaeser and Cutler, 2021).
Unsurprisingly, London's Commission of Sewers was created directly by an act of Parliament,
and its Commissioners were directly appointed by the Queen. Yet, in 1855 Parliament also
established an elected Metropolitan Board of Works that would straddle 36 districts within
greater London. Royal appointees still held veto power, and there was little progress until the
Great Stink of 1858 that brought forth Disraeli's speech. Eighteen days after the speech,
parliament passed the "Metropolis Local Management Amendment Act," which directly settled
key areas of engineering dispute (e.g. sewage could not enter the Thames within the borders of
the metropolis) and provided abundant ability to borrow. The direct engagement of an effective
national government enabled the construction of London's sewers under Joseph Bazalgette, just
as it enabled Baron Hausman to build the sewers of Paris.
Before New York City built the Croton Aqueduct, the city attempted to solve its water problem
using a subsidized private water provider: the Manhattan Water Company. While Philadelphia
had opted for a public water works system, Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton convinced the
city legislature that a subsidized private company would provide a cheaper alternative. The key
subsidy slipped into the enabling legislation was that the Manhattan Water Company could also
engage in banking, which was a valuable privilege since the city had only one other legal bank.
With the benefit of modern incentive theory, it is easy to predict that this company will do far
more banking (which was highly profitable) than water provision (which was not). Over time,
the Bank of the Manhattan Water Company evolved into the Chase Manhattan Bank and then
into J.P. Morgan Chase. For the last two centuries, it has been a major part of New York City's
financial establishment, but it did little to solve New York City's clean water problem.
When New York turned instead to building the Croton Aqueduct, it chose an independent public
authority: the Croton Aqueduct Commission. This commission was public, but largely
independent of the city's government. The aqueduct commission was led by distinguished New

                                                16
Yorkers and beholden to the State Government. The Erie Canal Commission followed a similar
model. In the twentieth century, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the Triboro
Bridge Authority provide other examples of independent public authorities that manage
infrastructure.
Private provision also proved problematic for New York City's street cleaning. During the
Tweed regime, New York City paid private street cleaners to remove the abundant waste that
accreted from abundant animal traffic. Public procurement is a primary means through which
public wealth can be plundered. Apparently, the payment to the street clearers was split between
the private company and the city machine's political leaders. As part of this corrupt bargain, the
street cleaners faced little pressure to actually do any street cleaning. New York streets only got
cleaned up when the city government directly ­ and not through any independent authority ­
took responsibility for the streets and handed that responsibility over to public servants, who had
a reputation to lose.
Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) present the core model of the "proper scope of government", in
which private-sector provision differs from public provision mainly because of the strength of
incentives. Private providers of roads or prisons or airport security will keep costs down, but
lower costs may also lead to lower quality. When maintaining quality is more important than
cutting costs, then the weak incentives of public providers provide more social surplus.
While assuredly that advantage of public provision is real, both urban history and the
contemporary work of Engel, Fischer and Galetovic (2014) point to an even more important
disadvantage of public private partnerships: the subversion of the state. When the public sector is
paying a private actor to perform a public service, then the private actor has a strong incentive to
bribe the government to increase payments. Reduced quality may well go along with that corrupt
bargain. The work of Engel et al. (2014) finds that while private infrastructure provision has
worked moderately well in Chile, which has strong public capacity and limited corruption, the
track record in sub-Saharan Africa is far worse.
During an energy crisis early in 1992, Philippine President Fidel Ramos signed deals with
independent energy producers, who proved capable of swiftly increasing the country's power
supply. Manila's public water system could only supply "an average of 16 hours of water per
day to two-thirds of its coverage population," and its "efficiency as measured by non-revenue
water (NRW) and number of staff per 1000 connections was the lowest among major Asian
cities" (Wu and Malaluan, 2008). As private companies had been able to deliver more power, it
seemed logical to turn see privatization as a solution for the city's lack of water.
With the help of World Bank consultants, the Philippines producds "a privatization and bidding
process that was hailed internationally as a significant improvement over previous similar deals"
(Esquerra, 2003). Manila was split into two zones with two different operators, and "the
company that won the east zone offered to run the concession by charging a price that was only
26.39 percent of existing rates." Maynilad won the west zone by charging a price that was 57




                                                17
percent of current prices. 7 At this point, the situations seemed to be a model of how competition
between private providers could lower costs for the public at large.
But Esquerra (2003) notes that there is a "joke" that concessionaires only get serious "on Day 1
after a contract is won" when "they would sit to lay down plans to renegotiate the contract." At
the auction stage, the process is inherently competitive, but after that point, the process turns into
a bilateral negotiation between the water companies and the government. The water companies
claimed that their currency losses during the Asian Financial Crisis was a force majeure event,
and that they should be allowed to raise their rates and delay service improvements. The
government agreed.
Maynilad was the more problematic entity. It had less equity, and consequently often on the
edge of bankruptcy, which helped it bargain with the government. Wu and Mamaluan (2008)
note that "because related-party transactions were shielded from competitive bidding, Maynilad
incurred exorbitant costs," and that "non-personnel operating costs actually increased
dramatically while its financial woes were worsening." 8 Profit-seeking private entities who deal
with the public sector have strong incentives to subvert the system through renegotiation,
bribery, and risk-taking when the public takes the downside risk.
Engel et al. (2014) also emphasize that private provision does solve any financing problem on its
own. If a piece of infrastructure generates revenues that can be used to attract private developers,
then those revenues can also be used to pay for public development. The case for private
development hinges on the value of incentives. If a private developer receives revenues only by
ongoing usage over time, then there is a strong incentive to maintain the infrastructure. An
independent public authority that was funded by toll revenues could face similar incentives, but
those incentives would be weakened if the public entity was funded with general tax revenues,
rather than user fees, or if the public entity knows that it can count on a bailout.
Non-profit entities, such as the turnpike trusts that managed road infrastructure in eighteenth-
century England or non-profit hospitals today, provide another institutional model. It is difficult
to imagine that a non-profit could potentially raise the vast resources need to build urban
infrastructure in the twenty-first century, but non-profits provide a number of smaller
interventions throughout the urban world, from water purification to education. Non-profits are
particularly plausible when there are philanthropic dollars or hours that can be channeled.
Non-profit enterprises also have weaker incentives than their for-profit competitors, but they are
independent from government and typically face more competitive pressure. Glaeser and Shleifer
(2001) argue that non-profits can help ensure higher quality for customers and fairer treatment of
employees, such as the doctors who work for not-for-profit hospitals. Donors have little interest
in giving money to for-profits, since that money will typically flow purely to their shareholders,
or governments, since donations will presumably just crowd out taxes. Non-profits face a non-

7
  The well-connected Lopez and Ayala families were central players in the two winning bids, just as they had been
in the earlier power privatization.
8
  Overpaying for inputs is attractive either if the fees are based on costs or if the payments essentially shield
corporate assets from recovery during bankruptcy proceedings.

                                                        18
distribution constraint, which means that new donations cannot just leave the entity and so
charitable gifts can change their budget set and their behavior. The non-distribution constraint
therefore gives non-profits an edge in activities that are funded by the altruistic impulses of
others.
Independent public authorities have the advantage of being free from some regulations which
may bind the rest of the public sector, such as limitations on incentives or salaries or dismissing
workers. Independent authorities can sometimes serve to do an end run around failed local
institutions, such as New York's political machine. Yet the track record of parastatal firms in the
developing world is decidedly mixed. At their worst, these institutions provide even less
accountability than a directly controlled public entity because elected leaders can hide behind
appointed officials.
The broadest lesson from this urban history is that there is no one right answer for institutional
design. In the twentieth century, the switch from public to private service provision in many
cities seems to have brought lower costs with little loss in quality (Lopes-De-Silanes et al.,
1997). In the nineteenth century, it was the switch to public provision that increased quality and
cut costs. Institutions must respect local conditions, and sometimes, just changing the
institutional arrangement ­ in any direction ­ can eliminate cozily corrupt relationships.
A second lesson is that private provision is extremely dangerous with low levels of public
capacity. If a private company is given an opportunity to provide a public service in exchange for
a public subsidy, then that company has a strong incentive to subvert the government to reduce
the expected level of service and increase the level of subsidy. The first requirement before
turning to private providers is to increase the strength of public evaluation capacity, with agents
who can investigate and stop corruption, and with independent assessors of costs and quality.
A third lesson is that private provision is most plausible in settings that closely resemble a
standard market, such as transportation, and least plausible in settings that resemble public good
provision. If users are expected to pay for most of the cost of a service, then presumably a private
provider can be found without the need for public subsidy. The need to attract users means that
the government will not have to enforce a quality standard. The largest risk may be that the
private firm will subvert the government to receive the free use of other public assets. Nineteenth
century streetcar companies routinely corrupted American city government to receive lengthy
land leases (sometimes lasting for several centuries) at a nominal price.
A fourth lesson is that independent public authorities work well only in limited settings. Ideally,
the authority will have a leader ­ like Robert Moses ­ with an international reputation to
maintain. If the leader is a plausible candidate to run a major private corporation, then she is
much less likely to become a pawn for the local political bosses. Independent authorities also
work best when they have clearly delineated missions, like building the Croton Aqueduct, which
make it easier for their leadership to be judged. In the late twentieth century, the Port Authority
of New York and New Jersey morphed into a vast empire with responsibilities ranging from
John F. Kennedy Airport to the rebuilding of the Twin Towers after the September 11 bombing.



                                                19
This vast proliferation of functions would tax any management team, especially a team that
labors under political and governmental limitations.
A final lesson is that change happens most quickly with empowered leaders, who are isolated
from public discontent, but that isolation can also lead to significant abuse. It is vital to create
organizations that hit the right balance between accountability and authority. While Moses
perhaps had too much authority, the stasis of American urban infrastructure since 1970 suggests
that accountability may have overwhelmed authority (Altshuler and Luberoff, 2004). If the cities
of the developing world are going to grow and change, they will need institutional designs that
empower, but hopefully do so with enough checks to limit corruption and malfeasance.


   VIII. Conclusion


All cities must deal with the downsides of density, including traffic congestion, contagious
disease and crime. All cities must deliver usable space for residents and businesses. As massive
migration expands the cities of the developing world, these challenges can seem unmanageable.
Yet the history of western cities reminds us that they were once places of horrendous disease and
terrible living conditions. They too once suffered from corruption and dictatorship. The cities of
the developing world should not try to imitate the cities of the west, but they should learn from
their past successes and failures.
This essay emphasized five ways in which the urban past still resonates today. Political power
determined the growth of places like Rome and Edo. Political power still shapes the fortunes of
Lagos and Delhi. Great political capitals typically benefit from favoritism, which then
encourages more in-migration, but they also can suffer from the trappings of grandeur, which can
limit agglomeration and mobility.
Transportation technology played a critical role in the growth of commercial cities in the past,
but transportation-related advantages have become steadily less important over time as the world
has become flatter. The declining importance of transportation technologies does not argue
against transportation-related investments, but it does suggest the importance of rigorous cost-
benefit analysis and the value of complementary investments, such as education.
The third lesson is that the infrastructure becomes more efficient when it is combined with
incentives. Road traffic can come to a standstill without congestion pricing. The last mile
problem can limit the sanitary value of water mains unless households are nudged into
connecting with the system.
A fourth lesson is that property rights played a central role in the physical construction of
western cities. Cities like New York and London did not grow through slow infill of small
property holders. Instead, large scale developers borrowed vast sums to purchase land and build.
Their borrowing was then repaid with revenues from renting apartments and offices. That



                                                 20
process requires a nexus of property rights, including the right to buy, build, rent and mortgage
property. These rights are typically absent in most of the world's informal settlements.
A final lesson concerns the institutions that must make the city livable. Some sort of operating
entity must provide clean water and sewers and street cleaning. That entity can be an
independent public entity or a private provider or fully contained within the public sector.
History does not suggest that there is one universal answer. Private providers can cut costs, but
they have a disturbing tendency to subvert their public-sector overseers. Local conditions must
determine the right institution.




                                                21
References
Ades, Alberto F., and Edward L. Glaeser. 1995. "Trade and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1): 195­227. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118515.

Altshuler, Alan and David Luberoff. Mega-Projects: The Changing Politics of Urban Public Investment.
        Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. 2004.

Ashraf, Nava, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2017. "Water, Health and
        Wealth." NBER Working Paper Series No. 23807. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23807.

Ashraf, Nava, Edward L. Glaeser, and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2016. "Infrastructure, Incentives, and
        Institutions." American Economic Review 106 (5): 77­82. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20161095.

Austin, Benjamin A., Edward L. Glaeser, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2018. "Jobs for the Heartland:
        Place-Based Policies in 21st-Century America." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
        https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/AustinEtAl_Text.pdf.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?" The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 122 (2): 775­805. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.2.775

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Matthew E. Kahn, and Richard Voith. 2005. "Effects of Urban Rail Transit
      Expansions: Evidence from Sixteen Cities, 1970-2000 [with Comment]." Brookings-Wharton
      Papers on Urban Affairs, 147­206.

Bertaud, Alain. 2011. "Mumbai FAR/FSI Conundrum." https://alainbertaud.com/wp-
       content/uploads/2013/06/AB-Mumbai-FSI-Conundrun-Revised_June-2013_kk-ab1.pdf.

Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2015. "History and the Sizes of Cities." American Economic Review 105
       (5): 558­63. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20151069.

Bolt, Jutta, Robert Inklaar, Herman de Jong, and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2018. "Rebasing `Maddison':
         New Income Comparisons and the Shape of Long-Run Economic Development." Maddison
         Project Working Paper 10, 69.

Broadberry, Stephen, Bruce M.S. Campbell, and Bas van Leeuwen. 2013. "When Did Britain
       Industrialise? The Sectoral Distribution of the Labour Force and Labour Productivity in Britain,
       1381­1851." Explorations in Economic History 50 (1): 16­27.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2012.08.004.

Campante, Filipe, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2018. "Long-Range Growth: Economic Development in
      the Global Network of Air Links." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1395­1458.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx050.

Caro, Robert A. 1973. The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York. Vintage Books.

Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. "The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances:
        The Twentieth-Century United States." Demography 42 (1): 1­22.
        https://doi.org/10.1353/dem.2005.0002.



                                                   22
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner. 2011. "The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evidence
       from US Cities." American Economic Review 101 (6): 2616­52.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.6.2616.

Ellickson, Robert C. 1993. "Property in Land." The Yale Law Journal 102 (6): 1315­1400.
        https://doi.org/10.2307/796972.

Engel, Eduardo, Ronald D. Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic. 2014. The Economics of Public-Private
        Partnerships: A Basic Guide. Cambridge University Press.

Esguerra, J., 2003. The Corporate Muddle of Manila's Water Concessions. A report for
       WaterAid and Tear Fund. London: WaterAid. Available online at www. wateraid. org.
       uk/other/startdownload. asp.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. "The Next Generation of the Penn
        World Table," American Economic Review 105(10): 3150-3182.

Fisman, Raymond. 2001. "Estimating the Value of Political Connections." American Economic Review
       91 (4): 1095­1102. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.91.4.1095.

Glaeser, Edward L. and David M. Cutler. 2021. Survival of the City. New York: Penguin Press.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2017. "Real Estate Bubbles and Urban Development." Asian Development Review 34
        (2): 114­51. https://doi.org/10.3386/w22997.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2018. "The Political Economy of Transportation
        Investment." Economics of Transportation 13 (1): 4­26.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecotra.2017.08.001.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Andrei Shleifer. 2001. "Not-for-Profit Entrepreneurs." Journal of Public
        Economics 81 (1): 99­115.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2017. "Transforming Cities: Does Urbanization
        Promote Democratic Change?" Regional Studies 51 (1): 58­68.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2016.1262020.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. "The Proper Scope of Government: Theory
        and an Application to Prisons." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1127­61.
        https://doi.org/10.1162/003355300555448.

Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J. Redding, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2020. "The Making of the Modern
       Metropolis: Evidence from London." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4): 2059­2133.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjaa014.

Henderson, J.V. and Wang, H.G., 2007. Urbanization and city growth: The role of
      institutions. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37(3), pp.283-313.

Holmes, Thomas J. 1998. "The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from
       State Borders." Journal of Political Economy 106 (4): 667­705. https://doi.org/10.1086/250026.


                                                   23
Jacobs, Jane. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Random House.

Krugman, Paul. 2015. "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography." Journal of Political Economy,
      October. https://doi.org/10.1086/261763.

La Porta, Rafael, and Florencio López-de-Silanes. 1999. "The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence from
        Mexico." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4): 1193­1242.

Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. "Privatization in the United
       States." RAND Journal of Economics 28 (3): 447­71.

McMahon, Augusta. 2014. "Urbanism and the Prehistory of Violent Conflict: Tell Brak, northeast Syria."
     Billet. ArchéOrient - Le Blog (blog). Accessed November 1, 2020.
     https://archeorient.hypotheses.org/2797.

Nicholas, Tom, and Anna Scherbina. 2013. "Real Estate Prices During the Roaring Twenties and the
       Great Depression." Real Estate Economics 41 (2): 278­309. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
       6229.2012.00346.x.

Pollock, Frederick, and Frederic William Maitland. 1898. The History of English Law Before the Time of
        Edward I: Volume I. Cambridge University Press.

Sebastian, Galiani, and Schargrodsky Ernesto. 2016. "The Deregularization of Land Titles." Man and the
        Economy 3 (2): 169­88.

Smith, Michael, Jason Ur, and Gary M. Feinman. 2014. "Jane Jacobs' `Cities First' Model and
       Archaeological Reality." International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 38 (4): 1525­35.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12138.

Smith, Monica L. 2020. Cities: The First 6,000 Years. Penguin.

Soto, Hernando De. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
       Everywhere Else. Basic Books.

Ur, Jason, Philip Karsgaard, and Joan Oates. 2011. "The Spatial Dimensions of Early Mesopotamian
        Urbanism: The Tell Brak Suburban Survey, 2003­2006." Iraq 73: 1­19.
        https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021088900000061.

World Bank. "World Development Indicators." https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-
       development-indicators.

Wu, X. and Malaluan, N.A., 2008. A tale of two concessionaires: A natural experiment of water
      privatisation in Metro Manila. Urban Studies, 45(1), pp.207-229.




                                                   24
