                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


  THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF SPORTS CLUB VOUCHERS FOR PRIMARY SCHOOL
                              CHILDREN

                                         Jan Marcus
                                       Thomas Siedler
                                      Nicolas R. Ziebarth

                                      Working Paper 28819
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28819


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021


We would like to thank Sascha O. Becker, John Cawley, Jan Feld, Paola Guiliano, Helena
Holmlund, Olena Izhak, Tobias Klein, Fabian Lange, Michael Lechner, Magne Mogstad, Frauke
Peter, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, Imran Rasul, Jens Ruhose, Harald Tauchmann, Rudolf Winter-
Ebmer, and Christoph Wunder for their helpful comments and suggestions. In particular, we are
grateful to Hannah von Glan for the collection of the sports club data, and Dan Torge Dammann
for his invaluable support in helping to design and implement the YOLO survey. We would also
like to thank the participants of various research seminars and conferences for their helpful
comments and suggestions. We would like to express our gratitude to Kristin Seidel, Regina
Thoß, and Klaus Wallmann for their efforts in providing us with the health examination data and
answering our questions. We are also grateful to Mr. Richter and Ms. Mai from the
Landessportbund Sachsen, Mr. Kluger from the Saechsisches Staatsministerium fuer Kultus, Mr.
Ender from the Kultusminsterium Sachsen, Ms. Riedel from the Sozialministerium Sachsen, and
Ms. Frenschkowski from the Saechsisches Staatsministerium fuer Soziales und
Verbraucherschutz for their willingness to meet with us and answer all our questions. Neither we
nor our employers have any relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. We take full responsibility for any remaining errors in and shortcomings
of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jan Marcus, Thomas Siedler, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of Sports Club Vouchers for Primary School Children
Jan Marcus, Thomas Siedler, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 28819
May 2021
JEL No. H71,I12,I14,I18,I28,I38,Z28

                                         ABSTRACT

Starting in 2009, the German state of Saxony distributed sports club membership vouchers among
all 33,000 third graders in the state. The policy's objective was to encourage them to develop a
long-term habit of exercising. In 2018, we carried out a large register-based survey among several
cohorts in Saxony and two neighboring states. Our difference-indifferences estimations show
that, even after a decade, awareness of the voucher program was significantly higher in the
treatment group. We also find that youth received and redeemed the vouchers. However, we do
not find significant short- or long-term effects on sports club membership, physical activity,
overweightness, or motor skills.

Jan Marcus                                      Nicolas R. Ziebarth
University of Hamburg                           Department of Policy Analysis and Management
jan.marcus@uni-hamburg.de                       Cornell University
                                                2218 MVR
Thomas Siedler                                  Ithaca, NY 14853
University of Hamburg                           and IZA
Department of Economics                         and also NBER
Von-Melle-Park 5                                nrz2@cornell.edu
20146 Hamburg
and IZA
thomas.siedler@uni-hamburg.de
1    Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (2020), childhood obesity is "one of the most

serious public health challenges of the 21st century." To fight this phenomenon, it calls for co-

ordinated and comprehensive policy action such as promoting healthy diets, taxing unhealthy

food, and incorporating physical activity into the daily routines of children (Frieden et al., 2010;

World Health Organization, 2017). However, we know very little about which policies actually

work.1 In particular, while there is consensus that a lack of physical activity is a major driver of

children's unhealthy body weight (Prentice-Dunn and Prentice-Dunn, 2012), it remains largely

unknown how to induce children to exercise more. This paper comprehensively evaluates a $5

million sports club voucher policy with the objective of nudging primary school children into

exercising more and adopting exercise as a long-term habit.

    Specifically, we use survey and administrative data to empirically evaluate the causal effects

of this voucher policy experiment in the German state of Saxony. The policy's objective was to

increase physical activity through the distribution of sports club vouchers and an information

campaign among all third graders in Saxony in 2009, 2010, and 2011. The sports club vouchers

were worth about $50-60 and provided free membership for up to one year. The campaign slo-

gan was "Come to the Sports Club" (KOMM! in den Sportverein ). The idea was to encourage

children (and their parents) to test regular use of a sports club for free, with a view to them

becoming active members and adopting a healthier lifestyle in the short- and long-run. One of

the initiative's target groups were children from disadvantaged, economically deprived house-

holds who could not afford sports club membership fees (German Olympic Sports Confedera-

tion, 2011). In Germany, children from households in the lowest income quintile are about 50

percent less likely to be physically active in their leisure time than children from households in

the highest quintile (Graf and Cecchini, 2019).

    To evaluate the voucher program's effectiveness and its impact on awareness, membership

take-up, physical activity, body weight, and health, we rely on two unique data sources, a
   1 Cawley et al. (2007) and Cawley et al. (2013) are exceptions exploiting variation in state-level mandated min-

imum physical education (PE) class time. They find lower obesity rates among boys in fifth grade (Cawley et al.,
2013) and an impact on actual PE instruction time in high school, but no significant effect on high school stu-
dents' body weight (Cawley et al., 2007). Otherwise, the rich economics obesity literature focuses on adult obesity
and studies general driving forces such as technological change (Cutler et al., 2003; Lakdawalla and Philipson,
2009) along with specific drivers such as the availability of (fast food) restaurants (Currie et al., 2010; Dunn, 2010;
Anderson and Matsa, 2011), consumption of soda (Fletcher et al., 2010), increases in portion sizes (Jeitschko and
Pecchenino, 2006), increases in gluttony (Griffith et al., 2016), declining gas prices (Courtemanche, 2011), increasing
cigarette taxes (Courtemanche, 2009), changes in food prices (Dubois et al., 2014; Grossman et al., 2014; Strulik, 2014;
Courtemanche et al., 2015; Dragone and Ziebarth, 2017), and cash transfers (Akee et al., 2013).


                                                           1
register-based survey and administrative data from school health examinations. For the sur-

vey, we first contacted registry offices (Einwohnermelde¨
                                                        amter ) in the German states of Saxony,

Brandenburg, and Thuringia and obtained 80 percent random samples of residential addresses

of treatment and control cohorts. In 2018, we then contacted these households by regular mail

with an invitation to participate in an (incentivized) online survey, the Youth Leisure Online

Survey (YOLO), which we designed for the purpose of this study. Around 16,000 youth com-

pleted the survey. We use registry data to compare characteristics of survey participants and

non-participants and show that survey participation was not affected by the voucher program.

Moreover, we show that the distribution of the socio-demographics in YOLO is similar to that

of the representative German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). For the administrative data set, we

exploit that state employed physicians are legally required to physically examine all children

in school and obtained complete examination data for several cohorts in one county of Saxony.

The data include objective measures on overweightness and obesity as well as emotional and

motor skill disorders of about 7,000 sixth graders, some of which were and some of which were

not treated.

   Using difference-in-differences models and comparisons across affected and unaffected co-

horts, our findings show that the "Come to the Sports Club" (C2SC) campaign has been effec-

tive in increasing long-term awareness about the program, especially among the first treated

cohort. Even seven to nine years after the program started, significantly more treated children

in Saxony recall having received and redeemed the vouchers, relative to older cohorts and co-

horts in neighboring states. However, despite higher awareness and utilization, we find no

significant short- or long-term effects on membership rates, physical activity, and overweight-

ness among previously inactive students. Conversely, we find strong evidence that the vouch-

ers were a windfall gain for parents of existing members as they were the ones who primarily

redeemed the vouchers. Consistently, we do not find that the voucher program changed self-

reported health, health behaviors, objectively measured obesity rates, and diagnosed disorders

either in the short or long-run. We discuss several potential explanations for the ineffectiveness

of the program and perform a battery of robustness tests including synthetic control group

methods and placebo checks.

   There are several arguments to suggest that this unique sports club voucher program was

not poorly designed, but rather a well-crafted and implemented nudging policy. First, it fo-

cused on primary school children. Childhood is a crucial age for habit formation and children


                                                2
are more receptive to interventions than adults (Just and Price, 2013; Belot et al., 2016; Loewen-

stein et al., 2016). Second, as the voucher provided free sports club membership for one year,

relative to existing interventions in the literature, it is quite a long-run intervention. This is

a crucial and inherent element of C2SC as changing habits takes time (cf. Royer et al., 2015;

Carrera et al., 2018, 2020). Third, German sports clubs usually focus on team sports. Hence,

because of peer pressure from other team members and coaches, and out of a feeling of respon-

sibility toward their team, children might have stayed active members for an extended time

period (Babcock et al., 2015). Fourth, German sports clubs typically offer sports activities for

all age groups; children can therefore remain active members for many years (Breuer et al.,

2015). Fifth, being a member of a sports club implies regular, weekly practice. For example,

among German fifth graders who are sports club members, 36 percent report practicing several

               ¨
times a week (Zuchner and Arnoldt, 2012). Sixth, the voucher was not a cash transfer but an

in-kind transfer and could not be used for any other purpose than sports club membership in

the given time frame (see, e.g., Currie and Gahvari, 2008).

    In addition to contributing to the very sparse literature on how to increase school children's

physical activity levels, this research contributes to the broader economics literature on nudges

for adults to adopt a healthier lifestyle. Studies show that adults can be incentivized to go

to the gym more often, but the effects are short-lived and people seem to find it difficult to

change their habits permanently (DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006; Royer et al., 2015; Carrera

et al., 2018, 2020). Exceptions are Reichert (2015) and Augurzky et al. (2018) who find long(er)-

lasting effects on weight loss and health behavior in a randomized controlled trial among obese

health plan enrollees in Germany. In one of the few studies that focuses on children, Angelucci

et al. (2020) study peer effects in health behaviors in a field experiment among K-8 school

children in Chicago. Their findings demonstrate the existence of health behavior spillover

effects, but also that making incentives public can backfire and crowd-out positive peer effects.2

Because we evaluate a policy that explicitly targeted primary school children with the intention

of changing their health behavior in the long-run, our research also contributes to research on

early childhood interventions which have been shown to have long-lasting effects (see, e.g.,

Kesternich et al. (2015) and Felfe and Lalive (2018) for two papers with a focus on children in

Germany and similar data).
   2 Inanother study, Prina and Royer (2014) find that body weight report cards increase parental knowledge about
their children's body weight without having any impact on parental behavior or children's weight.




                                                       3
      The next section explains the extramural sports club setting in Germany and describes the

voucher policy in detail. Section 3 discusses the data and key variables, and Section 4 explains

the empirical models. Section 5 presents our findings based on YOLO, and Section 6 presents

robustness checks. Section 7 discusses additional evidence based on official health examination

data, and Section 8 concludes.



2     Non-Profit Sports Clubs and the Voucher Initiative

2.1     Germany's Extramural Sports Club Setting

Germany has a long tradition of extramural sports clubs. In 2018, there was a total of 89,121

sports clubs in Germany distributed over 11,000 municipalities (Breuer and Feiler, 2015).3 Sports

clubs are the main providers of opportunities for organized sport and cover all ages; for in-

stance, about 4.2 million members are between the ages of 7 and 14, relative to roughly 6 million

Germans in that age group (German Olympic Sports Confederation, 2017).

      Unlike in the United States, German extramural sports clubs are not associated with pri-

mary or secondary schools but operate as independent, voluntary, non-profit amateur organi-

zations.4 Coaches are typically former or current amateur athletes. In general, the clubs charge

low membership fees and admit anyone who applies to be a member. Bigger clubs in larger

cities may participate in professional or semi-professional sports leagues.

      Most members join extramural sports clubs as children or youths between the age of 5 and

15. If a young person is serious about a particular sport, that is, if they decide they want to

acquire, develop, and hone the skills the sport involves, they will typically practice several

times a week, join a team in their age group, and participate in amateur competitions. This

aspect of the extramural sports clubs closely resembles the sort of activities young people in

the US pursue when they join school-based sports teams. As in the US, German youth compete

in matches that take place in their hometown, and they travel to compete in matches hosted

by clubs of other towns in their state of residence. The competitions and the associated travel
    3 Breuerand Feiler (2015) and Breuer et al. (2015) provide a summary of the history and organization of extra-
mural sports clubs in Germany.
   4 According to Breuer et al. (2015), sports clubs in Germany can be characterized by several constitutive and

economic features. The constitutive characteristics are: membership is voluntary and members can freely decide
when to enter and when to leave the clubs, sports clubs are autonomous, focus on the interests of their members,
have democratic decision-making structures, and rely on volunteers. The main economic features are their non-
profit orientation (clubs are allowed to make a profit, but they are not allowed to pay out surpluses to members),
autonomous revenues, and the principle of solidarity.


                                                        4
are an integral part of the experience young people gain when they participate in extramural

sport.


2.2    The Voucher Initiative

On June 18, 2008, during his State of the Union Address, the newly sworn-in prime minis-

ter of the east German state of Saxony, Stanislaw Tillich (Christian Democratic Union, CDU),

announced a new policy initiative. The main goal of this "Come to the Sports Club" (C2SC;

KOMM! in den Sportverein ) initiative was to induce primary school children to join an ex-

tramural sports club. By joining a sports club, children would not only exercise regularly, be

healthier, and more self-confident, but also meet new friends and acquire social skills to cope

better with everyday life and become "good citizens". The C2SC initiative was jointly devel-

oped by the Ministry for Education and Cultural Affairs (Kultusministerium ) and the Saxony

State Sports Association (Landessportbund Sachsen ).

      To not discriminate against anyone but ensure that low-income families were in a posi-

tion to afford the membership fees, the idea was to distribute membership vouchers among

all 33,000 third graders in Saxony at the end of January 2009. Figure A1 (Appendix) shows an

example of the voucher. The vouchers were handed out by primary school class teachers and

had the official school stamp to prevent illegal copies from being made. They were distributed

together with a "starter kit", which included a T-shirt with the logo of the initiative as well

as an information letter for the parents describing the basic idea of the initiative and that the

voucher could be redeemed in any of the state-approved sports clubs until March 31, 2009. The

letter also explained that a second voucher would be distributed at the beginning of the fourth

grade in August 2009 (the idea was to let children experiment with several sports clubs and

disciplines). Both vouchers were worth e 30 ($33), so children of this cohort received vouch-

ers worth e 60 ($66) in total. The voucher's value was designed to cover membership fees in

the majority of sports clubs: Breuer and Feiler (2015) report that the annual median member-

ship fee was e 30 for children in Germany in 2013. Moreover, the letter informed parents that

sports club membership included insurance for sports injuries and referred to brochures with

complete lists, addresses, and all disciplines offered for children by all local sports clubs in Sax-

ony. The brochures were distributed in all primary schools as part of the information package.




                                                 5
The letter also referred to a website and a contact person (including an e-mail address and a

telephone number).

       The initiative was repeated for the following two years. That is, three cohorts were treated,

namely those who were third graders in Saxony in school years 2008/2009, 2009/2010, and

2010/2011. While in the first year of the initiative, two vouchers worth e 30 each were dis-

tributed, in the second and third year, only one voucher worth e 50 was distributed in late Jan-

uary 2010 and 2011, respectively. The reason for switching from two vouchers to one voucher

was to reduce the administrative burden for the sports clubs and to align the funding with the

clubs' fiscal year (calendar year). The deadline for redeeming the voucher in the second and

third round was again March 31.5

       Based on the number of redeemed vouchers, each sports club was reimbursed for the "lost"

membership fees. At the beginning of the third round, in January 2011, the initiative announced

that about 20,000 vouchers (out of a total of about 66,000 eligible third graders) had been re-

deemed. The budget for the entire C2SC initiative was e 4.5 million over three years (German

Olympic Sports Confederation, 2011).

       In 2012, C2SC was restructured and third graders no longer received sports club vouch-

ers. Instead, the vouchers were distributed to first graders.6 In 2013, policymakers decided

to completely abolish the voucher system, primarily because of the high administrative bur-

den for distributing the reimbursements. The C2SC program still exists today, however. It has

been broadened and now also focuses on adolescents and people over the age of 50. Instead of

distributing vouchers, regional coordinators were hired to build "regional networks to foster

physical activity among the population" (Kreissportbund Landkreis Leipzig, 2019; Landess-

portbund Sachsen, 2019).
   5 In 2011, the German federal government launched the Educational Package (Bildungs- und Teilhabepaket), which
among other things, covers membership fees and equipment costs for sports clubs. However, this program was
only directed at low-income welfare recipients and came into effect on April 1, 2011, that is, after the deadline for
redeeming the voucher from the last round of the initiative. Our results are robust to only including the first two
rounds of C2SC (see Section 6).
   6 Note that we do not analyze the C2SC effects on first graders as the affected students are mostly below the age

of 14 at the time of our survey. In Germany, children below the age of 14 may not be surveyed without parental
consent.




                                                         6
3    The Youth Leisure Online Survey (YOLO)

This paper relies mainly on a large register-based online survey, which we specifically designed

and carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of the "Come to the Sports Club" (C2SC) initia-

tive. This main data set, the Youth Leisure Online Survey (YOLO), uses a two-stage sampling

strategy, which we describe in detail in the Appendix and Figure A3. By law, Germany re-

quires residents to register with the registry offices (Einwohnermelde¨
                                                                      amter) of their municipality;

addresses of households can be obtained for research purposes.7 Hence, we had to randomly

sample at the level of the registry offices and request addresses for a sample of households with

youth of our target group (registry offices know the demographics of each household member).

We could then contact these households via regular mail and invite them to participate in an

online survey.

    Hence, in the first stage, we randomly sampled 121 registry offices in Saxony and the neigh-

boring states of Brandenburg and Thuringia (with sampling probabilities proportional to pop-

ulation size).8 Figure A2 (Appendix) illustrates the geographic location of the registry offices

along with the population that they cover in the three federal states.

    In the second stage, we contacted all 94 registry offices who responded in the first stage,

and requested an 80 percent random sample of the target population. This target population

consists of individuals born between July 1997 and June 2002. The first cohort that received the

C2SC voucher was born between July 1999 and June 2000. These individuals typically entered

school in 2006 and the third grade in the school year 2008/2009. Table A1 (Appendix) lists the

relationship between birth cohorts and school cohorts. We aimed to survey two pre-voucher

cohorts (born July 1997 to June 1999) and three treated voucher cohorts (born July 1999 to June

2002) in Saxony. Moreover, we surveyed the same five cohorts in the neighboring states of

Brandenburg and Thuringia.9
    7 While most municipalities have their own registry office, some registry offices are responsible for more than

one municipality. For ease of understanding, we will use the terms registry office and municipality interchangeably
throughout the paper.
    8 We chose these three states because they all use the same registry software which facilitated the execution of the

survey and allowed us to provide the registries with instructions on how to randomly draw the subsamples. The
neighboring state of Saxony-Anhalt uses a different software and is therefore not included. 94 of the 121 registry
offices contacted responded. The response rate of the registry offices was similar in Saxony (77.5 percent) and the
control states (77.8 percent) and did not differ between urban and rural regions.
    9 Note that we also surveyed the cohort born between July 2002 and June 2003, that is, third graders in school

year 2011/12. In our main analysis, we discard this cohort for two reasons. First, the Educational Package (Bildungs-
und Teilhabepaket) that covered sports club membership fees for welfare recipients came into effect on April 1, 2011
and therefore affected this cohort (see Section 2.2). Second, this is the first cohort that did not receive vouchers
and, therefore, disappointment effects could arise. However, in Section 6 we show that our findings are robust to
including this post-treatment cohort.


                                                           7
      Next, we mailed one official invitation letter to each of the 155,527 adolescents sampled

in the second stage. Figure A4 (Appendix) shows the original invitation letter for an online

survey about youth leisure time activities. To increase response rates, we offered a lottery

ticket for participation.10 This letter provided a unique access code for the online survey for

both, children and their parents.11 This unique access code also allowed us to match children

with their parents. Respondents completed the surveys between March and July, 2018. It took

respondents an average of 34 minutes to complete the survey (see Figure A5, Appendix). The

final YOLO response rate was 12.7 percent. Below, we investigate and discuss selective survey

participation. For this purpose, we also make use of the representative German Socio-Economic

Panel Study (SOEP).

      In Section 7, in addition to YOLO, we use official student health examination data carried

out by state-employed physicians. We use this second data set from one county in Saxony

to examine objectively measured body weights, heights, as well as motor skill and emotional

disorders.


3.1     Main Outcome Variables

In total, we generate six main outcome variables: three measure policy awareness and voucher

utilization (program known, voucher received, voucher redeemed ), and three measure sports

club membership, physical activity, and overweightness (member of sports club, weekly hours

of sport, overweight ). We elicited all six outcomes at the time of the survey. However, the first

three are of retrospective nature, whereas the other three are of contemporaneous nature.

      Note that the invitation letter did not specifically mention the C2SC campaign (see Figure

A4, Appendix). It only stated that the survey would be about leisure time behavior among

young people. Further, so as not to frame participants, the questions regarding the first three

awareness and utilization measures (program known, voucher received, voucher redeemed )

appear only at the very end of the survey.


3.2     Sample Selection

Our main sample consists of young people who attended third grade in primary school in

Saxony, Thuringia, or Brandenburg during the school years from 2006/07 to 2010/11. Hence,
 10 The   lottery prize included two iPads, worth e 500 each, and ten Amazon vouchers, worth e 20 each.
 11 We   invited one parent (mother or father) to participate in the survey.


                                                        8
we work with two pre-treatment and three treatment cohorts. YOLO explicitly asks when

children were born, in which state they attended each primary school grade, whether they

started first grade at the age of six, and whether they had to repeat a grade. This allows us to

precisely assign respondents to the treatment group. For example, we disregard individuals

who attended third grade abroad or in other federal states. Further, we excluded observations

with missing values on one of our six outcome variables. Our final sample consists of 13,334

unique youth observations.


3.3     Descriptives

Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the YOLO sample. The average age of the young people

surveyed was 17.5 years. 57 percent of all respondents were female. About half were attending

an academic track school at the time of the survey in 2018.12 Instead of asking respondents

about their parents' income or education, to proxy for socio-economic status, we asked whether

they had a newspaper and/or art at home. Of all the respondents, 58 percent had a newspaper

at home and 73 percent had art at home.

      38 percent of all respondents belong to the treatment group, that is, they were third graders

in Saxony between school years 2006/07 and 2010/11. Table 1 shows that 19 percent of all

respondents (including control cohorts) had heard about C2SC (program known ). Almost ten

percent recall having received the voucher (voucher received ) and six percent had redeemed

the voucher (voucher redeemed ). Around 42 percent of youth were active extramural sports

club members at the time of the survey (member of sports club ). On average, respondents

exercised 4.6 hours per week (weekly hours of sport ) and 16 percent were overweight.

      Figure B1 (Appendix) plots the sports disciplines for which the vouchers were redeemed.

Not surprisingly, by far the most popular discipline was soccer (20 percent), followed by mar-

tial arts (12 percent), swimming (12 percent), handball (7 percent), athletics (6 percent), and

gymnastics (5 percent).


                                              [Table 1 about here]


      Table A2 (Appendix) lists the normalized difference for key variables between treatment

and control groups. According to Imbens and Wooldridge (2009), a normalized difference of
 12 The   states considered here track students after four years of mixed primary school.



                                                          9
more than 0.25 indicates strong imbalances. As seen, almost all variables are balanced across

the treated and control groups, with the majority of the normalized differences smaller than

0.10. For example, the average age at the time of the survey was 17.6 (treated) vs. 17.4 (con-

trol); about 57 percent of respondents were female in both groups, and 20.5 percent vs. 21.8

percent had ever smoked a cigarette.13 Moreover, the sport-related outcome variables are very

balanced, whereas program-related outcome variables naturally differ.


3.4    Data Quality

To check the accuracy of the information provided by the YOLO respondents and to investigate

possible selective survey response, we use two secondary data sources: the registry data pro-

vided by the registry offices and the German Socio-Economic Panel Study (Goebel et al., 2019).

First, we have a set of overlapping variables for YOLO participants, as the registry offices pro-

vide administrative information which we also surveyed in YOLO. YOLO participants were

not aware that we had the registry information. Table A3 (Appendix) shows that 99 percent of

all YOLO participants correctly reported their gender, nationality, and year of birth.14

      Second, based on the registry data, Table A4 (Appendix) compares the characteristics of

YOLO participants and non-participants. While YOLO has a slight overrepresentation of women,

Germans, and younger individuals, all normalized differences are below 0.25, suggesting that

participants and non-participants do not differ strongly with respect to these characteristics.

Additionally, in Section 6, we show that these slight overrepresentations are unrelated to C2SC

and that the results are robust to weighting the observations based on their probability of par-

ticipating in the survey.

      Third, we use the SOEP as a reference data set to compare YOLO and SOEP participants

(Siedler et al., 2009). We can directly compare a wide range of background information between

YOLO and the SOEP as the wording of several YOLO questions is identical to the wording in

the SOEP (including socio-demographic variables, leisure time activities, personality traits, and

attitudes). Specifically, we compare SOEP and YOLO respondents who were born between July
   13 One of the very few covariates with a major imbalance is the share of youth living in a city (76 percent in the

treatment group vs. 43 percent in the control group). The reason for this is that Saxony has two cities with more
than half a million residents (Dresden and Leipzig), whereas Brandenburg and Thuringia do not.
   14 Four registry offices provided only the respondent's gender and address but not the date of birth. Therefore,

the number of observations is slightly smaller for the birth variables in Table A3 (Appendix). In the robustness
section, we show that the results are robust to excluding individuals with non-matching registry information and
individuals who spent little time answering the survey.




                                                         10
1997 and July 2000 and who live in Saxony, Brandenburg, or Thuringia.15 Table A5 (Appendix)

compares an extensive list of covariates, such as demographics, sports and other leisure time

activities, volunteering, personality traits, and attitudes. Again, most variables are very bal-

anced and do not provide much evidence for strong selection into YOLO.



4    Empirical Approach

We estimate the C2SC effects using difference-in-differences (DD) models. We begin with basic

DD models of the form:



                   Yics = 0 + 1 · Saxonys + 2 · Postc +  · (Saxony · Post)cs +  ics ,                       (1)


    where Yics denotes the outcome of individual i in cohort c in state s. The dummy variable

Saxonys is one if a respondent was a third grader in Saxony, and zero if he or she was a third

grader in Thuringia or Brandenburg. Recall that about 33 thousand third graders of the treat-

ment cohorts were treated and received the voucher. Postc is a dummy variable, which is one

if a respondent was a third grader in the school year 2008/09, 2009/10 or 2010/11, and zero

if he or she was a third grader in the school year 2006/07 or 2007/08. The main variable of

interest is the interaction of these two dummies (Saxony · Post). It is one if a respondent was

eligible to receive and redeem sports club vouchers, and zero for all other respondents.  ics is

the individual error term. To take the nature of our sampling strategy into account, we cluster

our standard errors at the level of the municipalities and, hence, allow for arbitrary correlation

of these error terms across municipalities, the primary sampling units of our survey (Abadie

et al., 2017).16

    In our second specification, we replace the Saxonys -dummy with state fixed effects (s )

and the Postc -dummy with cohort fixed effects (c ). This twoway-fixed effects specification

considers general differences in the outcomes between states as well as general changes in the

outcomes over time. The estimation equation is then:
   15 We rely on the SOEP youth questionnaire, which surveys individuals in the year in which they turn 17. This

fixed age is an important difference between SOEP and YOLO participants. While the average age of YOLO re-
spondents is comparable, due to the sampling design, YOLO respondents are between the ages of 14 and 20 at the
time of the survey (see also Table 1). As many older YOLO participants are no longer in school, we refrain from
comparing school-related variables.
   16 In Section 6, we present and discuss several alternative methods of inference.




                                                      11
                                Yics =  · (Saxony · Post)cs + c + s +  ics .                                    (2)


      In our third and preferred specification, we augment equation (2) with municipality fixed

effects.

      The main identifying assumption of our DD models is the common time trend assumption.

This means that, in the absence of C2SC, the outcomes of the treatment and control group

would have followed the same time trend. Below, we provide support for this assumption

graphically and by running placebo regressions using unaffected cohorts and unaffected states.



5     Results

This section first presents graphical and regression-based evidence of C2SC's effectiveness (Sec-

tion 5.1) and then examines effect heterogeneity between subgroups (Section 5.2). Next, we

investigate the program's short-run effects using retrospective information about sports club

membership throughout the participant's childhood (Section 5.3). Section 5.4 presents sugges-

tive evidence for potential mechanisms.


5.1     Main Results

We begin by plotting unadjusted mean outcomes separately for the treatment state (Saxony)

and the control states (Brandenburg and Thuringia) in Figure 1. We plot these means sepa-

rately by the school year during which YOLO respondents attended third grade. The three

subgraphs in the left column of Figure 1 illustrate whether treated cohorts in Saxony have a

higher awareness of the program (1a), were more likely to have received the voucher (1b), and

were more likely to have redeemed the voucher (1c).

      As seen, we observe very flat and non-trending lines over the entire time period for re-

spondents in the control states for all three outcomes (dashed lines).17 In contrast, respondents

who were third graders in Saxony at the time of the policy show a substantially larger program
   17 In Figure 1a, some individuals in Saxony's pre-treatment cohorts report to have known the program, and in

Figures 1b and 1c a small fraction of individuals in Saxony's pre-treatment cohort claims that they received and
used the voucher. There are several potential explanations for this phenomenon. For instance, it could be that the
children got hold of the voucher although they were not eligible (e.g., via siblings or friends or a teacher handing
out the voucher to the wrong class), or that individuals remember incorrectly whether they received the voucher
(recall bias).




                                                        12
awareness, particularly those who were treated in the first year of the policy. While aware-

ness clearly decreases for the two following cohorts from about 50 percent to 40 percent and 30

percent, respectively, it still remains higher than in control cohorts and control states. Interest-

ingly and reassuringly, we observe the exact same pattern for the outcomes voucher received

and voucher redeemed in Figures 1b and c: There are substantial spikes in the first year of

the voucher initiative, and subsequent linear decreases in years two and three. Note that the

decreases in program awareness, treatment, and utilization works against a possible recall bias

(which would increase in the years elapsed since then). The dynamically decreasing treatment

effects are more likely to be a function of the very active information campaign and promotion

in the first C2SC year. Also, C2SC's structure changed from disbursing two smaller vouchers

(which were valid for six months) in January 2009 and August 2009, to one larger voucher

(which was valid for 12 months) in January 2010 and 2011 (see Section 2.2 for details).


                                   [Insert Figure 1 about here]


   The three subgraphs in the right column of Figure 1--Figures 1d, e, and f--show the three

outcomes membership in sports club today, weekly hours of sports, and overweight. Here, no

treatment effect is visually detectable. The two lines follow almost identical trends and levels

throughout the entire time periods. Note that, while the first three awareness and utilization

measures are elicited retrospectively, the three sports club and activity measures are elicited

contemporaneously (and thus do not suffer from any recall bias).

   Next, we turn to our main regression results obtained with the DD models. We start with the

simplest of all specifications in column (1) of Table 2, where we only include a binary treatment

group indicator (which is one for respondents who attended third grade in Saxony), a binary

post-reform indicator (which is one for school years 2009/10 and after), and its interactions

(equation (1)). Column (2) adds a full set of cohort and state fixed effects (equation (2)), and

column (3) additionally includes municipality fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the

municipality level.


                                   [Insert Table 2 about here]


   The findings from the 18 DD models in Table 2 allow us to conclude the following: First,

the regression results are entirely in line with the visual evidence above: Awareness about the

program is on average 27 percentage points higher among those who attended third grade in

                                                13
Saxony during the voucher years. In line with the nonparametric evidence in Figure 1, treated

cohorts also have a 20 percentage point higher probability of reporting that they received the

voucher, and a 12 percentage point higher probability of reporting that they redeemed the

voucher. In Panel A, all nine coefficient estimates are highly significant at the one percent

level. Moreover, and again in line with the graphical evidence, the DD models in Panel B show

that the program was neither effective in increasing sports club membership rates or physical

activity, nor in reducing overweight rates in the long-run (seven to nine years later). Second,

the coefficients are very robust to the inclusion of additional time and region fixed effects,

suggesting the absence of confounding time trends or spatial factors.

      As we surveyed all respondents in 2018, some of our dependent variables may suffer from

recall bias due to the retrospective nature of our survey questions. While such recall bias is

unavoidable, it is important for the consistency of our estimates that no systematic, treatment-

related, recall bias exists. Note that our main dependent variables fall into two categories: (i)

The outcomes voucher received and voucher redeemed are likely to suffer from recall bias, as

respondents who received and redeemed the vouchers are more likely not to recall that this

was the case. This almost exclusively affects the treatment group as the control group did not

receive any vouchers. Hence, the take-up estimates are likely to be downward biased and yield

a lower bound.18 While it could be argued that the recall bias is smaller when using parental

information, we obtain similar point estimates when using parents' rather than their children's

responses (see Section 6); (ii) When estimating the long-run effects of the C2SC voucher policy

on contemporaneous sports club membership rates, physical activity, and overweightness, the

estimates cannot be affected by recall bias as they are not retrospective.


5.2    Effect Heterogeneity

Now we investigate effect heterogeneity to better understand the underlying driving forces

of the treatment effects and to examine whether treatment effects differ between specific sub-

groups. Technically, we run a version of equation (2) with municipality fixed effects, to which
  18 For the outcome voucher received we would expect a point estimate close to one if the program was perfectly

administered and if there was no recall bias. Regarding the outcome voucher redeemed, official numbers suggest
that about 30 percent of eligible students redeemed the voucher in the first two years of the program: 20,000 vouch-
ers were redeemed and about 66,000 third graders were eligible (German Olympic Sports Confederation, 2011).




                                                        14
we add interactions of all variables with the stratifying variable of interest:


       Yigcs =  1 · Vouchercs +  2 · Vouchercs · Groupigcs + cg + sg +  · Groupigcs +  igcs ,                  (3)


where Yigcs denotes the outcome of individual i in cohort c in state s and group g. cg and sg

are cohort-group and state-group fixed effects. Group is an indicator that is one if an individ-

ual belongs to a specific group (e.g., females) and zero if not (e.g., males). Figure 2 graphically

plots the ^ 2 -coefficients, i.e., the difference in the treatment effects between groups for six dif-

ferent stratifying variables and all six outcomes along with the 95 percent confidence bands.

Additionally, Table B1 (Appendix) shows the DD regression coefficients for all subgroups.19

                                        [Insert Figure 2 about here]

    As above, we begin with the three measures for program awareness, take-up, and utiliza-

tion in the left column of Figure 2. A clear picture emerges. While we do not find much

evidence that the effects differ by gender or urban/rural regions, all effect sizes are signifi-

cantly larger for children from higher socio-demographic backgrounds (i.e., children whose

parents have art and/or a newspaper at home). They are also larger for youth attending an

academic track school and those who were already sports club members before the C2SC cam-

paign started. Although effect sizes differ, in line with our main findings, Table B1 (Appendix)

shows positive and significant effects for program awareness, take-up, and utilization for every

subgroup. They strongly reinforce the narrative that it was primarily children from advantaged

parental backgrounds and existing sports club members who redeemed the voucher, but not

the main target group of disadvantaged children from economically deprived households.

    The right column of Figure 2 shows effect heterogeneity for the three contemporaneous

long-term measures: sports club membership, physical activity, and overweightness. They

confirm a lack of significant long-term effects of the program. Table B1 (Appendix) shows no

single significant treatment effect for these long-term outcomes for any of the subgroups.

                                        [Insert Figure 3 about here]

    As another heterogeneity test, we examine effect heterogeneity by cohorts and plot the re-

sults in Figure 3.20 The results in Figure 3 reflect and reinforce the nonparametric evidence from
  19 Technically, Table B1 (Appendix) is based on separate DD regressions for each group, which yields estimates

for  1 and  1 +  2 .
  20 For this purpose, we add cohort-specific treatment indicators to equation (2) with municipality fixed effects:



                                                        15
Figure 1: The highly significant effects on awareness, take-up, and utilization are strongest for

the first affected cohort and then decline substantially for the following two treated cohorts.

Again, we find no evidence for significant long-term effects on membership rates, physical

exercise, or being overweight for any of the treated cohorts.


5.3     Short-Run Effects on Sports Club Membership Rates

While the previous sections demonstrated an absence of long-run effects on sports club mem-

bership rates, this section examines potential short-run effects. To this end, we make use of the

retrospectively reported membership information by child age from 5 to 12.


                                     [Insert Figure 4 about here]


      Figure 4a shows the nonparametric development of membership rates by child age 5 to 12.

Here we focus only on YOLO respondents who went to primary school in Saxony and show the

results separately for treated and non-treated cohorts. First, we see monotonically increasing

and concavely shaped membership rates as a function of child age. Between ages 5 and 8,

the probability of being a sports club member roughly doubles from 25 to 50 percent. It then

flattens substantially between ages 9 and 12 but continues to increase. Moreover, both lines are

almost identical and clearly follow a common time trend--both before and after age 9 (the age

when children are third graders). We observe the same concave-shaped function in Figure 4b,

which focuses solely on respondents who were third graders at the time of the C2SC initiative

and compare the treatment state of Saxony to the control states of Brandenburg and Thuringia.

The curves follow parallel trends and no treatment effect is visually identifiable.

      Next, we examine the equivalent short-run effects with parametric DD models. The results

are shown in Table B2 (Appendix). In contrast to our main specification, these DD models de-

fine the treatment based on child age. Treatment starts at age 9 when children are third graders

and we compare the within-child membership development of the treated cohorts against the

control cohorts. The models in the first two columns mirror the visual evidence in Figure 4a

and focus on Saxony where third graders in the treated school years are compared to third

graders in earlier school years before C2SC. By contrast, the next two columns of Table B2 mir-

                                     2011
                           Yics =             j (Saxony · Cohort j )cs + c + s +  ics .       (4)
                                    j=2009




                                                         16
ror the visual evidence in Figure 4b and focus on third graders in the school years when C2SC

was in place (2009/2010, 2010/2011, and 2011/2012). It compares Saxony to the two other

states. The uneven columns show the average effect whereas the even columns show event

study estimates by child age.21

    Table B2 again confirms the visual evidence in Figure 4. The point estimates are not only

statistically insignificant, but also small and close to zero in size. Furthermore, when estimating

event-study regressions in these DD settings (columns [2] and [4] in Table B2), we do not find

evidence that the voucher program significantly increased sports club memberships at any of

the ages analyzed.22 The two placebo coefficients provide additional evidence for the common-

trend assumptions in these cases.

    We can also use the retrospective information on sports club membership at different ages

as an outcome in our main specification (equation (2) with municipality fixed effects).23 Table

3 shows the results for such a specification. It confirms that the C2SC initiative did not signifi-

cantly increase sports club membership rates among children in the short run. Moreover, when

using parents' retrospective responses about their children's sports club membership at differ-

ent ages, we obtain the same non-significant result (column [3] of Table 3). In conclusion, based

on three different, yet related, identification strategies and retrospective information from chil-

dren as well as their parents, there is little evidence that the C2SC initiative increased sports

club membership rates in the short run.


                                           [Insert Table 3 about here]
  21 Column   (1) estimates the following model using solely youth who went to primary school in Saxony:

                                         Yica =  · Voucherca + c + µ a +  ica ,
  where Yica denotes the outcome of individual i in cohort c at age a, c are cohort fixed effects, and µ a stands for a
set of age fixed effects. Voucherca is one if the individual was 9 years or older and went to third grade in school years
2008/09, 2009/10, or 2010/11 (and, therefore, eligible to receive the sports club voucher). Voucherca leverages the
naturally occurring within-child sports club membership probabilities which increase monotonically in a concave
manner between ages 5 and 12. Column (3) estimates the following model using only third graders in school years
2008/09, 2009/10, or 2010/11 but in all three states:

                                         Yisa =  · Vouchersa + s + µ a +  isa ,
   where s and µ a are sets of state and age fixed effects, respectively. Vouchersa is 1 if the individual was 9 years or
older and went to third grade in Saxony.
   22 When retrospectively eliciting sports club membership rates across ages, there might be recall bias. For a con-

sistent estimation of the C2SC effect, we assume a common trend in recall biases. More specifically, the assumption
for Figure 4a (and columns [1] and [2] in Table B2) is that the recall bias regarding sports club membership before
and after age 9 is similar in treated and untreated cohorts in Saxony. The assumption for Figure 4b (and column
[3] and [4] in Table B2) is that the recall bias among those who were third graders in 2008/09-2010/11 is similar in
Saxony and the other states (regarding pre- and post-age-9 sports club memberships).
   23 This specification then assumes that, at each age, the difference in recall bias between the treatment and control

states is similar for treated and untreated cohorts.


                                                           17
      There are several potential explanations for the absence of a short-run C2SC effect on mem-

bership rates. First, new members would have joined sports clubs irrespective of the C2SC ini-

tiative. Figure 4 shows an increase in membership rates by child age, also among non-treated

cohorts, providing support for this argument. Second, to affect the consistency of our estimates,

recall bias would have to take a non-trivial form. For example, youth may have redeemed the

vouchers and joined sports clubs but only for a few weeks, making it more likely for them

not to recall their membership several years later. For these individuals, we would also not

expect any (long-run) changes in physical activity or health. Third, youth who were already

sports club members may have used the voucher to become a member of another sports club.

Unfortunately, YOLO only elicits multiple sports club memberships. However, there is some

evidence that about one-third of active users redeemed the voucher to experiment with new

disciplines (see Figure 5a).


                                    [Insert Figure 5 about here]


5.4     Suggestive Evidence on Mechanisms

Why did the C2SC program fail to significantly increase sports club membership rates? We

categorize potential explanations into supply-side and demand-side arguments.

Supply-Side Arguments. Supply-side restrictions would arise if the sports clubs did not have

enough capacity for new members. We perform additional analyses to examine the plausibility

of this explanation. First, we asked all YOLO respondents who remembered receiving the

voucher whether they could redeem it for their desired discipline. Figure 5b shows that 92

percent could redeem the voucher for their desired discipline.

      Second, we collected information on the addresses of the 4,381 sports clubs that existed in

Saxony in 2008, before the start of C2SC. Based on these addresses, we computed the number

of sports clubs in each ZIP code and merged this number with YOLO participants in Saxony.

For these individuals, Figure 6a displays the distribution of the number of sports clubs across

ZIP codes.24 Almost 95 percent of YOLO respondents live in ZIP codes with at least six differ-

ent sports clubs and 11 disciplines; on average, more than 16 sports clubs exist in a ZIP code

(median 13). These figures illustrate that, for the large majority of youth, plenty of sports clubs
  24 Theserespondents live in ZIP codes with about 20,000 inhabitants, on average; 95 percent live in ZIP
codes with 9,000 - 40,000 inhabitants (ZIP-code specific population data are taken from https://www.
suche-postleitzahl.org/downloads).


                                                   18
existed in the immediate neighborhood.25 When interpreting these numbers, it is important to

note that individuals are not restricted to joining sports clubs in their own ZIP code. Hence, the

actual number of sports clubs and available disciplines to choose from is usually larger than

the numbers in Figure 6.


                                        [Insert Figure 6 about here]


    Third, as another possible barrier, we investigate the self-reported mode of transportation

for those youth who indicated that they redeemed the voucher. The descriptive findings, sep-

arately by urban and rural ZIP codes are in Figure 5f. As seen, children in rural counties were

much more likely to get a ride from their parents (50 vs. 42 percent). However, they were also

more likely to walk (30 vs. 23 percent) or bike (34 vs. 30) to the sports club. Finally, not sur-

prisingly, they were significantly less likely to take public transport (9 vs. 22 percent). As these

are ex post equilibrium outcomes, it is hard to tell--however--whether a lack of transport was

a significant supply side barrier for children. On the one hand, the public transport network is

much denser in cities; on the other hand, rural environments make it much safer for children

to walk or bike to their sports club.26

    Fourth, over the course of several years, we personally met with representatives of the

Saxony State Sports Association (Landessportbund Sachsen ) who implemented the policy in

cooperation with the Ministry for Education and Cultural Affairs (Kultusministerium ). In these

one-to-one meetings, the representatives informed us that they were not aware of any supply-

side constraints at sports clubs in Saxony.

    In sum, this suggests that supply-side constraints were unlikely to be a major barrier to

take-up.

Demand-Side Arguments. First, it could be that the program targeted the wrong age group.

However, as almost half of all third graders in our sample were not sports club members when

C2SC started, this is unlikely to be the main explanation (see Figure 4).
  25 Technically,we only observe the number of "divisions" in a sports club, which is a conservative proxy for the
number of disciplines: While one discipline is usually organized in the same division, sometimes several disciplines
are organized in the same division (e.g., a division entitled "ball games" may include the disciplines of football,
handball, and basketball).
  26 Unlike in the United States, "free range parenting" is the social norm in Germany.




                                                        19
    Second, stigma could be a reason for incomplete take-up of social benefits (Friedrichsen

et al., 2018). As the vouchers were distributed to entire cohorts, stigma is also unlikely to be

the main reason for the program's ineffectiveness.

    Third, other policies may have confounded the demand side. We have carefully checked

the legislation in the relevant federal states and found no such policies in Saxony or the neigh-

boring states.27 The official school curricula show that physical education hours did not change

in any of the three states at the time. In Saxony, students in grades one to ten have three hours

of physical education per week. The requirements in Brandenburg and Thuringia are almost

identical.28

    Fourth, a lack of parental information may have created access barriers. These might be

particularly relevant for children from disadvantaged backgrounds. However, several C2SC

features could have mitigated such issues: Parents received information packages which de-

scribed C2SC, explained how to redeem the vouchers, and also listed all local sports clubs

along with the disciplines they offered (see Section 2.2). Further, because entire cohorts were

treated, it is very likely that parents heard about the program from other parents, and also from

their children. Nevertheless, a lack of information or support from parents cannot be ruled out

as a take-up barrier.

    Fifth, besides a lack of parental information, a lack of involvement and encouragement from

parents might be driving take-up barriers. Table B3 in the Appendix compares the characteris-

tics of parents of children who are vs. those who are not sports club members. This is simply

a descriptive exercise and considers all children in all cohorts and all states. As seen, it is very

clear that children of better educated parents and parents who are sports club members them-

selves are significantly more likely to become sports club members themselves. Further, we

surveyed parents' attitudes about exercising in general in the parent questionnaire (see notes

to Table B3 for details). Responses are on a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 7 (totally agree).

Table B3 shows that differences in parental attitudes are highly significant for all 11 questions.

Parents whose children are sports club members are more likely to agree that, for them, exercis-

ing is something that is integrated into their weekly routine, that is a habit, that they do without

a lot of effort and willpower, and that they have been doing for a long time. Next, we conduct
  27 We   are also not aware of policies affecting the supply-side, i.e., sports clubs. As discussed in footnote 5, the
federal "Educational Package", which covered membership fees for welfare recipients, came into effect on April
1, 2011, after the third C2SC cohorts' deadline to redeem the voucher. Further, the Educational Package affected
welfare recipients in all states.
   28 In Thuringia, students in grades 1 and 2 only have two hours of physical education.



                                                          20
a similar exercise but focus on the treated cohorts in Saxony and differentiate between children

who redeemed vs. those who did not redeem the voucher. This time we use responses from the

youth questionnaire. The findings in Table B4 of the Appendix clearly show that children who

redeemed the voucher are significantly more likely to have art and newspapers at home, are

on the highest educational track, and were already sports club members between ages 4 and 7

(before the treatment). These children were also significantly more likely to have taken music

lessons between ages 4 and 7. All these factors remain statistically significant in a multivariate

regression framework. Interestingly, and reinforcing our supply-side discussion, the number

of sports clubs in the ZIP code does not statistically differ between the two groups of children.

   Sixth, although membership fees were waived, additional monetary and non-monetary

costs are typically associated with sports club memberships and may prevent take-up. In

particular, C2SC did not cover costs for equipment. Further, the vouchers only covered the

membership fees for a single year. However, Figures 5c and d show that monthly membership

fees are not the main barrier to take-up for most families. Only three percent of youth who re-

deemed the voucher responded that membership fees would have been unaffordable without

the voucher. Consistently, a quarter of active users said that their parents were glad to be able

to save money thanks to the vouchers. However, for parents, sports club memberships some-

times carry large non-monetary costs; for instance, when parents have to take their children to

the sports facilities. Further, on weekends, parents are often asked to volunteer in tournaments

or in matches against other teams.

   In sum, (future) financial costs, indirect costs, and a lack of parental involvement might

explain why few children in the target group redeemed the vouchers. We cannot and do not

attempt to distinguish these diverse potential demand-side explanations but interpret the evi-

dence as suggestive that supply-side constraints were not the major driving force. Conversely,

we find clear evidence that children who redeemed the vouchers were significantly more likely

to come from households with art and newspapers at home and to be on a higher educational

track. It is also clear that they were already sports club members prior to the treatment and

received music lessons. Moreover, their parents are significantly more likely to hold positive

attitudes about exercising and to see it as an integral part of their daily routine. Hence parental

involvement, attitudes and encouragement appear to be very important driving forces for chil-

dren's voucher take-up.




                                                21
6      Sensitivity Analyses

6.1     Alternative Specifications, Placebos, and Further Outcomes

The first set of robustness checks addresses alternative model specifications, in particular, al-

ternative sample restrictions, alternative assignments of the treatment group, and alternative

ways of dealing with control variables. Table 4 shows results for our preferred specification

and all six outcomes, where we vary the cohorts included in the sample (columns [1] to [4]),

omit either Brandenburg or Thuringia from the sample (columns [5] and [6]), include individ-

uals who lived in other states when they were third graders (column [7]), and only consider

individuals with matching registry information (regarding gender, nationality, and age) and

who spent at least ten minutes on the survey (column [8]). In column (9) of Table 4, to consider

potential spillover effects between siblings, we exclude respondents from the pre-treatment co-

horts in all three states who reported that their siblings also received an invitation to participate

in YOLO. In column (10), we exclude youth with an older sibling.

      To test for whether possibly misreported migration between states and the first and third

grade matters, when we define the treatment group, we use information on where the child at-

tended first grade (column [11]) and use the current state of residence (column [12]).29 Column

(13) controls for socio-demographics30 , while column (14) weights the sample based on the

probability of an individual participating in the YOLO survey, which we derived from the reg-

istry information.31 The next set of robustness checks focuses on placebo tests. First, we omit

Saxony from the sample and assume that Brandenburg was the treatment state and Thuringia

the control state (see column [14] of Table 4). All point estimates are small in size, also the first

three on awareness and utilization, and not statistically different from zero.


                                          [Insert Table 4 about here]


      Second, Figure 7a plots point estimates from our preferred model along with 95 percent

confidence bands. However, here we use outcomes that either cannot plausibly be affected
    29 Notethat geographic mobility in Germany is much lower than in the US. In YOLO, 92 percent of youth also
spent the third grade in the state of their current residency, about a decade later. According to the representative
                                                                         ¨
SOEP, in a given year, less than one percent of all respondents move (Jurges   et al., 2011; Goebel et al., 2015).
   30 These control variables include the binary variables female, has siblings, born in Germany, parent not born in

Germany, newspaper at home, art at home, academic track, sports club aged 4-7, and music lessons aged 4-7 (see
Table A2, Appendix).
   31 More specifically, we apply inverse probability weights, where the probability to participate in the YOLO survey

is predicted by a Probit model. This Probit model uses registry information and includes a fully interacted set of
state, gender, year of birth, and German nationality dummies.


                                                         22
by the treatment, such as gender, the number of siblings, or whether the child was born in

Germany--or outcomes that are very unlikely to be affected by vouchers, such as newspaper

at home, art at home, or academic track. We also use sports club participation during childhood

ages prior to the treatment (between age four and seven) as a placebo outcome. As seen, the

effect on none of these outcomes is statistically significant, but all point estimates are very close

to zero. All these robustness checks confirm that the C2SC initiative increased awareness and

take-up, but had no long-run effect on physical activity and being overweight.

      Figure 7b displays treatment effects for alternative outcomes, such as different measures of

physical activity or attitudes regarding sports. We also measure other health behaviors such as

drinking or smoking. In conclusion, C2SC affected none of the sport, health, overweightness,

smoking, or alcohol-consumption outcomes. This is in line with our main findings and sup-

ports our conclusion that the C2SC initiative did not improve health or health-behaviors in the

long-run.

                                   [Insert Figure 7 about here]

      In addition to weighting the regressions with the respondents' probability of participating

in YOLO (column [13] of Table 4), Table A6 (Appendix) shows that individuals in treated co-

horts in Saxony are just as likely as everybody else to participate in YOLO. Using only registry

data, we re-run our main DD model in equation (2), but use the dummy "YOLO participation"

as an outcome and assign the treatment based on the date of birth. As seen in Table A6, the

small and insignificant point estimate provides evidence that survey participation is not sig-

nificantly related to treatment status. Table B5 (Appendix) employs 12 different methods of

statistical inference (including different levels of clustering and different wild cluster bootstrap

procedures). None of the estimates lead us to revise our main conclusion; all 36 estimated co-

efficients for the first three outcomes remain highly significant, and all 36 coefficients for the

other three outcomes remain insignificant.


6.2     Parents' Information

We also invited parents to fill out a similar survey, which we electronically linked to their chil-

dren's responses (see Section 3). Now, we leverage this information to check whether the results

are robust to using parents' responses. Table 5 shows the results. The first two columns use the

children's responses as a benchmark and the third column uses parents' responses. We always

                                                 23
show our preferred DD estimates.32 As seen, using parents' responses regarding whether their

child received and redeemed the voucher about a decade ago, the estimates remain highly sig-

nificant and are very similar to the estimates obtained using children's responses. If anything,

the program is slightly better known among children (comparing columns [2] and [3] in Table

5), while the utilization effect is slightly larger when using the parents' responses.


                                           [Insert Table 5 about here]


6.3     Synthetic Control Group

Although the pre-treatment trends in Figure 1 are fairly similar, as another test, we follow

Abadie et al. (2010) and construct a synthetic control group with the same pre-treatment out-

come trends. More specifically, we re-weight the municipalities in the control states such that

the two pre-treatment cohorts have the same mean as the treatment state of Saxony with respect

to member of sports club, weekly hours of sport, and overweight.33 Based on this synthetic

control group approach, neither the regression results in Table 6 nor the visual inspections in

Figure B2 (Appendix) provide evidence that the C2SC initiative increased membership rates

and the amount of physical exercise, or reduced overweight rates.


                                           [Insert Table 6 about here]


      This finding is further reinforced when we plot the differences between treatment and con-

trol states both for the main sample (Panel A) and the synthetic control group approach (Panel

B) in the Appendix in Figure B3. As seen all point estimates are very close to zero and almost

no trending is discernible. Further, all confidence intervals largely overlap with zero and the

point estimate signs alternate between being positive and negative.


6.4     Statistical Power

As a final exercise, we conduct two types of power analyses. The results are in the Appendix

in Tables B6 and B7. First, for our main outcomes and four different models as indicated in

the first column, Table B6 shows the one-sided limits of 90 percent (column 2) and 95 percent

(column 3) confidence intervals. For example, the model in the first row of Panel A in column
 32 Note   that we did not ask parents about their children's current sports activities or weight.
 33 The   notes for Table 6 provide further details on the construction of the synthetic control group.


                                                          24
(3) indicates that increases in sports club membership rates by more than 2.8 percentage points

as a result of C2SC lie outside the 90 percent confidence interval. The models in Panel B and C

can exclude increases of 2.7 and 3.3 percentage points, respectively. Note that, as a precaution,

we excluded the last surveyed cohort (2011/2012) from our main models. This cohort was not

treated and is thus a control group, but it could be hypothesized that disappointment effects

might confound the main effects (see footnote 9). However, to increase our statistical power,

we re-include that cohort in the models in Panel D. As seen, here we can exclude increases

in membership rates by more than 0.5 percentage points. Similarly, this model also has the

tightest bounds to exclude increases in weekly hours of sport of more than 0.005 as well as

decreases in overweight of more than 0.008 percentage points. In the next subsection, we will

use administrative health examination data which can exclude overweight decreases by more

than 0.07 percentage points and motor disorder decreases by more than 0.43 percentage points

at the 90 percent statistical certainty level.

   Second, Table B7 shows the results of 36 power simulations with 1,000 replications each (see

notes to the table for specific details). Again, the first column indicates our model specifications

and outcome variables. Columns (1) to (3) simulate the ability of our models to identify one-

sided treatment effects for 3 to 5 units with 90 percent statistical certainty. Specifically, we

artificially add pseudo treatment effects to our models--for example, increases of 0.3, 0.4. as

well as 0.5 hours of sport when our outcome of interest is weekly hours of sports --and then run

the models 1000 times per specification. The numbers in Table B7 indicate how many of these

1,000 replications correctly reject the null hypothesis of no treatment effects at the 10 percent

significance level in one-sided tests. For example, the simulation in the third row of Panel A

in column (2) indicates that our baseline model in Table 2 can identify statistically significant

decreases in the overweight rate of 4 percentage points in 88 percent of all cases. Rules of

thumb of power analyses suggest that 80 percent is a solid threshold for well-powered models

(cf. Griffith and Feyman, 2020). As seen, all our models exceed this threshold in column (3).

The model in Panel D with extended power through the inclusion of the 2011/2012 cohort also

reaches this threshold for all three outcomes and an artificial treatment effect of 4 units (column

2). It is also noteworthy that neither the method of synthetic controls (Panel C) nor the inclusion

of additional controls (Panel B) appear to increase our statistical power substantially.




                                                 25
7    Additional Evidence Based on Official Health Examination Data

In this section, we use supplemental school health examination data, obtained from one of

the 13 counties in Saxony. Paragraph 26a of the Saxony School Law (S¨
                                                                    achsisches Schulgesetz­

S¨                                                       ¨
 achsSchulG ) stipulates that the Public Health Service (Offentlicher Gesundheitsdienst ), to-

gether with the principal, the teachers, parents, and school children, carry out or participate in

School Health Care (Schulgesundheitspflege ). An integral part of this is the physical examina-

tion carried out by a state-employed physician for all children in the second and sixth grade of

all schools to identify and prevent diseases and development disorders among children (Schul-

reihenuntersuchung ). The examinations are mandatory and all children are legally obligated

to attend school in Germany; home schooling does not exist. The state-employed physician,

with the help of physician assistants, measure the height and weight of all children, check im-

munizations, and test for development or motor skill disorders. They write recommendations

for parents, schedule follow-up visits, and refer children to specialists or therapists if necessary.

    We obtained school medical examination data for the universe of sixth graders in one

county. The county has a population of about 300,000 inhabitants, where ten percent are chil-

dren and adolescents aged 6-18 (Statistisches Landesamt, Freistaat Sachsen, 2020). The data

include health examination data of sixth graders in school years 2009/10, 2010/11 vs. 2012/13,

2013/14. Hence, the first two cohorts were not affected by C2SC, whereas the last two co-

horts were part of the second and third round of the C2SC initiative, when the children were

third graders in school years 2009/10 and 2010/11. That is, the treated cohorts received the

vouchers at the end of January 2010 and January 2011 and were physically examined between

mid-March and mid-July 2012 and 2013, slightly more than two years after the beginning of

the C2SC initiative.34

    Because all data represent objective diagnoses by a small number of state-employed physi-

cians, measurement errors should play a negligible role (Salm and Schunk, 2012). In terms

of outcome variables, we rely on the coding used by the state-employed physician. For ex-

ample, the standard body mass index (BMI) cut-offs to determine overweightness and obesity

for adults do not apply to children. Guidelines determine overweightness and obesity in per-
  34 We only consider students who were in the sixth grade at the time of the examination and who started primary

school in 2004, 2005, 2007, and 2008 (that is, we exclude students who skipped or repeated a grade). We also focus on
children in "regular" schools and exclude those in special schools for the disabled or those with specific disorders.
This is a census of all children. When children are sick on the day of the examination, there is a follow-up and they
will be examined on the next possible date. Moreover, there are basically no missings in the data; we have missing
for BMI per year for a cohort of about 2.5 thousand children.


                                                         26
centiles relative to the age in months of the child. The state-employed physicians in Saxony

follow the guidelines of the "German Working Group on Child and Youth Obesity" (Arbeits-

gemeinschaft Adipositas im Kindes- und Jugendalter (AGA) , 2019), who refer to Kromeyer-

Hauschild et al. (2001, 2015). We use the diagnoses recorded by the state-employed physicians.

The guidelines define children as overweight if they fall between the 90th and 97th percentile

of the age-specific BMI distribution, as obese if they exceed the 97th percentile, and as under-

weight if they fall below the 10th percentile of the age-specific BMI distribution. The major

advantage of these data is the objective nature of the health and motor skills measures.

    Table C1 (Appendix) shows that the data include 6,794 observations. Half of all children are

female and the average age is 12.1 years (145 age-months as recorded in the data). The average

height is 154 centimeters (5 foot) and the average weight is 46 kilograms (101 pounds). The

calculated BMI varies between 11 and 42. A total of 11 percent of all children are overweight

and underweight, respectively, and six percent are obese. Eight percent had hypertension, 11

percent a poor posture, 0.4 percent motor skill disorders, and 3.6 percent emotional disorders.

    Next, we compare the objective health measures of the two treated cohorts against the two

control cohorts. For causal inference of the C2SC initiative, we have to assume the absence of

cohort effects. Consequently, we interpret the estimates below with caution.


                                  [Insert Figure 8 about here]


    Figures 8a to d compare the share of sixth graders who are (a) obese or (b) overweight, and

who have (c) motor skill disorders and (d) emotional disorders in the treatment and control co-

horts. Because our main findings do not deliver any evidence of significant long-term effects on

physical activity, we hypothesize that there will not be much evidence of health improvements

either. As seen, Figure 8 confirms these priors. We obtain the same finding when regressing the

objective health outcomes on an indicator for the treatment cohorts and a set of pre-determined

control variables in Table C2 (Appendix). Overall, the supplemental school health examination

data confirm our findings based on the YOLO survey.



8   Discussion and Conclusion

Integrating the habit of regular physical activity into our daily lives is generally considered a

worthwhile objective (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011; European Commis-

                                               27
sion, 2016; World Health Organization, 2018). Empirical studies from different disciplines have

linked physical activity to a wide array of positive outcomes, including lower risks of chronic

diseases, better sleep, and normal development of children (Piercy et al., 2018). Economic stud-

ies provide evidence that physical activity is associated with lower obesity rates (Cawley et al.,

2013), improved educational performance (Stevenson, 2010; Fricke et al., 2018)35 , and better

labor market outcomes (Lechner, 2009; Stevenson, 2010). It is not only individuals who may

benefit from regular exercise, but also society as a whole. People who exercise regularly might

be more resilient to stress (Childs and de Wit, 2014), show better life skill development (Gould

                                              ¨
and Carson, 2008), higher levels of trust (Schuttoff et al., 2018), and have a higher degree of

social capital (Di Bartolomeo and Papa, 2019). At the same time, a comprehensive literature

suggests that habit formation plays a key role in adopting a healthier lifestyle; the earlier in life

people start being physically active, the stronger the long-term effects (Hallal et al., 2006; Lally

and Gardner, 2013; Belot et al., 2016; Loewenstein et al., 2016).

   This paper evaluates a policy aimed at increasing the physical activity levels of third graders

in the long term. The hope and the policy's intention was to encourage children, especially

those from disadvantaged backgrounds, to adopt the habit of exercising regularly in order to

improve physical fitness. However, in order not to discriminate against anyone, vouchers were

distributed among all 33,000 third graders in the German state of Saxony in January 2009. The

treatment was repeated twice with the next two cohorts in January 2010 and 2011. Redeemed

vouchers provided free sports club membership of up to one year. The findings produced

by this policy initiative differ from existing evidence as the initiative represents one of the

very few quasi-experimental settings explicitly targeting children. What is more, most existing

field experiments focus on gyms and "only" strive to change adults' habits for a few weeks or

months, while this treatment lasted for an entire year. Moreover, the empirical setting allows

us to estimate long-run effects seven to nine years post-intervention.

   Drawing on a unique register-based survey and difference-in-differences approaches, our

findings demonstrate that those who were treated about a decade ago still recall the initia-

tive today. They also redeemed the vouchers at significantly higher rates. However, the pro-

gram was not effective in raising levels of regular physical activity and in reducing overweight

among youth. We find neither significant nor suggestive evidence that the policy attracted a

substantial share of new members. We discuss several potential explanations for the ineffec-
 35 However,   there is also some evidence of negative effects (Golsteyn et al., 2020).


                                                          28
tiveness of the program. Supply-side constraints are unlikely to be a driving force as most

children could choose from many sports clubs in close proximity. Rather, demand-side expla-

nations such as additional monetary costs (e.g., equipment) and high non-monetary costs (e.g.,

parental time) are the most plausible explanations for why the program did not increase sports

club memberships. We find that it was primarily children from advantaged socio-demographic

backgrouds who had already been sports club members who redeemed the vouchers, question-

ing the effectiveness of untargeted voucher programs (see also Schwerdt et al., 2012). In line

with our finding that the voucher program was ineffective in encouraging a significant share

of children to become members of sports clubs and exercise regularly, we find no change in

health behaviors or objective health using official health examination data either in the short-

or long-run. Empirically evaluating which measures are effective in encouraging youth to inte-

grate physical activity into their daily lives will certainly remain a fruitful and highly relevant

research field across the social science disciplines.




                                                 29
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic control methods for comparative
 case studies: Estimating the effect of California's tobacco control program. Journal of the
 American Statistical Association 105(490), 493­505.

Abadie, A., G. W. Imbens, S. Athey, and J. M. Wooldridge (2017). When should you adjust
 standard errors for clustering? NBER Working Paper 24003.

Akee, R., E. Simeonova, W. Copeland, A. Angold, and E. J. Costello (2013). Young adult obesity
 and household income: Effects of unconditional cash transfers. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics 5(2), 1­28.

Anderson, M. L. and D. A. Matsa (2011). Are restaurants really supersizing America? American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(1), 152­188.

Angelucci, M., S. Prina, H. Royer, and A. Samek (2020). When incentives backfire: Spillover
 effects in food choice. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(4), 66­95.

Arbeitsgemeinschaft Adipositas im Kindes- und Jugendalter (AGA) (2019). Definition der Adi-
  positas. https://aga.adipositas-gesellschaft.de, last accessed on May 4, 2019.

Augurzky, B., T. K. Bauer, A. R. Reichert, C. M. Schmidt, and H. Tauchmann (2018). Habit
 formation, obesity, and cash rewards. Ruhr Economic Papers 750.

Babcock, P., K. Bedard, G. Charness, J. Hartman, and H. Royer (2015). Letting down the team?
  Social effects of team incentives. Journal of the European Economic Association 13(5), 841­870.

Belot, M., J. James, and P. Nolen (2016). Incentives and children's dietary choice: A field exper-
  iment in primary schools. Journal of Health Economics 50, 213­229.
                                                                   ¨
Breuer, C. and S. Feiler (2015). Sportvereine in Deutschland ­ ein Uberblick. In C. Breuer (Ed.),
  Sportentwicklungsbericht 2013/2014. Analyse zur Situation der Sportvereine in Deutschland, pp.
          ¨
  1­42. Koln: Sportverlag Strauß.

Breuer, C., S. Feiler, and P. Wicker (2015). Sport clubs in Germany. In C. Breuer, R. Hoek-
  man, S. Nagel, and H. van der Werff (Eds.), Sport clubs in Europe, pp. 187­208. Switzerland:
  International Publishing Springer.

Breuer, C., R. Hoekman, S. Nagel, and H. v. d. Werff (Eds.) (2015). Sport Clubs in Europe: A
  Cross-National Comparative Perspective. Sports Economics, Management and Policy. Springer
  International Publishing.

Carrera, M., H. Royer, M. Stehr, and J. Sydnor (2018). Can financial incentives help people
  trying to establish new habits? Experimental evidence with new gym members. Journal of
  Health Economics 58(C), 202­214.

Carrera, M., H. Royer, M. F. Stehr, and J. R. Sydnor (2020). The structure of health incentives:
  Evidence from a field experiment. Management Science 66(5), 1783­2290.

Cawley, J., D. Frisvold, and C. Meyerhoefer (2013). The impact of physical education on obesity
  among elementary school children. Journal of Health Economics 32(4), 743 ­ 755.

Cawley, J., C. Meyerhoefer, and D. Newhouse (2007). The impact of state physical education
  requirements on youth physical activity and overweight. Health Economics 16(12), 1287­1301.




                                               30
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2011). Strategies to prevent obesity and other chronic
  diseases: The CDC Guide to strategies to increase physical activity in the community. Atlanta, GA:
  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Childs, E. and H. de Wit (2014). Regular exercise is associated with emotional resilience to acute
  stress in healthy adults. Frontiers in Physiology 5, 161.

Courtemanche, C. (2009). Rising cigarette prices and rising obesity: Coincidence or unintended
  consequence? Journal of Health Economics 28(4), 781­798.

Courtemanche, C. (2011). A silver lining? The connection between gasoline prices and obesity.
  Economic Inquiry 49(3), 935­957.

Courtemanche, C., G. Heutel, and P. McAlvanah (2015). Impatience, incentives and obesity.
  The Economic Journal 125(582), 1­31.

Currie, J., S. DellaVigna, E. Moretti, and V. Pathania (2010). The effect of fast food restaurants
 on obesity and weight gain. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(3), 32­63.

Currie, J. and F. Gahvari (2008). Transfers in cash and in-kind: Theory meets the data. Journal
 of Economic Literature 46(2), 333­383.

Cutler, D., E. L. Glaeser, and J. M. Shapiro (2003). Why have Americans become more obese?
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(3), 93­118.

DellaVigna, S. and U. Malmendier (2006). Paying not to go to the gym. American Economic
 Review 96(3), 694­719.

Di Bartolomeo, G. and S. Papa (2019). The effects of physical activity on social interactions: The
  case of trust and trustworthiness. Journal of Sports Economics 20(1), 50­71.

Dragone, D. and N. R. Ziebarth (2017). Non-separable time preferences, novelty consump-
  tion and body weight: Theory and evidence from the East German transition to capitalism.
  Journal of Health Economics 51, 41 ­ 65.

Dubois, P., R. Griffith, and A. Nevo (2014). Do prices and attributes explain international dif-
 ferences in food purchases? American Economic Review 104(3), 832­867.

Dunn, R. A. (2010). The effect of fast-food availability on obesity: An analysis by gender, race,
 and residential location. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 92(4), 1149­1164.

European Commission (2016). Monitoring the activities of the EU Platform for Action on Diet,
  Physical Activity and Health. Annual Report 2016. Brussels: European Commission.

Felfe, C. and R. Lalive (2018). Does early child care affect children's development? Journal of
  Public Economics 159(C), 33 ­ 53.

Fletcher, J. M., D. E. Frisvold, and N. Tefft (2010). The effects of soft drink taxes on child and
  adolescent consumption and weight outcomes. Journal of Public Economics 94(11-12), 967 ­
  974.

Fricke, H., M. Lechner, and A. Steinmayr (2018). The effects of incentives to exercise on student
  performance in college. Economics of Education Review 66(C), 14­39.

Frieden, T. R., W. Dietz, and J. Collins (2010). Reducing childhood obesity through policy
  change: Acting now to prevent obesity. Health Affairs 29(3), 357­363.



                                                31
                      ¨
Friedrichsen, J., T. Konig, and R. Schmacker (2018). Social image concerns and welfare take-up.
  Journal of Public Economics 168, 174­192.

                                                             ¨ Sachsens Drittkl¨
German Olympic Sports Confederation (2011). Sportgutscheine fur                assler.
 News, DOSB-Presse.

German Olympic Sports Confederation (2017). Mitgliederentwicklung in Sportvereinen 2000 bis
 2015. Bestand, Ver¨
                   anderungen und Perspektiven. Frankfurt am Main: German Olympic Sports
 Confederation.

                                                                 ¨
Goebel, J., M. M. Grabka, S. Liebig, M. Kroh, D. Richter, C. Schroder, and J. Schupp (2019). The
 German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). Jahrbucher  ¨     fur
                                                        ¨ National¨okonomie und Statistik 239(2),
 345­360.

Goebel, J., C. Krekel, T. Tiefenbach, and N. Ziebarth (2015). How natural disasters can affect
 environmental concerns, risk aversion, and even politics: Evidence from Fukushima and
 three European countries. Journal of Population Economics 28(4), 1137­1180.

Golsteyn, B. H. H., M. W. J. Jansen, D. H. H. Van Kann, and A. M. C. Verhagen (2020). Does
 stimulating physical activity affect school performance? Journal of Policy Analysis and Man-
 agement 39(1), 64­95.

Gould, D. and S. Carson (2008). Life skills development through sport: current status and
 future directions. International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology 1(1), 58­78.

Graf, S. and M. Cecchini (2019). Current and past trends in physical activity in four OECD
  countries: Empirical results from time use surveys in Canada, France, Germany and the
  United States. OECD Health Working Papers 112.

Griffith, K. N. and Y. Feyman (2020). Amplifying the noise: The dangers of post hoc power
  analyses. Journal of Surgical Research forthcoming.

                                    ¨
Griffith, R., R. Lluberas, and M. Luhrmann     (2016). Gluttony and sloth? Calories, labor market
  activity and the rise of obesity. Journal of the European Economic Association 14(6), 1253­1286.

Grossman, M., E. Tekin, and R. Wada (2014). Food prices and body fatness among youths.
  Economics & Human Biology 12, 4­19.

Hainmueller, J. (2012). Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting method
 to produce balanced samples in observational studies. Political Analysis 20(1), 25­46.

Hallal, P. C., C. G. Victora, M. R. Azevedo, and J. C. K. Wells (2006). Adolescent physical activity
 and Health: A Systematic Review. Sports Medicine 36(12), 1019­1030.

Imbens, G. W. and J. M. Wooldridge (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of pro-
  gram evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature 47(1), 5­86.

Jeitschko, T. D. and R. A. Pecchenino (2006). Do you want fries with that? An exploration of
   serving size, social welfare, and our waistlines. Economic Inquiry 44(3), 442­450.

 ¨
Jurges, H., S. Reinhold, and M. Salm (2011). Does schooling affect health behavior? Evidence
   from the educational expansion in Western Germany. Economics of Education Review 30(5),
   862 ­ 872. Special Issue on Education and Health.

Just, D. R. and J. Price (2013). Using incentives to encourage healthy eating in children. Journal
  of Human Resources 48(4), 855­872.



                                                32
Kesternich, I., B. Siflinger, J. P. Smith, and J. K. Winter (2015). Individual behavior as a path-
  way between early-life shocks and adult health: Evidence from hunger episodes in post-war
  Germany. The Economic Journal 125(588), F372­F393.

Kreissportbund Landkreis  Leipzig (2019).     Projekt:     'KOMM!      Engagier
  Dich'.              https://www.ksb-ll.de/kinder-jugendsport-leipzig/
  komm-in-den-sportverein-landkreis-leipzig/, last accessed on May 7, 2019.

Kromeyer-Hauschild, K., M. A., and M. Wabitsch (2015). Referenzwerte fur   ¨ den Body-Mass-
         ¨ Kinder, Jugendliche und Erwachsene in Deutschland. Anpassung der AGA-BMI-
  Index fur
  Referenz im Altersbereich von 15 bis 18 Jahren. Adipositas 149, 807­818.

                                                                              ¨ den Body-
Kromeyer-Hauschild, K., M. Wabitsch, D. Kunze, and et al. (2001). Perzentile fur
               ¨ das Kindes- und Jugendalter unter Heranziehung verschiedener deutscher
  Mass-Index fur
  Stichproben. Monatsschrift Kinderheilkunde 9, 123­127.

Lakdawalla, D. and T. Philipson (2009). The growth of obesity and technological change. Eco-
  nomics and Human Biology 7(3), 283­293.

Lally, P. and B. Gardner (2013). Promoting habit formation. Health Psychology Review 7(sup1),
  S137­S158.

Landessportbund Sachsen (2019).        Kampagne 'KOMM! Engagier Dich' Engage-
  mentf¨orderung im s¨
                     achsischen Sport.   https://www.sport-fuer-sachsen.de/
  sport-und-gesellschaft/engagementfoerderung/, last accessed on May 4,
  2019.

Lechner, M. (2009). Long-run labour market and health effects of individual sports activities.
  Journal of Health Economics 28(4), 839­854.

Loewenstein, G., J. Price, and K. Volpp (2016). Habit formation in children: Evidence from
  incentives for healthy eating. Journal of Health Economics 45, 47­54.

Peter, F. H. and C. K. Spiess (2016). Family Instability and Locus of Control in Adolescence. The
  B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 16(3), 1439­1471.

Piercy, K. L., R. P. Troiano, R. M. Ballard, S. A. Carlson, J. E. Fulton, D. A. Galuska, S. M. George,
  and R. D. Olson (2018). The physical activity guidelines for Americans. JAMA 320(19),
  2020­2028.

Prentice-Dunn, H. and S. Prentice-Dunn (2012). Physical activity, sedentary behavior, and
  childhood obesity: A review of cross-sectional studies. Psychology, Health & Medicine 17(3),
  255­273.

Prina, S. and H. Royer (2014). The importance of parental knowledge: Evidence from weight
  report cards in Mexico. Journal of Health Economics 37, 232 ­ 247.

Reichert, A. R. (2015). Obesity, weight loss, and employment prospects: Evidence from a ran-
  domized trial. Journal of Human Resources 50(3), 759­810.

Roodman, D., M. Ø. Nielsen, J. G. MacKinnon, and M. D. Webb (2010). Fast and wild: Bootstrap
  inference in stata using boottest. The Stata Journal 19(1), 4­60.

Royer, H., M. Stehr, and J. Sydnor (2015). Incentives, commitments, and habit formation in
  exercise: Evidence from a field experiment with workers at a fortune-500 company. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7(3), 51­84.


                                                 33
Salm, M. and D. Schunk (2012, 12). The Relationship between Child Health, Developmental
  Gaps, and Parental Education: Evidence from Administrative Data. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 10(6), 1425­1449.

   ¨
Schuttoff, U., T. Pawlowski, P. Downward, and M. Lechner (2018). Sports participation and
  social capital formation during adolescence. Social Science Quarterly 99(2), 683­698.

Schwerdt, G., D. Messer, L. Woessmann, and S. C. Wolter (2012). The impact of an adult ed-
  ucation voucher program: Evidence from a randomized field experiment. Journal of Public
  Economics 96(7-8), 569 ­ 583.

Siedler, T., J. Schupp, C. K. Spiess, and G. G. Wagner (2009). The German Socio-Economic Panel
  (SOEP) as reference data set. Schmollers Jahrbuch 129(2), 367­374.

Statistisches Bundesamt (2020). GENESIS-ONLINE: Die Datenbank des Statistischen Bunde-
  samtes. https://www-genesis.destatis.de/genesis/online, last accessed on June
  26, 2020.

Statistisches Landesamt, Freistaat Sachsen (2020). Bev¨
                                                      olkerungsstand des Freistaatest Sachsen
  nach Alter und Geschlecht. https://www.statistik.sachsen.de/download/100_
  Berichte-A/A_I_3_j18_SN.pdf, last accessed on March 26, 2020.

Stevenson, B. (2010). Beyond the classroom: Using Title IX to measure the return to high school
  sports. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2), 284­301.

Strulik, H. (2014). A mass phenomenon: The social evolution of obesity. Journal of Health
  Economics 33(C), 113­125.

World Health Organization (2017). Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. Imple-
 mentation plan: Executive summary. Geneva: World Health Organization. Licence: CC BY-
 NC-SA 3.0 IGO, https://www.who.int/end-childhood-obesity/publications/
 echo-plan-executive-summary/en/, last accessed on March 26, 2020.

World Health Organization (2018). Physical Activity. https://www.who.int/news-room/
 fact-sheets/detail/physical-activity last accessed March 26, 2020.

World Health Organization (2020). Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health:
 Childhood Overweight and Obesity. https://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/
 childhood/en/, last accessed on March 26, 2020.

 ¨
Zuchner, I. and B. Arnoldt (2012). Sport von Kinder und Jugendlichen in Ganztagsschule und
  Sportverein. K¨orper, Bewegung und Schule 3(6), 333­383.




                                              34
Figure 1: Development of Outcome Variables in Treatment and Control States across Cohorts

           Panel A: Awareness & take-up                                   Panel B: Physical activity
                  a) Program known                                         d) Sports club member




                  b) Voucher received                                      e) Weekly hours of sport




                 c) Voucher redeemed                                            f) Overweight




Notes: The figures display unadjusted trends of the main outcome variables by the school year in which YOLO
respondents attended the third grade, before and after the start of the C2SC initiative. The treatment state is Saxony
and control states are Brandenburg and Thuringia. N = 13,334.
Source: YOLO survey.



                                                         35
                      Figure 2: Effect Heterogeneity across Socio-Demographics

           Panel A: Awareness & take-up                                   Panel B: Physical activity
                  a) Program known                                         d) Sports club member




                  b) Voucher received                                      e) Weekly hours of sport




                 c) Voucher redeemed                                            f) Overweight




Notes: The figures display effect heterogeneity estimates for all six outcomes and six binary stratification variables
along with 95 percent confidence bands, based on equation (3).
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                         36
                            Figure 3: Effect Heterogeneity across Cohorts

           Panel A: Awareness & take-up                                Panel B: Physical activity
                 a) Program known                                       d) Sports club member




                 b) Voucher received                                   e) Weekly hours of sport




                c) Voucher redeemed                                          f) Overweight




Notes: The figures display effect heterogeneity estimates for all six outcomes, by affected cohorts along with 95
percent confidence bands, based on equation (2) with municipality fixed effects.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                       37
                           Figure 4: Sports Club Membership by Age

         a) Treatment vs. control cohorts                     b) Treatment vs. control states




Notes: The figures display retrospectively reported sports club membership rates by child age. Figure
(a) only uses data for Saxony and compares treatment cohorts (third graders in school years 2009/2010,
2010/2011, 2011/2012) to control cohorts (third graders in previous school years). Figure (b) only uses
data for cohorts that attended the third grade in 2009/2010, 2010/2011, 2011/2012 and compares the
treatment state (Saxony) to the control states (Brandenburg and Thuringia).
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                  38
                            Figure 5: Suggestive Evidence on Mechanisms

               a) Tried new sport discipline(s)              c) Could not afford membership w/o voucher




       b) Could redeem voucher for desired discipline        d) Parents happy to save money b/c of voucher




            e) Transport as a supply-side barrier             f) Mode of Transportation (Urban vs. Rural)




Notes: Figures a) to d) display the shares of respondents who answered the questions in the panel header with yes
or no. The sample is conditional on respondents who said that they received the voucher. Figures e) and f) relate to
the question "How did you get to the sports club where you redeemed your voucher?" (multiple answers possible).
The sample is conditional on respondents who said that they received the voucher and remembered the mode of
transport they used to get to the sports club.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                        39
            Figure 6: Supply-Side Restrictions? Number of Sports Clubs per ZIP Code

                                 a) Distribution of the number of sports clubs




                           b) Distribution of the number of sports club disciplines




Notes: The figures display the distribution of the number of sports clubs and available disciplines across ZIP codes.
Numbers are based on Saxony's 6,665 YOLO respondents from our main sample with valid ZIP code information.
Source: YOLO survey, addresses of sports clubs in Saxony.




                                                         40
                                     Figure 7: Further Outcomes

                                           a) Placebo outcomes




                                         b) Additional outcomes




Notes: The figures display C2SC treatment effects on (a) placebo outcomes and (b) additional outcomes, using
equation (2) with municipality fixed effects.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                    41
                  Figure 8: Objective Health Outcomes: Treatment vs. Control Cohorts

                           a) Obese                                    c) Motor skill disorder
            .15




                                                                 .15
            .1




                                                                 .1
      Percent




                                                           Percent
            .05




                                                                 .05
            0




                                                                 0
                               Control cohorts                                    Control cohorts
                               Treated cohorts                                    Treated cohorts




                         b) Overweight                                 d) Emotional disorder
            .15




                                                                 .15
            .1




                                                                 .1
      Percent




                                                           Percent
            .05




                                                                 .05
            0




                                                                 0




                               Control cohorts                                    Control cohorts
                               Treated cohorts                                    Treated cohorts




Notes: The treated cohorts comprise those who started primary school in 2007 and 2008, received the voucher at
the end of January 2010 and 2011, and had their sixth grade school medical examination between March and July
of 2012 and 2013 (Schulreihenuntersuchung ). Control cohorts comprise those who started primary school in 2004
and 2005, never received a voucher, and had their sixth grade school medical examination between March and July
of 2009 and 2010. The panels display the share of students with the diagnoses indicated along with 95 percent
confidence bands.
                                                                      ¨
Source: School Medical Examination Data from Public Health Service (Offentlicher Gesundheitsdienst ).




                                                      42
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

 Variable                      Mean      Std. Dev.    Min.    Max.
                                (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)

 Background characteristics
 Age at survey              17.49           1.43       14       20
 Female                     0.57            0.49       0        1
 City                       0.61            0.49       0        1
 Academic track             0.50            0.50       0        1
 Newspaper at home          0.58            0.49       0        1
 Art at home                0.73            0.45       0        1
 Outcomes
 Program known                  0.19        0.39        0        1
 Voucher received               0.10        0.30        0        1
 Voucher redeemed               0.06        0.24        0        1
 Member of sports club          0.42        0.49        0       1
 Weekly hours of sport          4.67        4.18        0       31
 Overweight (BMI > 25)          0.16        0.36        0       1
 Treatment
 Treatment state                0.54        0.50        0        1
 Treatment group                0.38        0.48        0        1

Notes: The table displays descriptive statistics for the main analysis
sample. N = 13,334.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                 43
Table 2: Evaluation of Sports Club Voucher Program--Main DD Results

                                    Base     Twoway      + municip.
                                    DD         FE           FE
                                     (1)       (2)          (3)

      Panel A: Awareness & take-up
      Program known
      Voucher                0.272***         0.272***     0.276***
                              (0.014)          (0.014)      (0.014)
      Voucher received
      Voucher                     0.200***    0.201***     0.202***
                                   (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)
      Voucher redeemed
      Voucher                     0.122***    0.122***     0.122***
                                   (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)
      Panel B: Physical activity and overweight
      Member of sports club
      Voucher                     0.004    0.003             0.009
                                 (0.019)  (0.019)           (0.019)
      Weekly hours of sport
      Voucher                       -0.069     -0.082       -0.002
                                   (0.161)    (0.159)       (0.159)
      Overweight
      Voucher                       0.005      0.006         0.004
                                   (0.016)    (0.016)       (0.016)
      N                            13,334      13,334       13,334
      Notes: The table displays the C2SC effects on various outcomes.
      Robust standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the
      municipality level (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01). Each column
      in each panel represents one DD estimate. All regressions in-
      clude state and cohort fixed effects (except (1), which only in-
      cludes a dummy for the treatment group and a post-dummy).
      The sample includes individuals who attended the third grade
      between 2006 and 2010 in the German states of Saxony, Branden-
      burg, or Thuringia. The treatment indicator Voucher is one for
      respondents who attended third grade in Saxony in school years
      2008/09, 2009/10, or 2010/11. Column (1) is based on equation
      (1) and column (2) on equation (2), while column (3) adds mu-
      nicipality fixed effects to equation (2). Column (3) is the main
      specification that is the basis for the subsequent analyses.
      Source: YOLO survey.




                                    44
         Table 3: Sports Club Membership Across Child Ages

                                Children
                    All (reference)    Parent sample      Parents' response
                           (1)              (2)                  (3)

 Member of sports club at age 6
 Voucher             -0.019                 0.032                -0.017
                    (0.016)                (0.046)              (0.051)
 Member of sports club at age 7
 Voucher             -0.025                 0.014                0.016
                    (0.019)                (0.044)              (0.045)
 Member of sports club at age 8
 Voucher             -0.023                 0.004                0.032
                    (0.021)                (0.060)              (0.053)
 Member of sports club at age 9
 Voucher             -0.007                 0.077                0.011
                    (0.018)                (0.056)              (0.049)
 Member of sports club at age 10
 Voucher             0.014                  0.061                -0.010
                    (0.015)                (0.054)              (0.047)
 Member of sports club at age 11
 Voucher             0.003                  0.029                -0.023
                    (0.018)                (0.058)              (0.056)
 Member of sports club at age 12
 Voucher             0.008                  -0.023               -0.025
                    (0.016)                (0.052)              (0.057)
 N                  12,476                   1,942                2,045
Notes: The table displays the effect of the sports club voucher program on var-
ious outcomes from the parent and child questionnaires. Column (1) uses the
full sample of youth, whereas column (2) conditions on youth whose parents
also responded (column [3]) to make column (2) and (3) directly comparable.
Robust standard errors allowing for clustering at the municipality level are in
parentheses (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01). Each column in each panel rep-
resents one DD estimate. Models are based on equation (2) with municipality
fixed effects.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                      45
                                                                               Table 4: Robustness

                            Temporal                                Regional                         Individual                   Treatment               Controls          Placebo
                                                           w/o        w/o                                         w/o older      1st                                         BB vs.
              07-10      00-10      06-11      06-09       BB         TN          all     serious      sibl.        sibl.      grade     current     + Xics    weighted       TN
               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)       (13)       (14)         (15)

 Panel A: Awareness & take-up
 Program known
 Voucher 0.245*** 0.279*** 0.265***           0.337***   0.271***   0.279***   0.263***   0.282***   0.279***      0.266***   0.264***   0.279***   0.287***    0.280***     -0.007
            (0.011)  (0.014)  (0.011)          (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.017)       (0.021)    (0.015)    (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.009)
 Voucher received
 Voucher 0.186***       0.203***   0.196***   0.262***   0.202***   0.202***   0.196***   0.205***   0.195***      0.199***   0.196***   0.197***   0.210***    0.209***      0.000
            (0.010)      (0.011)    (0.010)    (0.017)    (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.013)    (0.011)       (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.004)
 Voucher redeemed
 Voucher 0.111***       0.123***   0.118***   0.159***   0.122***   0.122***   0.117***   0.124***   0.116***      0.118***   0.116***   0.119***   0.125***    0.127***      0.001
            (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)       (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.006)    (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.003)
 Panel B: Physical activity & overweight
 Member of sports club
 Voucher     0.011       0.006    -0.014       0.016       0.017      0.004      0.010      0.014      0.017        0.004       0.010      -0.001     0.024       0.013       0.018
            (0.019)     (0.019)   (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.024)    (0.022)    (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.020)      (0.034)     (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.019)     (0.021)     (0.028)
 Weekly hours of sport
 Voucher    0.177      -0.054      -0.148      0.052       0.086      -0.034    -0.098     -0.027      0.030       -0.151       0.030      0.096      0.085       0.034       0.149
           (0.179)    (0.164)      (0.119)    (0.162)     (0.185)    (0.189)    (0.154)    (0.174)    (0.169)      (0.205)     (0.130)    (0.139)    (0.150)     (0.184)     (0.204)
 Overweight
 Voucher    0.014        0.010      0.005      0.006       0.018      -0.004     0.000      0.005      -0.002       0.031       0.006      0.005     -0.001       -0.003      0.022
          (0.022)       (0.015)    (0.010)    (0.016)     (0.022)    (0.018)    (0.015)    (0.019)    (0.016)      (0.029)     (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.024)
 N           11,686      13,506     16,082     10,044     9,572      10,973     14,720     10,836     12,481        5,891      13,421     13,859     12,114      12,004      6,123


Notes: The table tests the robustness of the C2SC effects for all main outcomes. Robust standard errors allowing for clustering at the municipality level are in parentheses (* p<0.1,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01). All regressions include state and cohort fixed effects. The main specification includes individuals who attended the third grade in the years 2006-2010 in
Saxony, Brandenburg (BB), or Thuringia (TN). The treatment indicator is based on the year and state when an individual attended the third grade (except in columns [11] and
[12]). The column headers indicate the type of robustness check, see main text for details. "Sibl." stands for "sibling." Column (8)--"serious"--conditions on respondents who
spent at least 10 minutes on the survey and whose registry and self-reported information match exactly. Column (9) excludes respondents from the pre-treatment cohorts whose
siblings also received a YOLO invitation. Column (10) excludes youth with an older sibling.
Source: YOLO survey.
  Table 5: Using Parents' Responses for Program-Related Outcomes

                                  Children
                    All (reference)    Parent sample     Parents' response
                           (1)              (2)                 (3)

 Program known
 Voucher               0.276***              0.322***         0.271***
                        (0.014)               (0.017)          (0.024)
 Voucher received
 Voucher               0.202***              0.233***         0.275***
                        (0.011)               (0.017)          (0.025)
 Voucher redeemed
 Voucher          0.122***                   0.144***         0.167***
                   (0.006)                    (0.011)          (0.021)
 N                 13,334                      2,045            2,045
Notes: The table displays the effect of the sports club voucher program on our
main outcomes using information from the parent and child questionnaires.
Column (1) uses the full sample of youth, whereas column (2) conditions on
youth whose parents also responded (column [3]) to make column (2) and
(3) directly comparable. Robust standard errors allowing for clustering at the
municipality level are in parentheses (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01). Models
are based on equation (2) with municipality fixed effects.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                      47
         Table 6: Synthetic Control Group Results

                                   Synthetic control
                            Version 1            Version 2
                               (1)                   (2)

Panel A: Awareness & take-up
Program known
Voucher                0.285***                     0.280***
                        (0.017)                      (0.017)
Voucher received
Voucher                      0.207***               0.203***
                              (0.014)                (0.014)
Voucher redeemed
Voucher                      0.127***               0.123***
                              (0.007)                (0.008)
Panel B: Physical activity and overweight
Member of sports club
Voucher                   -0.008                    -0.016
                          (0.022)                   (0.021)
Weekly hours of sport
Voucher                      -0.048                 -0.206
                             (0.202)                (0.290)
Overweight
Voucher                      -0.017                 -0.012
                             (0.023)                (0.021)
Ncohort-municipality           435                    435

Notes: The table displays the effects of the sports club voucher
program on our main outcomes, based on municipality-level re-
gressions and a synthetic control group approach. The synthetic
control group is based on "entropy balancing" (Hainmueller,
2012) and reweights the municipalities in the control states such
that the two pre-treatment cohorts have the same means than the
treatment state with respect to specific variables. Version 1 con-
siders only member of sports club, weekly hours of sport, and over-
weight for the construction of the synthetic control group, while
version 2 additionally relies on all pre-determined grouping vari-
ables used in the heterogeneity analyses of Figure 2. All regres-
sions include municipality and cohort fixed effects. The estima-
tions use a balanced sample of 87 municipalities that had survey
respondents in all five cohorts. N refers to the number of cohort-
municipality observations. Robust standard errors are in paren-
theses and clustered at the municipality level (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01).
Source: YOLO survey.




                                48
                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix A: YOLO Survey




49
                                                                                           a) German version (original)




                                                        b) English version (translation)
                                        Serial number

                                      Jane Doe
                                   FirstName, Surname
                                                                                                                          Figure A1: Example of a Sports Club Voucher




     Date                               School stamp

     VOUCHER for a sponsored membership in a Saxonian
     sports club in the 2nd school half-year 2008/09
                             Figure A2: Map of Resident Registries




Notes: The map on the left shows all 16 German federal states. The map on the right displays the partic-
ipating registries in the treatment (Saxony) and control states (Brandenburg, Thuringia). The circles are
proportional to population size. Source: own illustration.




                                                 50
Sampling and Sample Sizes


                             Figure A3: YOLO Sampling and Sample Size

                               695= all registry offices   ~424,169 individuals
                                                            born in July 1997 -
                                                            June 2003 period

 Draw random sample


                                121 registry offices

 Drop registry offices w/o
 reply
                                 94 registry offices       194,409 individuals
                                     (=77.69 %)            born in July 1997 -
                                                            June 2003 period
                                                                                  Draw random sample(s)

                                                                155,527 (=80%)

                                                                                  Drop individuals who did not reply

                                                            19,850 (=12.76%)
                                                                                  Drop invalid birth dates

                                                            19,095 (=96.20 %)

                                                                                  Keep individuals who spent grade 3
                                                                                  in one of the three states in the
                                                                                  2006/07-2011/12 period

                                                            16,828 (=88.13 %)
                                                                                  Drop individuals with missing values
                                                                                  on key variables
                                                            16,082 (=95.57 %)
                                                                                  Drop individuals who were in grade
                                                                                  3 in 2011/12
                                                            13,334 (=82.91 %)




                                                           51
Sampling Procedure. At the beginning of 2018, a total of 424,169 individuals who were born

between July 1997 and June 2002 lived in the three states of Brandenburg, Saxony, and Thuringia

(Statistisches Bundesamt, 2020).36 There were 695 registry offices in these three states.

    In the first sampling stage, we randomly selected 121 out of these total of 695 registry offices

(with sampling probabilities proportional to population size). About 78 percent or 94 registry

offices replied. These 94 registry offices cover about 46 percent of the total target population

in the three federal states (194,409 youth). Note that because we sampled registry offices pro-

portional to population size, the share of sampled individuals is much larger than the share of

sampled registry offices. Due to German data privacy regulations, we were only allowed to ask

for an 80 percent random sample of all households in our target group from these 94 registry

offices, as shown in Figure A2. Hence we obtained 155,527 (physical) addresses for youth in

the target cohorts.

    In the next step, we mailed a research invitation letter (see Figure A1) to each of these

155,527 youth and invited them to participate in our YOLO survey online. A total of 19,850 in-

dividuals replied and completed the online survey (12.76 percent). After discarding individuals

with self-reported birth dates outside our target cohorts, we were left with 19,095 respondents.

Of these, we considered only those who reported that they attended third grade in one of the

three states. This reduced the sample size by about 12 percent to 16,828 individuals. Addition-

ally, we only kept respondents who answered the relevant questions to construct our six main

outcome variables (16,082 individuals).

    Moreover, in our main analysis, we disregard third graders in school year 2011/12, which

further reduces the sample size to 13,334 individuals. We discard this cohort because i) the

Educational Package (Bildungs- und Teilhabepaket) that covered sports club membership fees for

welfare recipients came into effect on April 1, 2011 and therefore affected this cohort (see Sec-

tion 2.2) and ii) because this is the first cohort that did not receive vouchers and disappointment

effects could therefore arise.




  36 Note that this number is only an approximation as Statistisches Bundesamt (2020) only provides the numbers

based on birth years.


                                                      52
                                                                            Figure A4: Information Letter for Survey Respondents

                                       a) German version (original)                                                                                                               b) English version (translation)




            --                                                                                                                                             --
     UHH - WiSO Fakultät - Professur VWL, insb. Mikroökonometrie                      Prof. Thomas Siedler (PhD)                                    UHH - WiSO Fakultät - Professur VWL, insb. Mikroökonometrie                           Prof. Thomas Siedler (PhD)
     Esplanade 36 - D-20354 Hamburg                                                                                                                 Esplanade 36 - D-20354 Hamburg
                                                                                      Universität Hamburg                                                                                                                                 Universität Hamburg
                                                                                      Fakultät für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften                                                                                                  Fakultät für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften
                                                                                      Fachbereich Volkswirtschaftslehre                                                                                                                   Fachbereich Volkswirtschaftslehre
                                                                                      Professur für Volkswirtschaftslehre, insb. Mikroökonometrie                                                                                         Professur für Volkswirtschaftslehre, insb. Mikroökonometrie
                                                                                      www.wiso.uni-hamburg.de/fachbereich-vwl/professu-                                                                                                   www.wiso.uni-hamburg.de/fachbereich-vwl/professu-
                                                                                      ren/siedler.html                                                                                                                                    ren/siedler.html
                                                                                      E-Mail: umfrage-mikro@wiso.uni-hamburg.de                                                                                                           E-Mail: umfrage-mikro@wiso.uni-hamburg.de
                                                                                      Tel.: 040 42838-9459                                                                                                                                Tel.: 040 42838-9459

     19.06.2018                                                                                                                                     June 19, 2018



                                        Teilnahme an einer wissenschaftlichen Umfrage                                                                                                                  Participation in a scientific survey
53




     Sehr geehrte Frau X,                                                                                                                           Dear Sir/Madam,

     wir sind Wissenschaftler an der Universität Hamburg und führen eine Online-Umfrage zum
                                                                                                                                                    We are researchers at the University of Hamburg conducting an online survey on the leisure
     Freizeitverhalten von Jugendlichen und jungen Erwachsenen durch. Hiermit laden wir Sie herz-
                                                                                                                                                    behavior of adolescents and young adults. We cordially invite you to take part in this survey.1
                                                                   1
     lich ein, an dieser Umfrage teilzunehmen. Unter allen Teilnehmenden verlosen wir zwei aktu-
                                                                                                                                                    As a thank you for participating your name will be entered into a lottery, where you will have
     elle iPads im Wert von je 500 Euro und zehn Amazon-Gutscheine im Wert von je 20 Euro. Die
                                                                                                                                                    the chance to win two new iPads worth 500 each and ten Amazon vouchers worth 20 each.
     Teilnahme an der Umfrage ist freiwillig. Den Zugang zur Umfrage sowie weitere Informationen
                                                                                                                                                    Participation in the survey is voluntary. You can access the survey and obtain further infor-
     erhalten Sie mit folgenden Zugangsdaten:
                                                                                                                                                    mation using the following access data:

     Link für Sie:                                     www.umfrage-uhh.de/uc/u
     Passwort:                                         XXYYZZ                                                                                       Link for you:                                     www.umfrage-uhh.de/uc/u
     Link für Eltern:                                  www.umfrage-uhh.de/uc/eltern                                                                 Password:                                         XXYYZZ
                                                                                                                                                    Link for your parents:                            www.umfrage-uhh.de/uc/eltern

     Bitte geben Sie diese Zugangsdaten auch an einen Elternteil weiter. Ihre Mutter oder Ihr Vater
                                                                                                                                                    Please pass this access data on to one parent. This parent can also take part in the survey using
     kann unter dem zuletzt angegebenen Link mit dem gleichen Passwort wie Sie ebenfalls an der
                                                                                                                                                    the same password as you via the second link listed above.
     Umfrage teilnehmen.
                                                                                                                                                    We would request that you participate within two weeks of receiving this letter at the latest.
     Wir bitten Sie, bis spätestens zwei Wochen nach Erhalt dieses Briefs teilzunehmen. Herzlichen
                                                                                                                                                    Many thanks for your help!
     Dank!
                                                                                                                                                    Yours sincerely
     Mit freundlichen Grüßen
                                                                                                                                                    ...
     ...

                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                     We obtained your address from the registration authority where you are registered in accordance with
     1Ihre Anschrift haben wir auf Grundlage des § 46 Bundesmeldegesetz von der für Sie zuständigen Meldebehörde                                    Section 46 of the Federal Registration Act (Bundesmeldegesetz). Your name and address will be deleted
     erhalten. Ihr Name und Ihre Anschrift werden aus unserer Datenbank gelöscht, nachdem wir Sie angeschrieben ha-                                 from our database after we have written to you.
     ben.
                           Figure A5: Duration of Survey in Minutes




Notes: The figure displays the minutes needed to complete the YOLO survey for the individuals in the
main analysis sample.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                54
       Table A1: Stylized School Cohort Development

 Birth date                  School           In 3rd       C2SC
                           enrollment         grade       voucher
                               (1)              (2)         (3)
 July 1997­June 1998           2004        2006/2007         No
 July 1998­June 1999           2005        2007/2008         No
 July 1999­June 2000           2006        2008/2009         Yes
 July 2000­June 2001           2007        2009/2010         Yes
 July 2001­June 2002           2008        2010/2011         Yes

Notes: The table displays the stylized relationship between birth
cohorts and school cohorts as well as their eligibility status for the
C2SC voucher. The relationship is stylized in the sense that it does
not consider deviations from this path (e.g., red-shirting, grade
repetitions), which are, however, incorporated in the construction
of the main treatment indicator.




                                 55
          Table A2: Summary Statistics: Treatment vs. Control States

 Variable                          Treatment state    Control states    Norm.diff.
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)
 Background characteristics
 Female                                 0.57               0.57              0.01
 Has siblings                           0.87               0.84              0.06
 Born in Germany                        0.96               0.97             -0.02
 Parent not born in Germany             0.14               0.12              0.04
 Newspaper at home                      0.54               0.63             -0.12
 Art at home                            0.73               0.72              0.02
 Academic track                         0.49               0.50             -0.02
 Sports club age 4-7                    0.52               0.56             -0.06
 Music lessons age 4-7                  0.47               0.45              0.04
  1hr sports per week                   0.89                0.89             0.00
  2hrs sports per week                  0.76                0.77            -0.02
  3hrs sports per week                  0.62                0.64            -0.03
 Sport is important                     0.57               0.57              0.00
 Very good health                       0.26               0.28             -0.04
 Obese (BMI>30)                         0.04                0.04            -0.02
 Ever smoked cigarettes                 0.53               0.57             -0.06
 Current smoker                         0.20               0.22             -0.02
 Ever consumed alcohol                  0.81               0.84             -0.05
 Alcohol in last 7 days                 0.51               0.52             -0.02
 Age at survey                          17.56              17.42             0.07
 City                                    0.76               0.44             0.50
 Outcomes
 Program known                           0.32               0.03             0.60
 Voucher received                        0.18               0.00             0.45
 Voucher redeemed                        0.11               0.00             0.34
 Member of sports club                   0.41               0.43            -0.02
 Weekly hours of sport                   4.63               4.70            -0.01
 Overweight (BMI>25)                     0.15               0.17            -0.03

Notes: The table displays descriptive statistics for the main analysis sample, sepa-
rately for Saxony (treatment state) and Brandenburg and Thuringia (control states).
Norm. diff. stands for the "normalized difference", which is defined for each variable
x as NDx = ( x1 - x0 )/ (s2        2
                             x1 + s x0 ), where x1 and x0 are the sample means of the
two groups and s2         2
                  x1 and s x0 the corresponding variances. According to Imbens and
Wooldridge (2009), a normalized difference of more than 0.25 indicates substantial co-
variate imbalance.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                         56
 Table A3: Registry vs. Self-Reported Socio-Demographics

                                     Percentage survey        N
                                         = registry
                                             (1)             (2)
 Female                                     0.995          13,331
 German nationality                         0.995          13,040
 Year of birth                              0.993          12,105
 Month and year of birth                    0.985          12,105
 Day, month, and year of birth              0.974          12,105

Notes: The table displays the share of individuals in our main sam-
ple for which the registry information matches the self-reported in-
formation.
Source: YOLO survey and registry information.




                                57
  Table A4: Administrative Data: YOLO Participants vs. Non-Participants

 Variable                YOLO-participants      Non-participants     Norm. diff.
                               (1)                    (2)               (3)
 Female                          0.56                  0.47               0.13
 German nationality              0.96                  0.90               0.15
 Saxony                          0.55                  0.51               0.05
 Year of birth 1997              0.06                  0.09              -0.08
 Year of birth 1998              0.12                  0.18              -0.11
 Year of birth 1999              0.15                  0.17              -0.05
 Year of birth 2000              0.18                  0.16               0.03
 Year of birth 2001              0.19                  0.15               0.07
 Year of birth 2002              0.19                  0.15               0.08
 Year of birth 2003              0.08                  0.07               0.03

Notes: The table compares YOLO participants with non-participants based on registry
information.
Source: Registry information.




                                        58
   Table A5: Comparison of YOLO and SOEP Participants

 Variable                               YOLO        SOEP      Norm. diff.
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)
 Socio-demographic variables
 Female                                   0.57       0.54         0.04
 German citizenship                       0.96       0.98         -0.06
 Born in Germany                          0.95       0.97         -0.07
 Has siblings                             0.86       0.86         0.00
 Still in school                          0.84       0.94         -0.24
 Leisure time activities
 Does sport                               0.72       0.74         -0.03
 Does sport in a club                     0.31       0.31         0.00
 Involved in music                        0.33       0.32         0.01
 Music lessons outside school             0.25       0.19         0.11
 Watches TV, videos                       1.39       1.37         0.02
 Plays computer games                     2.46       2.59         -0.06
 Listens to music                         1.21       1.15         0.08
 Plays music, sings                       3.65       3.88         -0.11
 Does sport                               2.30       2.38         -0.05
 Dances or acts                           4.17       4.02         0.09
 Reads                                    2.68       2.76         -0.05
 Does volunteer work                      4.35       4.49         -0.10
 Does nothing                             2.32       2.02         0.18
 Best friend                              2.25       2.07         0.14
 Youth/recreation centre                  4.76       4.38         0.30
 Church/religious events                  4.59       4.48         0.09
 Personality traits and attitudes
 Risk attitude                            5.56       5.72         -0.05
 Internal locus-of-control                0.00       0.11         -0.07
 External locus-of-control               -0.03       0.05         -0.06
 Works carefully                          5.65       5.16         0.27
 Communicative                            5.04       5.12         -0.04
 Abrasive towards others                  3.40       3.22         0.08
 Introduces new ideas                     4.81       4.73         0.04
 Often worries                            5.08       5.00         0.03
 Can forgive others                       5.70       5.60         0.06
 Is lazy                                  4.20       4.07         0.05
 Is outgoing/sociable                     4.77       4.97         -0.09
 Importance of aesthetics                 4.76       4.42         0.13
 Is nervous                               4.32       4.24         0.03
 Carries out duties efficiently           5.49       5.07         0.25
 Is reserved                              4.23       4.32         -0.04
 Is considerate, friendly                 6.00       5.95         0.03
 Has a lively imagination                 5.35       5.24         0.05
 Is relaxed/unstressed                    4.48       4.15         0.15
 Is curious                               5.50       5.21         0.16
 Is positive about oneself                4.97       4.90         0.03
Notes: The table compares YOLO participants with SOEP participants. We
use the SOEP youth questionnaire and the year respondents turned 17. To
make the two samples comparable, both are restricted to individuals born
between July 1997 and July 2000 (2000 is the last available cohort in the SOEP
youth questionnaire and July 1997 is the first cohort in YOLO), who live in
Saxony, Brandenburg, or Thuringia. SOEP observations are weighted with
SOEP weights. Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) provide details on how to
calculate the normalized difference. The construction of the locus of control
variables follows Peter and Spiess (2016) for the pooled SOEP-YOLO sample.
Source: YOLO survey and SOEP.
Table A6: Survey Participation as Outcome in DD Framework

                 Cohorts 1997-2003      Cohorts 1997-2002
                        (1)                    (2)
     Voucher            0.004                  0.007
                       (0.004)                (0.006)
     N                 141,758                120,528

    Notes: The table displays the "effect" of the voucher pro-
    gram on participation in the YOLO survey based on our
    DD framework in equation (2) and registry information
    on state and date of birth. The treatment indicator is as-
    signed based on birth dates. The binary outcome takes on
    the value one if an individual participated in the survey
    and zero otherwise.
    Source: Registry information.




                                 60
Appendix B: Empirical Results YOLO


              Figure B1: Sports Disciplines for which Vouchers Were Redeemed




Notes: The figure displays the sports disciplines for which vouchers were redeemed. The sample in-
cludes only respondents who answered that they redeemed the voucher (N=798).
Source: YOLO survey.




                                               61
           Figure B2: Development of Outcome Variables--Synthetic Control Group

          Panel A: Awareness & take-up                             Panel B: Physical activity
                 a) Program known                                   d) Sports club member




                b) Voucher received                                 e) Weekly hours of sport




               c) Voucher redeemed                                       f) Overweight




Notes: The figures show the main outcome variables by the school year during which YOLO respondents
attended the third grade, before and after the start of the C2SC initiative. The figures compares the
treatment state of Saxony to a synthetic control group based on municipalities in Brandenburg and
Thuringia. See the notes to Table 6 for further details on the construction of the synthetic control group.
Source: YOLO survey.

                                                    62
                  Figure B3: Outcome Difference--Treatment vs. Control States

               Panel A: Main results                              Panel B: Synthetic control
              a) Sports club member                                 d) Sports club member




             b) Weekly hours of sport                              e) Weekly hours of sport




                   c) Overweight                                        f) Overweight




Notes: While Figures 1 and B2 display the mean of the main outcome variables for the treatment and
control states, this figure displays the differences between the treatment and control states based on the
main sample (Panel A) and on the synthetic control group (Panel B). Note that these are simple averages
and not adjusted for covariates.
Source: YOLO survey.


                                                   63
                                                     Table B1: Difference-in-Differences: Heterogeneity

                   Sports club age 4-7        Newspaper              Art at home         Academic track            Female                    Urban
                    No           Yes         No          Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No             Yes
                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)           (12)

      Panel A: Awareness & take-up
      Program known
      Voucher 0.254***    0.293***         0.277***    0.271***   0.247***   0.299***   0.192***   0.306***   0.201***   0.283***   0.256***    0.297***
                (0.025)    (0.012)          (0.025)     (0.017)    (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.013)    (0.017)    (0.019)    (0.010)    (0.017)     (0.016)
      Voucher received
      Voucher 0.193***        0.210***     0.196***    0.206***   0.188***   0.211***   0.140***   0.223***   0.156***   0.215***   0.183***    0.227***
                (0.016)        (0.010)      (0.020)     (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.012)    (0.007)    (0.014)    (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.009)     (0.017)
      Voucher redeemed
64




      Voucher 0.118***        0.126***     0.130***    0.120***   0.106***   0.133***   0.080***   0.135***   0.092***   0.132***   0.085***    0.156***
                (0.014)        (0.009)      (0.016)     (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.007)     (0.011)
      Panel B: Physical activity
      Member of sports club
      Voucher     0.015       0.006         0.009        0.008     -0.001     0.021      -0.002     0.011      0.011      0.013      0.027       0.019
                 (0.026)     (0.021)       (0.042)      (0.024)   (0.029)    (0.021)    (0.039)    (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.030)    (0.022)     (0.029)
      Weekly hours of sport
      Voucher   0.328        -0.218         0.065        -0.118    -0.292     0.198      -0.099     -0.001     -0.126     0.263      0.028       0.148
               (0.223)      (0.201)        (0.272)      (0.222)   (0.242)    (0.172)    (0.242)    (0.168)    (0.207)    (0.258)    (0.201)     (0.209)
      Overweight
      Voucher   0.006           0.001       0.015        0.004     0.017     -0.004      -0.006     0.011      -0.018     0.012      -0.015      0.007
               (0.025)         (0.020)     (0.026)      (0.021)   (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.036)    (0.018)    (0.020)    (0.025)    (0.021)     (0.024)
      N            5,722        7,609       5,192       8,142      5,576      7,666      3,612      9,643      6,661      6,601      5,717       6,759

     Notes: The table displays the effect of the C2SC initiative for various subgroups as indicated by the column header. Robust standard errors allowing
     for clustering at the municipality level are in parentheses (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01). Each column in each panel represents one DD estimate
     based on the subsample as indicated by the column header. Models are based on equation (2) with municipality fixed effects.
     Source: YOLO survey.
           Table B2: Alternative Aged-Based Difference-in-Differences Models

                              Within Saxony estimation        Within treated cohort estimation
                                DD             Event            DD                 Event
                                (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)
 Overall effect               -0.002                           0.011
                              (0.009)                         (0.008)
 (Placebo) Effect at age 7                    -0.016                              -0.004
                                              (0.010)                             (0.008)
 (Placebo) Effect at age 8                    -0.012                              -0.001
                                              (0.012)                             (0.009)
 Effect at age 9                              -0.015                               0.015
                                              (0.012)                             (0.010)
 Effect at age 10                             -0.007                               0.009
                                              (0.013)                             (0.011)
 Effect at age 11                             -0.009                               0.002
                                              (0.013)                             (0.011)
 Effect at age 12                             -0.004                               0.014
                                              (0.013)                             (0.011)
 N                             53,984         53,984           69,752             69,752

Notes: The DD models use retrospective sports club membership information by child age.
Columns (1) and (2) use treated and untreated cohorts only from Saxony (6,748 individuals ob-
served at eight different ages) along with age and cohort fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) use
third graders from 2008 to 2010 ("treated cohorts") in Saxony, Brandenburg, and Thuringia (8,719
individuals observed at eight different ages) along with age and state fixed effects. Robust stan-
dard errors allowing for clustering at the municipality level are in parentheses (* p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01). The uneven columns show the average effect whereas the even columns show event
study estimates by child age.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                 65
              Table B3: Characteristics of Parents of Sports Club Members

 Variable                    Non-member         Member      Difference     Norm. diff.       N
                                 (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
 Highest school degree             0.43          0.53         -0.10***        -0.14       2,800
 Middle school degree              0.50           0.44        0.06***          0.09       2,800
 Lowest school degree              0.06           0.03        0.03***          0.10       2,800
 Age                              46.66          47.17         -0.51*         -0.05       2,727
 Member of sports club             0.20          0.36         -0.16***        -0.26       2,814
 Sport 1                           3.43           3.99        -0.56***        -0.19       2,782
 Sport 2                           3.18           3.46        -0.28***        -0.10       2,761
 Sport 3                           3.11           3.39        -0.27***        -0.09       2,759
 Sport 4                           2.99           3.40        -0.41***        -0.14       2,753
 Sport 5                           3.13           3.40        -0.27***        -0.09       2,735
 Sport 6                           2.55           2.91        -0.36***        -0.14       2,753
 Sport 7                           3.99           4.57        -0.58***        -0.17       2,776
 Sport 8                           3.03           3.56        -0.53***        -0.18       2,753
 Sport 9                           3.28           3.65        -0.37***        -0.12       2,756
 Sport 10                          3.14           3.66        -0.51***        -0.17       2,755
 Sport 11                          3.70           4.43        -0.73***        -0.22       2,763
 Exercising index                 -0.38           0.29        -0.67***        -0.17       2,655

Notes: The table compares the characteristics of parents according to their children's sports club
membership status at age eight. The variables "Sport 1-Sport 11" refer to the responses to 11
statements about exercising. Parents could answer on a Likert Scale from 1 (totally disagree)
to 7 (totally agree). The statements are : (1) Exercising is something that I do regularly. (2)
Exercising is something that I do automatically. (3) Exercising is something that I do without
explicitly reminding myself. (4) Exercising is something that I feel I need if I don't do it. (5)
Exercising is something that I do without thinking about it. (6) Exercising is something that
would be exhausting for me not to do. (7) Exercising is something that is part of my weekly
routine. (8) Exercising is something that would be difficult for me not to do. (9) Exercising
is something that I do without the need to think about it. (10) Exercising is something that is
typical for me. (11) Exercising is something that I have been doing for a long time.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                               66
                Table B4: Socio-Demographics of Children who Redeemed the Voucher

 Variable                                 Redeemer        Non-redeemer     Difference    Norm. diff.       N
                                             (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)
 Female                                      0.57            0.58             -0.01          -0.01      5,025
 Has siblings                                0.88            0.86              0.02           0.04      4,965
 Born in Germany                              0.97            0.96            0.01*           0.06      4,993
 Parent not born in Germany                   0.10            0.15           -0.05***        -0.11      4,995
 Newspaper at home                            0.64            0.55           0.09***          0.13      4,992
 Art at home                                  0.81            0.73           0.08***          0.13      4,998
 Academic track                               0.68            0.59           0.09***          0.13      4,997
 Sports club at age 4, 5, 6, or 7            0.67            0.51            0.16***          0.23      4,670
 Music lessons at age 4, 5, 6, or 7          0.54            0.47            0.07***          0.10      4,670
 Number of sports clubs (ZIP code)           16.02           15.64             0.38           0.02      5,027

Notes: The table compares the characteristics of children in treated cohorts in Saxony according to whether they
redeemed the voucher or not. Norm. diff. stands for the "normalized difference", which is defined for each
variable x as NDx = ( x1 - x0 )/ (s2      2                                                                   2
                                    x1 + s x0 ), where x1 and x0 are the sample means of the two groups and s x1
and s2
     x0 the corresponding variances. According to Imbens and Wooldridge (2009), a normalized difference of
more than 0.25 indicates substantial covariate imbalance.
Source: YOLO survey.




                                                     67
                                    Table B5: Difference-in-Differences: Alternative Methods of Inference

                                                                                                    Wild cluster bootstrap
                                                   Cluster                          Testing under H0                   Testing under H1
                  rob     conv    municip.     states   twoway      cohort    Radem.      Mammen        Webb     Radem.      Mammen       Webb
                  (1)      (2)      (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)          (9)      (10)         (11)       (12)

      Panel A: Awareness & take-up
      Program known
      p-value 0.000 0.000     0.000             0.000     0.000      0.014      0.008       0.016       0.005     0.004        0.001      0.000
      Voucher received
      p-value 0.000 0.000            0.000      0.000     0.000      0.027      0.019       0.017       0.018     0.000        0.002      0.000
      Voucher redeemed
      p-value 0.000 0.000            0.000      0.000     0.000      0.035      0.017       0.028       0.019     0.001        0.002      0.000
68




      Panel B: Physical activity & overweight
      Member of sports club
      p-value 0.631 0.637        0.636    0.224           0.244      0.565      0.372       0.352       0.389     0.346        0.350      0.341
      Weekly hours of sport
      p-value 0.991 0.991            0.991      0.977     0.987      0.993      0.990       0.976       0.994     0.990        0.991      0.996
      Overweight
      p-value 0.779       0.768      0.795      0.679     0.637      0.774      0.731       0.720       0.747     0.726        0.748      0.745

     Notes: The table displays p-values for alternative methods of inference using our preferred model specification in column (3) of Table
     2. (1) is based on robust standard errors, (2) on conventional standard errors, and (3)-(6) on clustered standard errors, where the level
     of clustering is the municipality in (3), the state in (4), the cohort and the municipality (two-way clustering) in (5), and the state*cohort
     group in (6). The p-values in (7)-(12) are based on wild cluster bootstrap procedures with state*cohort groups as clusters, where testing
     is under the null hypothesis in (7)-(9) and under the alternative hypothesis in (10)-(12). (7) and (10) apply Rademacher weights, while (8)
     and (11) use Mammen weights, and (9) and (12) Webb weights. All wild cluster bootstrap specifications are estimated with the help of the
     user-written Stata-program BOOTTEST (Roodman et al., 2010).
     Source: YOLO survey.
       Table B6: Limits of Confidence Intervals

 Outcome                           ^
                                        95% CI     90% CI
                                  (1)     (2)        (3)
 Panel A: Base DD (Table 2, col. (1))
 Member of sports club 0.004         0.035          0.028
                        (0.019)
 Weekly hours of sport -0.069        0.196          0.137
                        (0.161)
 Overweight              0.005      -0.021          -0.016
                        (0.016)
 Panel B: Main specification (Table 2, col. (3))
 Member of sports club 0.009        0.040       0.033
                          (0.019)
 Weekly hours of sport -0.002       0.260       0.202
                          (0.159)
 Overweight                0.004   -0.022      -0.017
                          (0.016)
 Panel C: Synthetic control (Table 6, col. (1))
 Member of sports club -0.008        0.028       0.020
                         (0.022)
 Weekly hours of sport -0.048        0.284       0.211
                         (0.202)
 Overweight               -0.017    -0.055      -0.046
                         (0.023)
 Panel D: With 2011/2012 cohort (Table 4, col. (3))
 Member of sports club -0.014      0.011      0.005
                         (0.015)
 Weekly hours of sport -0.148      0.048      0.005
                         (0.119)
 Overweight               0.005   -0.011     -0.008
                          (0.01)

Notes: The table displays the 95% (column [2]) and 90%
(column [3]) limits of confidence intervals (CI) for the C2SC
effect on the outcomes in the first column, based on differ-
ent specifications as indicated by the panel headers. More
specifically, the table shows, based on one-sided tests and
the hypothesized sign of the effect, the upper limit of the
confidence interval for the outcomes member of sports
club and weekly hours of sport as well as the lower limit
for overweight.
Source: YOLO survey.




                             69
             Table B7: Power Calculations

                                Pseudo treatment effect
 Outcome                       3 units    4 units    5 units
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)
 Panel A: Base DD (Table 2, col. (1))
 Member of sports club 0.596         .759             0.902
 Weekly hours of sport   0.699      0.863             0.964
 Overweight              0.713      0.884             0.974
 Panel B: Main specification (Table 2, col. (3))
 Member of sports club 0.596       0.779      0.904
 Weekly hours of sport    0.706    0.872      0.968
 Overweight               0.668    0.838       0.95
 Panel C: Synthetic control (Table 6, col. (1))
 Member of sports club 0.552        0.786        0.91
 Weekly hours of sport    0.718     0.902       0.967
 Overweight                0.45     0.706       0.916
 Panel D: With 2011/12 cohort (Table 4, col. (3))
 Member of sports club 0.722        0.87      0.959
 Weekly hours of sport   0.826     0.949      0.992
 Overweight              0.916     0.977        1

Notes: The table shows the statistical power of different
DD model specifications as indicated by the panel head-
ers. The simulations use data from the YOLO survey, ar-
tificially induce pseudo treatment effects as indicated by
the column headers and 1,000 replications. First, we ran-
domly assign 30 municipalities--the same number that
is actually treated--to the treatment group and the other
municipalities to the control group. Then we artificially
introduce treatment effects of different magnitudes in in-
dicated by the column headers. Next, we run each DD
model 1,000 times. Based on the hypothesized sign of the
effect sizes, we add increases of 3, 4, and 5 percentage
points as pseudo treatment effects for member of sports
club ; for weekly hours of sport, we add increases of 0.3,
0.4. and 0.5 hours; and for overweight, we add decreases
of 3, 4, and 5 percentage points. Each cell indicates the
share of the 1,000 replications for which the models reject
the null hypothesis of statistically significant effects at the
10 percent significance level in one-sided tests. For exam-
ple, the simulation for the second row of Panel A in col-
umn (2) indicates that our base DD model in Table 2 can
correctly identify an increase of 0.4 weekly hours of sport
at the 90 percent certainty level in 86 percent of all 1,000
replications.
Source: Simulations based on YOLO survey.




                              70
Appendix C: School Examination Data


           Table C1: Descriptive Statistics--School Health Examination Data

      Variable                 Mean      Std. Dev.   Min.    Max.             N
                                 (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)            (5)
      Age in months           144.993      7.070      120     183           6,794
      Female                   0.502        0.5        0       1            6,794
      Height in cm            154.236      8.158      127     186           6,794
      Weight in kg             46.108     11.471       22     140           6,794
      BMI                     19.2026      3.636     10.54   42.31          6,794
      Obese                    0.0596     0.2377       0       1            6,794
      Overweight               0.1099     0.3129       0       1            6,794
      Underweight              0.1097     0.3125        0      1            6,794
      Hypertension              0.078      0.268       0       1            6,794
      Motor skill disorder      0.004      0.065       0       1            6,794
      Emotional Disorder       0.036       0.186        0      1            6,794
      Weak posture              0.115      0.319       0       1            6,794
      The table shows descriptive statistics for our administrative School Health Exami-
      nation Data from one county in Saxony. "Std. Dev." stands for standard deviation
      and "N" indicates the number of unique students in our data. Source: School Health
                                                       ¨
      Examination Data from Public Health Service (Offentlicher   Gesundheitsdienst ).




                                             71
Table C2: Regression of Objective Health Outcomes on Treated and Control Cohorts

                                                           Motor skill    Emotional
                                 Obese     Overweight       disorder       disorder
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)

     Treated                      -0.014        0.007          -0.002          0.000
                                 (0.014)       (0.005)        (0.002)         (0.014)
     Age in months              0.002***        0.000          0.000         0.002***
                                 (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)
     Female                       0.007       -0.019**         -0.001       -0.025***
                                 (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.001)         (0.005)

     Month of examination          X              X              X             X

     Observations                6,794           6,794         6,794         6,794
     R-squared                   0.003           0.002         0.001         0.007

   Notes: The table shows four separate regressions where the column headers indicate
   the objective health data used as outcome variable. Treated is a dummy indicating
   whether the cohort was treated whereas age in months and female are control vari-
   ables, see main text for details. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
   at the examination date level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                            ¨
   Source: School Health Examination Data from Public Health Service (Offentlicher
   Gesundheitsdienst ).




                                            72
