                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW EXPERIMENTS WITH CHILDREN INFORM ECONOMICS

                                          John A. List
                                          Ragan Petrie
                                          Anya Samek

                                      Working Paper 28825
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28825


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




Corresponding author: John List, University of Chicago, jlist@uchicago.edu. For helpful
comments, we thank Steven Durlauf, Isabelle Brocas, Juan Carrillo, Asadul Islam, Justin Holz,
Uditi Karna, Ariel Listo, and participants at a variety of seminars/conference presentations and
three anonymous referees at the Journal of Economic Literature. For research assistance, we
thank Kevin Sokal, Tarush Gupta, Andre Gray, Jessica Lopez, Andrew Yu, Haruka Uchida,
Michael Cuna, Shreemayi Samujjwala, Meredith Birdsong, Adam Dessouky and students at the
Behavioral and Experimental Economics (BEE) research group. This research was funded by the
Kenneth and Anne Griffin Foundation and by NIH grant 1R01DK114238. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John A. List, Ragan Petrie, and Anya Samek. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Experiments with Children Inform Economics
John A. List, Ragan Petrie, and Anya Samek
NBER Working Paper No. 28825
May 2021
JEL No. C9,D1,J1

                                          ABSTRACT

In the past several decades the experimental method has lent deep insights into economics. One
perhaps surprising area that has contributed is the experimental study of children, where advances
as varied as the evolution of human behaviors that shape markets and institutions, to how early
life influences shape later life outcomes, have been explored. We first develop a framework for
economic preference measurement that provides a lens into how to interpret data from
experiments with children. Next, we survey work that provides general empirical insights within
our framework. Finally, we provide 10 tips for pulling off experiments with children, including
factors such as taking into account child competencies, causal identification, and logistical issues
related to recruitment and implementation. We envision the experimental study of children as a
high growth research area in the coming decades as social scientists begin to more fully
appreciate that children are active participants in markets who (might) respond predictably to
economic incentives.

John A. List                                     Anya Samek
Department of Economics                          University of California, San Diego
University of Chicago                            Rady School of Management
1126 East 59th                                   Wells Fargo Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                9500 Gilman Drive #0553
and NBER                                         La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
jlist@uchicago.edu                               and NBER
                                                 anyasamek@gmail.com
Ragan Petrie
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and The Melbourne Institute
rpetrie@tamu.edu
1. Introduction

        When spanning the research landscape over the past several decades, it is not difficult to
find examples of experimental studies where children play a relevant, and in many cases
instrumental, role in the advancement of science. Many neuroscientists need children as
experimental subjects. Developmental and social psychologists rely heavily on children too. Other
scientists, from areas as varied as speech to autism to general medicine, critically depend on
children to test their ideas. Indeed, in 1953 Jonas Salk injected his own three sons with a test polio
vaccine based on an inactivate poliovirus. This early test paved the way for a nationwide trial that
included nearly 2 million children. By 1955, the vaccine was widely reported safe and effective.
While scientists across broad fields of study rely on children to gather data via experimentation,
one might wonder--should economists conduct experiments with children too? On several
dimensions the answer is unequivocally yes. To organize our thoughts, we classify why economists
need children into two silos.
        First, in the spirit of medical trials, economists, as well as neurologists, developmental
psychologists, sociologists, and the like, must understand children themselves for immediate
purposes. One prime example is experimental explorations in the economics of education wherein
different elements in the environment are perturbed and outcomes measured (see, e.g., Sadoff,
2014 and Lavecchia et al., 2016 for excellent overviews). 1 Indeed, understanding models of human
capital formation and early childhood education is an example of understanding children
themselves and how best to invest in child development and skill formation. This is because
children's choices are modeled as inputs into education production functions that shape their life
outcomes (Heckman, 2006; List et al., 2018). Likewise, how to affect children's health and mental
well-being are critical inputs into not only short-run outcomes but also those in the longer run.
More generally, any interventions designed to inform policy prescriptions for children's well-
being today fall into this first silo.


1
 The economics literature in this area is enormous, and spans experimental work using data from the seminal Perry
Preschool and Abecedarian experiments (see Heckman et al., 2010; 2013; summaries are provided in Currie, 2001,
Duncan and Magnuson, 2013 and Almond et al., 2018) to work in education research in the 1960s where some children
were labeled as high performers and others low performers, when they had actually performed identically on
achievement tests (Rosenthal and Jacobsen, 1968) to work evaluating educational interventions in a developing
country context (see Kremer, 2003 for a summary).




                                                                                                               1
         Our second silo includes experiments exploring the behaviors and preferences of children,
which we argue provide a unique glimpse into understanding adults, who are the primary decision-
makers in most important markets. Much like the work in the medical sciences on normal paths
of physiological maturation and determining the roots of illness and later life advantages and
disadvantages ­ or the social science work on learned behaviors and language/speech development
­ economic experiments with children can focus on the decisions and preferences of children that
potentially foreshadow adult behavior. As such, experiments with children can be thought of as
complementary to recent approaches to understanding underlying factors shaping behavior, such
as "genoeconomics," which seeks to identify genetic factors affecting decision-making, and
neuroeconomics, which correlates brain activity with decision-making.
         Within these two silos, we focus on the emerging literature using experiments with children
to understand the determinants of child decision-making, including how economic preferences,
information sets, and decision skills affect choices. 2 Experimental economics has already made a
great deal of headway into understanding the economic preferences of adults and linking them to
behaviors and outcomes, ranging from health outcomes, such as obesity, to financial outcomes,
such as credit card debt (e.g., see Falk et al., 2018). Exploring economic preferences, choices, and
relevant trade-offs with children is a natural extension. This exploration aligns with the influential
work of Heckman and co-authors in the labor economics field, who model child skill development
with a particular focus on the importance of non-cognitive or "soft skills" (e.g., Cunha and
Heckman, 2007). 3
         With respect to the first silo, children are active participants in their human capital
production process, and child preferences, beliefs, and information sets are also inputs into
household production and consumption. Measurement of such parameters ­ and mapping them to
behaviors ­ is therefore key to understanding these foundational processes. Further, intervention
studies that seek to improve child education, health, or well-being are numerous. Incorporating

2
  There are several ways to use children in experiments (as Harrison and List (2004) note, such studies fall under the
rubric of their definition of "field experiments"). The first is to use children as subjects to evaluate the impact of
various interventions on outcomes (i.e., a random controlled trial, or RCT). Since this is a well-traveled area in
economics, we only briefly discuss such work so we can focus attention more immediately on the second way, which
is to use experiments with children to understand the development of economic preferences and decision-making (this
would typically take the form of studying children in the laboratory or in artefactual field experiments).
3
  The work in labor economics tends to focus on skills as measured by various assessments/tests in education, or
with respect to "soft skills," measurement of character or personality using surveys. Different from that work, tools
from experimental economics allow economists to measure economic preferences such as e.g., time, risk, or social
preferences; or to understand how children react in decision problems.


                                                                                                                    2
preference and decision-making experiments into such studies adds value by identifying the role
that child preferences play in immediate child behavior (i.e., which interventions will work) and
by providing a potentially important variable for heterogeneity, or moderation, analysis (i.e., for
whom will interventions work). With respect to the second silo, experiments with child subjects
can lend key insights into questions about adults. For example, we can measure the variance in
preferences associated with differences in family background at an early age, learn the role of
experience in shaping preferences, and estimate when traits and preferences emerge and how they
evolve through time.
         Why is the study of children by experimental economists necessary, given the substantial
body of literature on child development from the sister sciences? First, the parameters that
economists are interested in may be distinct from those studied by developmental psychologists.
For example, in well-known work starting in the 1960s, psychologist Walter Mischel showed that
3-5 year-old children who can resist eating a marshmallow in order to receive a larger reward have
better educational, labor market and health outcomes than those who cannot (Shoda et al., 1990;
Schlam et al., 2013). In our own recent work with a group of 3-5 year-olds, we replicate Mischel's
marshmallow paradigm and conduct time preference experiments that are more standard in the
economics literature. We find that these two paradigms measure different constructs, and that time
preferences are predictive of disciplinary referrals in the classroom years later (Castillo et al.,
2020).
         Second, economists' training in issues of identification, estimation, and statistical analysis
can add value. For example, as Cotton et al. (2020) note, the work of Carrol (1962) and other 20th
century contemporary psychologists of education express learning as a function of the ratio of the
time spent on learning to the time needed to learn. Cotton et al. (2020) use a field experiment to
capture two crucial student-level unobservables--academic efficiency (turning inputs into
outputs) and time preference (motivation)--which lend empirical insights into the underpinnings
of adolescent skill formation, and provide lessons into curbing racial and gender achievement gaps.
Likewise, a series of papers have recently emerged suggesting that omitted variables may explain
Mischel's results (Kidd et al., 2013). In this article, we discuss how methods from economics can
address such identification issues. Finally, experimental economists have developed a toolkit of
incentivized, context-free, elicitation tasks that are portable to the sister sciences that explore




                                                                                                     3
complementary behavioral elements, permitting an exploration of economic mediators and
moderators. 4
        The remainder of our study begins with a focus on the broader economics literature that
uses children as experimental subjects. These studies span a large academic space, from examining
children's rationality, to measuring various economic preferences, to an exploration of the
variables correlated with children's preferences and behaviors. To place this work in the proper
context and aid in its interpretation, we provide a simple conceptual framework. This approach has
a dual purpose in that it also permits a deeper understanding of the development of children's
economic skills and preferences, and the role of those preferences in shaping behavior.
        This exploration, in turn, informs several fields of economics. For example, experimental
economists and economic theorists might find data from children of import to inform preference
parameters in economic theories. Labor and education economists might find child data useful to
understand the role of children's economic preferences and information sets on behavior that
affects their human capital development. Likewise, health economists need information about
children's preferences and information sets to inform the design of interventions as well as to study
their potentially heterogeneous effects. Finally, researchers studying economics of the household
may find value in understanding children themselves as active participants in household
bargaining.
        We then pivot to a discussion of key identification and methodological challenges the
experimental researcher faces when using children as subjects. Our goal is to provide practical
advice for conducting experiments with children. For example, how can the researcher most
efficiently align child competencies with features of the experimental design? In addition, we
discuss moving beyond the traditional A/B experimental approach to lend insights into why certain
economic choices are undertaken. This type of analysis permits a deeper understanding of the
behavioral mediators, a necessary step to grasp mechanisms, test theories, and provide efficient
policy tools. We next integrate insights from economics and our sister sciences ­ early education,
developmental psychology, and neuroscience ­ to provide a playbook for how to design and
execute field experiments with children. To complement the existing literature, which tends to



4
 Indeed, a number of recent papers from psychology have moved from using hypothetical decision tasks to using
dictator games more standard in the experimental economics literature. These papers are summarized later in this
article.


                                                                                                                   4
focus on correlational data, we highlight how experiments can be used to aid in identification and
interpretation of data. In this spirit, we also discuss practical issues of consent and ethics, setting
up experiments, and selection of incentives. Finally, we conclude by offering ideas on how to
scale experiments and best practices for documenting experimental procedures with children. We
package this section within a catalog of 10 tips for conducting experiments with children. We
conclude with thoughts about where the field is headed and suggestions for future directions that
we view as most promising.


2. The Growing Economics Literature on Experiments with Children

       Experiments with children can provide economists with unique knowledge that cannot be
obtained from conducting experiments with adults. This includes studying the development of
economic preferences among children as a means to understand adults, as well as using economic
experiments to understand children themselves to inform models of human capital formation and
early childhood education. Economic experiments allow us to measure aspects of children's
decision-making such as economic preferences (e.g., risk, time, and social preferences), rationality
in decision-making, and information or beliefs that a child possesses. As displayed in Figure 1, the
past 20 years has seen an enormous increase in working papers and publications that use economic
experiments with children. Given this interest, recent discussions of "alternative subject pools" in
experimental economics include children (Fréchette, 2016).
                                   [ FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

       Some of the earliest work examining children's preferences and decision-making in the
economics literature comes from William Harbaugh, Kate Krause, Lise Vesterlund and co-authors.
One of the first papers ­ published in the American Economic Review - focuses on investigating
whether children are rational decision-makers by examining consistency with the General Axiom
of Revealed Preference, or GARP (Harbaugh et al., 2001). The authors motivate their work by
pointing out that without an understanding of whether children are rational, we cannot know
whether standard economic models apply to them. Harbaugh et al. (2001) find evidence for
rationality among children as young as age 7. Harbaugh et al. (2001; 2002; 2003) expand the
exploration to other economic preferences across age groups, including altruism, risk preferences,
trust, and behavioral biases. The theme of these papers is to compare decision-making by children
to the well-documented decision-making patterns of university students in the laboratory.


                                                                                                     5
       The literature grew considerably in the mid-2000s, and ever since, researchers have
simplified standard economic games from the laboratory to facilitate understanding among
children, including dictator games, ultimatum games, time and risk preference elicitations, and
others. How children behave in these games forms the basis of our understanding of the origins of
preferences and decision-making, as well as provides insights for academia and practice.
       The Chicago Heights Early Childhood Center (CHECC) is a recent example of a
concentrated effort to expand the literature on experiments with children. CHECC is a large-scale
field experiment launched in Chicago Heights, Illinois in 2010. We highlight CHECC because the
explicit goals closely follow our two bins on the benefits of conducting experiments with children.
The first goal of CHECC is to learn about the optimal investment profile in early childhood to
reduce academic achievement gaps. To this end, CHECC randomized over 2,000 children to a
control group or to an early childhood program targeting parents or children (see e.g., Fryer et al.,
2015; Fryer et al., 2020). Findings suggest that targeting parents has a larger impact on executive
functions (Fryer et al., 2015) while targeting the schooling input has a larger impact on academic
skills (Fryer et al., 2020). Further, findings show that CHECC impacts not only test scores, but
brain activity as measured by electroencephalography (EEG). Compared to children in the control
group, children assigned to the treatment had greater brain activity related to executive functioning,
and this brain activity was predictive of executive functioning skills for up to three years after the
intervention (Ye et al., 2021).
       The second goal of CHECC is to understand broader issues beyond the intervention effects
described above. This includes economic preference development, i.e., to understand adults
through children. One key to this area of study is understanding how economic preferences,
cognitive skills, and non-cognitive skills serve as inputs into human capital formation (Castillo et
al., 2020). Hence, CHECC also operates as an experimental laboratory and researchers invite
CHECC children and parents to participate in periodic economic experiments. CHECC also aims
to increase the number of economists studying children. Therefore, another focus is to include
researchers outside of the original principal investigators of CHECC to conduct studies. To date,
experiments that involve understanding the development of economic preferences with children at
CHECC have involved nearly 30 different authors and 11 publications. For these reasons,
throughout the article we return to studies involving CHECC to augment the learnings from the
literature where appropriate.



                                                                                                    6
3. Children can be Rational
       Before commencing a discussion of the research agenda into the preferences, choices, and
behaviors of children, it is important to understand the make-up of this experimental species. For
example, it is interesting, but much less so, to study a species that makes decisions haphazardly,
or whose preferences are labile and subject to the whims of circumstance. In such cases, no
optimization principles may underlie even the most straightforward of choices (see List, 2002a).


3.1 Rationality and strategic thinking
       Rationality and strategic thinking form the basis of most economic theories; hence,
understanding their development at an early age has attracted the attention of economists.
Expanding on earlier work by Harbaugh and co-authors, recent work has continued studying other
violations of rationality (Brocas and Carrillo, 2018; Castillo et al., 2018; Brocas et al., 2019),
backward induction (Brosig-Koch et al., 2015) and strategic thinking (Sher et al., 2014; Czermak
et al., 2016; Brocas et al., 2017; Brocas et al., 2019). An interesting result is that consistency in
decision-making develops asymmetrically across domains. Children first develop consistency in
domains that are more familiar to them, for example choosing between toys (Brocas et al., 2016).
Because consistency may not be assured when modeling children's decisions, it is important to
test for consistency and control for decision error, especially in examining the effects of economic
preferences on field behavior (Castillo et al., 2018).
       Concerning strategic thinking, Brocas and Carrillo (2018) find that children as young as
age 3-5 can think strategically, though they have limited attention, which makes it difficult for
them to consistently act strategically. In Sher et al. (2014), researchers find that by the age of 7,
children's ability to act strategically by intentionally misleading is similar to that of adults.
Strategic thinking is related to Theory of Mind (ToM), which is a widely studied construct in
developmental psychology that relates to the ability of a child to understand that other people may
have different preferences or information states than oneself. The developmental psychology
literature suggests that basic ToM develops between the ages of 3-5, but that higher-order ToM
abilities continue to develop through early adulthood (e.g., see Dumontheil et al., 2010). A recent
paper from economics shows that childhood ToM predicts behavior in economic games and is
associated with later-life educational and labor market outcomes (Fe et al., 2020). As such, it is
important for economists to understand ToM, and related child traits, not only because ToM is



                                                                                                   7
predictive of later life outcomes, but also since models of strategic behavior need to make
assumptions about agents' information sets.

3.2 Rationality in Markets
           Early field experimental work studying markets includes many child decision-makers,
providing tests of economic theory amongst this group of agents (List and Shogren, 1998; List,
2002a,b, 2003, 2004a; List and Millimet, 2008). For example, List (2004a) explores whether
predictions from competitive models of equilibrium in bilateral negotiating markets accurately
predict behavior. Since standard economic theory relies on two assumptions, utility-maximizing
behavior and the Walrasian tâtonnement process, relaxing those assumptions remains invaluable.
In his lab experiments with Harvard undergraduates, Chamberlin (1948) observes that quantity
traded is typically higher and realized prices typically lower than predicted by competitive models
of equilibrium. Vernon Smith, an experimental subject in Chamberlin's markets, later refined
Chamberlin's work by varying two key aspects of the experimental design in Smith (1962): i) use
of a double-oral auction where an auctioneer took bids and asks and ii) use of multiple market
periods, permitting agents a chance to learn rules, strategies, and perhaps even valuations in the
market (whereas Chamberlin's markets were one-shot). Empirical results from Smith's
experiments are astonishing--both quantity and price levels are close to competitive predictions.
This result is an early example highlighting that Walrasian tâtonnement is not a necessary
condition in the standard model. By now, hundreds of studies have replicated Smith's original
insight.
           List (2004a) returns to the Chamberlin institution but moves the analysis from the
laboratory environment to a natural setting where the actors had experiences with the institution.
Much like Smith's (1962) set-up, the market mechanics in these bilateral bargaining markets are
not Walrasian. Unlike Smith (1962), however, in these markets subjects set prices as they please,
with no guidance from oral bids and asks (a centralized auctioneer). Thus, List's (2004a) design
shifts the task of adaptation from the auctioneer to the market agents, who mill around making
bids and asks in a multilateral manner. In doing so, the market structure reformulates the problem
of stability of equilibria as a question about the behavior of actual people as opposed to a question
about an abstract market. A key result of List's (2004a) study is the tendency for exchange prices




                                                                                                   8
to approach the competitive model predictions, especially in symmetric markets (less so in
asymmetric markets).
         For our purposes, the key data generated in List (2004a) are his experiments with children.
That is, the experimental markets in which the only participants are children under the age of 13.
These include experienced children ­ who made more than 25 trades per month in the past two
years ­ and inexperienced children, who made less than 3 trades per month in the past two years.
The findings are summarized in Figure 2.
                                             [ FIGURE 2 HERE ]
The patterns are stark, and provide two insights: first, competitive price theory adequately
organizes the data when participants have sufficient market experience. 5 Second, data from the
market sessions with purely inexperienced children are akin to a martingale process, whereby
prices follow no apparent trajectory or guidance from theory. Inference from these experiments
suggest that even in markets populated entirely by experienced children, there is a tendency toward
neoclassical expectations after a few periods. Yet, Chamberlin's (1948) original one-shot insights
hold ­ neoclassical theory does not do well in organizing behavior in markets populated by agents
with little market experience. This exploration showcases the value of experiments with children
in that they provide an avenue to study behavioral differences across inexperienced agents and
their experienced counterparts in a natural manner. We suspect it would be difficult to find a test
group outside of children - or visiting villages without markets - that provides such natural
variation. More broadly, it is important to understand children's behavior in such exercises
because popular explanations of economic behavior model familial decisions as a part of a
household bargaining process, in which children are engaged.
         The above results are promising since they suggest that with a level of experience children
can make rational decisions and think strategically at relatively young ages (or, as in List and
Millimet's (2008) tests of GARP, children make a similar level of errors as adults). Researchers
wishing to model decision-making by children may consider using standard economic
frameworks. However, they should keep in mind other necessary skills that develop concurrently
to carry out preferred decisions, such as the ability to reason about others (ToM), attention, and
impulse control. Hence, before the age of 5-7, researchers who model decision-making by children


5
 A similar result is observed in Brocas and Carrillo (2019a), who replicate List (2004a), finding that 75-82% of
groups of 5-11 year-old children converge to equilibrium.


                                                                                                                   9
should be concerned about whether it is appropriate to assume standard assumptions of rationality
such as transitivity and so on. We discuss the importance, and timing, of child competencies and
their implications for design of economic experiments with children in section 9.


4. Conceptual Framework

         Having provided evidence of rationality among children, we turn to a conceptual
framework that sheds light on how to interpret data on experiments with children. In sub-section
4.1, we provide a human capital development model to lend insights into the origins and
malleability of skills and economic preferences. In sub-section 4.2, we discuss how child skills
and economic preferences enter a utility function that influences behavior and decision-making.
In our framework, we follow the typical approach, allowing child skills and economic preferences
to be affected by investments of parents, schools, and children. Child outcomes are therefore
affected by a combination of skills and economic choices, and the latter are partly affected by the
child's preferences.


4.1 Development of Economic Preferences
         We begin with the assumption that skills and economic preferences result from a nature-
nurture (i.e., gene-environment) interaction. In our framework, children are born with a "band" of
potential skills or preferences, and the level expressed within that band depends on the
environment, including parenting or interventions. 6 This notion follows the spirit of the genetics
literature, which over the past 25 years, has moved from a deterministic genetics view (that
genetics entirely determine outcomes) toward embracing epigenetics, which posits that gene
expression has an environmental influence (Sternberg, 2011; Ijzendoorn et al., 2011; Lickliter and
Witherington, 2017). 7 Related work in the nascent field of genoeconomics seeks to understand the




6
  Note that our "band" approach is not the only way to conceptualize the idea that genetics and environment both
contribute to outcomes (and that there are inherent limits to skill development). We could alternatively model
diminishing returns to inputs from the environment on initial skill levels to capture the idea that environment can
have an effect on skills and preferences in a bounded manner.
7
  The idea of a range of potential outcomes available to each individual ­ even among animals raised in the
laboratory ­ is due to early work by pioneering geneticist Jerry Hirsch (1963).


                                                                                                                      10
extent of heritability of traits. This work suggests that genes explain some - but not all - of the
variation in economic preferences and outcomes (Benjamin et al., 2011). 8
         Much of the work that we review in this paper seeks to evaluate the evolution of skills and
preferences and to understand what factors affect skill and preference formation. The implicit
assumption in this literature is that skills and preferences depend partly on nature and partly on
nurture. This means that experiments that seek to understand the inter-generational transmission
of economic preferences (discussed in sub-section 6.1) capture both a genetic component and an
association with household environment. Experiments that seek to understand the impact of shocks
or interventions on outcomes (discussed in section 8) are implicitly measuring the impact of
environment on gene expression.
         We present a stylized model in which a child's realized skill or economic preference is a
reflection of both pre-determined potential skills and preferences and environmental inputs. In the
model, we let  be a vector of skills and economic preferences for individual i at time t. The
components of  could include skills such as cognitive skills, "soft skills," and economic
preference parameters representing, e.g., altruism, time discounting, or risk preferences. Let  
[ ,  ], where  and  are vectors representing scalars that indicate lower and upper bounds of
skill  for individual  . For simplicity, we assume  and  are known but discuss the relaxation
of this assumption later.
         In this sense, each component of M is bounded by a separate  and  . Each individual is
born with initial conditions 0 where 0  [ ,  ]. An individual's lower and upper bound for
a particular skill is fixed across time, but the expression of that skill can vary within the bounds at
any point in time. Initial conditions 0 are presumed to be associated with genetic background.
Papers we review in sub-sections 6.1 and 6.2 seek to proxy for genetic background by studying
the association of skills and preferences in very young children with mother's skills, economic
preferences, and household demographic/socio-economic (SES) characteristics, respectively.
         A distinction between skills and preferences is that, for the former, a higher level of skills
is typically assumed to be better. Hence, policymakers designing interventions to improve skills
may concentrate primarily on  , whereas those seeking to understand the impacts of adverse
events on child skills may focus on  . However, for preferences, a normative statement regarding


8
 Some recent examples are studying the heritability of risk preferences (Linnér et al., 2019) and educational
attainment (Lee et al., 2018).


                                                                                                                11
the optimal level of  is -- in many cases -- difficult to defend. For example, suppose  captures
the lower bound on risk preferences (i.e., most risk averse) while  captures the upper bound of
risk preferences (i.e., most risk seeking). The optimal level is less clear, but may be a function of
norms, customs, or local rituals.
       The norm or aspirational level of each component of  is captured by  . Cultural norms,
peers, and parental preferences are a critical aspect of the human development problem. We
introduce  to capture the idea that each actor may desire for the child's skills or preferences to
conform to a group-level norm or a set standard and may incur a cost for deviating from the norm.
Specifically, parents choose their level of investment to meet these goals for skills and preferences
(Bisin and Verdier, 2001). Policymakers implement their preferred minimum level of skills, by
setting educational standards for each grade level and holding schools accountable if they are not
met. Children make decisions that are in part influenced by the decisions of their peers (the papers
we survey in sub-section 6.3 attest to this). Related work provides evidence for peer and
neighborhood effects on child and adolescent behavior (Brock and Durlauf, 2001; 2002; Gaviria
and Raphael, 2001; List et al., 2020; see Durlauf, 2014, for a review).
       Skill and economic preference development are affected by inputs of the child, parent,
school, prior skill or economic preferences, norms or aspirational levels, individual characteristics,
and bounds on skills. Thus, the state variables for the child's development process in period t are:
                            = ( ,  ,  , -1 , -1 ,  ,  ,  )                                        ( 1)

where  ,  and  capture the history of child, parent, and school inputs (e.g., time spent
learning, time with the child, types of activities with which to engage the child) from the beginning
of the process up to period t. -1 represents the level of the child's skill and preferences in the
prior period, and -1 represents the level of the norm or aspirational level in the prior period. 
are individual characteristics.
       The production function of skill and preference development is:
                                           
                             = ( ,  ,  | ,  )                                                     ( 2)

where skills in period t are influenced by inputs from the child, parent, and schools in that period,
given the current state and norms or aspirational level. The production function,  (), is increasing
in each argument and quasi-concave. The production of skills and preferences is influenced by
skills and inputs from previous periods, and this can reflect self-productivity and dynamic



                                                                                                   12
complementarity, as described in Cunha and Heckman (2007). Self-productivity means that a skill
learned in period  - 1 persists and can augment learning of that same skill in period , and
dynamic complementarity means that previously learned skills can bolster investment in new skills
in period . The production function reflects the malleability of realized skills and preferences
through aspirations and inputs of the child, parent, and school.
         Each actor (parents, schools, and children) maximizes their investment in child skills,
taking the other investments as given, subject to the production function of skills and preferences
(2) and a budget constraint. The budget constraint,  = ( , ), is a function of prices 
(where  indexes each activity, such as time spent on the activity or purchases of books or
tutoring) and income, . The outcome of this process yields a policy function of investments
that directly relates to the state variables:
                                                   , =  (, )                                                       ( 3)

         We next turn to the implications of this simple framework. The fact that individual bands
exist and that they can overlap across people or groups can explain group-level differences that are
observed in previous experiments. For example, the literature that we survey in sub-section 5.3
evaluates gender differences in competitiveness between men and women (see, e.g., Gneezy et al.,
2003). In much of this literature, women display less competitive preferences than men, which is
thought to explain in part the corresponding gap in labor market earnings (Gneezy et al., 2003;
Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). One might conclude from this evidence that the "band" for
competitiveness is situated to the right for men compared to women. However, a handful of studies
explore behaviors in matrilineal societies and find that, in this context, the gender gap in
competitiveness disappears (see, e.g., Gneezy et al., 2009; Andersen et al., 2013). Taken together,
these findings are consistent with the idea that the bands for competitiveness overlap for men and
women, and we could observe men and women expressing both different and similar  for
competitiveness, depending on inputs and environment. 9



9
  There is experimental evidence that given the "right" incentives (i.e. the competitive payment is much higher than
the sure payment), women compete as much as men (Petrie and Segal, 2017; Ifcher and Zarghamee, 2016).
Relatedly, in an exploration of gender differences in social preferences, DellaVigna et al. (2013) find that women
are more likely to be on the margin of giving, partly because of a less dispersed distribution of altruism. In the same
manner, the distributional aspects of M across groups of interest might hold import for the interpretation of gender
competition studies. Similar reasoning holds when interpreting empirical results from interventions when setting
 , which is discussed next.


                                                                                                                    13
       Another implication relates to the impact of interventions on child skills. Heterogeneity in
0 implies that we may also observe heterogeneity in treatment effects. For example, as implied
by Cunha and Heckman (2007), higher 0 could make investments in  more productive.
Suggestive evidence for this is found in the intervention discussed in section 2, where the effects
of a parenting program were most concentrated among students with high executive function skills
at baseline (Fryer et al., 2015). Since  is bounded for every child  by  and  , the implication
is that some children may not be able to reach an aspirational level,  , if it is set above  . For
such children, interventions intended to increase achievement in a particular skill to reach a goal
may not observe considerable effects.
       We also find evidence for this result in the CHECC intervention discussed in section 2 ­
there were no cognitive impacts of the schooling intervention for children who already had high
cognitive test scores (Fryer et al., 2020). However, the same intervention could have such an effect
on other children if  were within their band. Aligned with this, the schooling intervention was
highly effective for students with cognitive skills below the median (Fryer et al., 2020). A
complementary CHECC study that explores the effects of monthly financial incentives amongst
adolescents for meeting an achievement standard based on multiple measures of performance
reveals overall modest effects but has a large and significant impact among students on the
threshold of meeting the achievement standard (Levitt et al., 2016a). Such results imply that
intervention success effects will be heterogeneous just by the nature of the policymaker setting  .
In this manner, a natural set of moderators result directly from how the researcher or policymaker
sets  .
       Consider an individual's realized skill or preference level,  . Two individuals with the
same level of realized skill could have very different underlying bands of potential ability. In other
words, improvement in a skill is different from being born into a "good stock" of ability. This
insight poses an interesting question with regards to how early childhood interventions impact later
life outcomes. For instance, are long-term outcomes different for children who attained a skill
through natural ability or through effort induced by an intervention? This is difficult to tease apart,
of course, because  and  may not be known with certainty. There is some evidence for
"reversion to the mean" in the sense that many early childhood interventions see fade-out of skills
learned in the years following a program (Duncan and Magnuson, 2013; Almond et al., 2018).
This suggests that children who increase their skills through early childhood interventions may


                                                                                                    14
need to be scaffolded with additional interventions in the middle-childhood years to attain
persistent gains, whereas those with higher initial skills may maintain their trajectory without
additional scaffolding.
        The shape of the production function is flexible and, as noted, allows for self-productivity
and dynamic complementarities of skills (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). More generally, skills can
be complementary, in the sense that improvements or changes in skill X could also lead to
increases in skill Y. These complementarities can exist within a period, as well as across periods.
In the literature we survey, there is some evidence that skills move in tandem. For example, studies
find a correlation between risk preferences and cognitive abilities (Benjamin et al., 2013; Andreoni
et al., 2019a). Such correlations also have implications for the identification of skills and
preferences, which we discuss in sub-section 10.4.
        Finally, the properties of the production function suggest that investing in a child early in
life leads to the greatest benefits to the skills within M as skills build on one another, and that
investments by more parties (e.g., schools, parents) complement one another. In line with these
properties, a review of data from interventions targeted at various age groups have shown benefit-
cost ratios that decline with the age of the targeted group (Kautz et al., 2014). 10 Along these lines,
List et al. (2018) provide a discussion for the importance in investing in children prior to the school
years. 11 The implications for economic preferences have not been studied empirically but follow
a similar line of thought. Investments early on are more effective for shifting preferences than
investments later, and investments in both schooling and parents are complementary. As discussed
in section 7, child preferences early on lead to decisions (e.g., conduct at school) and subsequently
affect outcomes (e.g., educational attainment). If preferences shift through inputs, then our work
at CHECC -- in which we assess preferences prior to school investments when children are 3-5 --
is helpful since it may come close to providing evidence of the "innate" nature of preferences.
        An open question is to what extent individuals understand the production function or know
the values of ( ,  ). The model above implicitly assumes that these are known; however,
predictions would change if, for example, individuals had incorrect beliefs about mapping of


10
   However, a newer review did not find this relationship (Rea and Burton, 2020). We view this as an invaluable
research question going forward that will be better understood through conducting field experiments with children.
11
   Investment in the adolescent years should not be discounted since studies do show impacts of certain investments.
For example, a schooling intervention in Joensen et al. (2021) finds that a relatively low-cost ~10-week math class
can increase both cognitive and executive functioning skills.


                                                                                                                 15
investment effort to outcomes, or about the values of ( ,  ). Examples from empirical work
suggest that incorrect beliefs are likely, and it is plausible that academic achievement gaps by SES
are associated with differences in beliefs. List et al. (2021) and Boneva and Rauh (2018) find that
perceived returns to parental investment are positively associated with household income ­ i.e.,
low-SES parents value investment less than high-SES parents. List et al. (2021) describe the
existing literature showing that from a very young age, high-SES children do better on academic
achievement tests. They conduct field experiments with parents of infants and toddlers in the US
to understand whether beliefs can be changed. At baseline, they find that low-SES parents are less
likely to believe that their investments in their baby can affect brain development as compared to
higher-income and higher-educational attainment parents. The authors also show that interventions
consisting of short videos or home visits durably improve beliefs about investments. Similarly,
Dizon-Ross (2019) describes a study in Malawi in which giving parents information about their
child's skills affects parental investments.
       However, parental interventions do not always affect beliefs. For example, Attanasio et al.
(2020) show that mothers of babies in Colombia underestimate the return on their investments, but
their home visiting program does not affect beliefs. Further, beliefs are not the only channel
through which parental investments are affected. Mayer et al. (2019) conduct an intervention on
parents in the US that incorporates reminders, goal setting and social rewards. The authors find
that this program affects the time parents spend reading to their children, but that this result does
not operate through changes in beliefs.
       The concept of mindset in psychology also suggests that people differ in their beliefs about
whether they can move M. Children who believe they can change their intelligence (growth
mindset) achieve more than children who believe that they cannot do so (fixed mindset) (Dweck,
2015). If actors under-estimate the value of b, or the extent to which M is malleable, this may result
in under-investments in child skills. Policies can be designed to counter this issue ­ for example,
Yeager et al. (2019) show that mindset can be changed through interventions.


4.2 How Economic Preferences Predict Behavior
       The literature that we survey also focuses on measuring  (section 5) and evaluating how
 correlates with contemporaneous or future field behaviors (section 7). Hence, it is helpful to




                                                                                                   16
understand how  enters a child's utility function and leads to changes in behaviors and outcomes.
To do this, we provide a standard formulation of a utility function with preference parameters.
         Children are assumed to maximize their utility of consumption over time subject to a
budget constraint that is a function of prices and income,  = (, ), where income is
determined by their parents. Recall that  can represent skills and preferences. In this case, 
includes preferences over uncertainty, consumption over time, and preferences towards others.
The utility function is as follows:
                                                             ( | )                                                  ( 4)

where  = (,  , ),  is a risk aversion parameter,  is a discount rate, and  is the degree of
prosociality towards others. 12 Utility is increasing and quasi-concave over consumption. Utility
has a curvature to account for risk preferences and a discount factor to account for the weight
placed on consumption in the present versus the future. While utility is defined over consumption,
it could more generally represent field behaviors, e.g., educational achievement, smoking, etc.
Choices are affected by these preference parameters in standard ways. More risk averse individuals
are less likely to engage in risky behaviors, such as misbehaving in school or smoking. More
impatient individuals are more likely to take immediate rewards rather than wait for larger future
rewards. Individuals with stronger prosocial inclinations are more generous to others, ceteris
paribus. To proxy for these underlying preferences, experiments evaluate child and adolescent
decisions in allocations between self and others (sub-section 5.1), choices between safe and risky
options, and choices between immediate and future rewards (sub-section 5.2).
         Economists who study field behavior often take preferences as given. However, according
to our framework, choices are malleable through investments by children, schools, and parents
(sub-section 4.1); this prediction is borne out in the empirical data discussed in sub-section 8.2.
Choices in previous periods may well shape preferences. Children who have fallen behind in
school may be impatient and less willing to study to complete coursework that is difficult so that
they can graduate. Finally, economic preferences may differ across time because of the
development production process and thus yield different outcomes for younger or older children.



12
   Social preferences can include separate components for `warm glow,' i.e., utility from the gift itself and pure
altruism, i.e., utility tied to the consumption of others (sub-section 5.1). Additional preference parameters that are of
interest include present-bias, i.e., the over-weighing of immediate outcomes (sub-section 5.2), ambiguity aversion,
i.e., aversion to unknown risks (sub-section 5.2) and competitiveness (sub-section 5.3).


                                                                                                                     17
       Throughout this section, we have made parallel but separate observations about skills and
preferences. Human capital development models focus mostly on skills, whereas models that seek
to explain behavior focus more on preferences. An interesting question is to what extent one or the
other drives outcomes. One recent paper evaluated skills and time preferences of adolescents,
finding that academic efficiency (ability to learn) rather than motivation (time preferences)
explains why some students fall behind in school and others do not (Cotton et al., 2020). While
the Cotton et al. work represents an early empirical contribution attempting to evaluate the core
insights of the contemporary psychology of education models of the 20th century (e.g., Carroll,
1962), we trust that future field experiments with children will lend further insights into the
underpinnings of adolescent skill formation through the lens of the models of our sister sciences.


5. Can we Measure Children's Preferences?
       In this section, we provide a discussion of the types of economic preferences of children
that have been explored in the literature, including social preferences, risk and time preferences,
and competitiveness. As discussed in sub-section 4.2, these preferences enter the utility function
of the child and influence behaviors and outcomes. A highly recommended companion paper by
Sutter et al. (2019) provides a comprehensive survey of experimental findings related to economic
preferences with respect to age and gender.


5.1 Social Preferences
       All human interaction is founded on our ability to get along with one another. Humans are
unique in their ability to form groups and cooperate with genetic strangers. Social preferences ­ or
preferences toward the welfare of others ­ are a key component of this feature of humanity.
Understanding origins of social preferences is important for our understanding of how institutions
form and evolve. For example, the large differences in inequality and redistribution between the
United States and Scandinavia are mirrored by differences in inequality acceptance (but not in
preferences toward efficiency) in cross-cultural experiments among adults (Almås et al., 2019).
Indeed, there is a large amount of diversity of social preferences both across and within countries
(Falk et al., 2018). Observing how these cross-cultural differences emerge is of interest to the study




                                                                                                   18
of political economy, to understand why people contribute time and money to charitable causes,
or undertake any other economic activity that involves the welfare of others. 13
        To understand social preferences, economists commonly put people in situations where
they are given the opportunity to share scarce resources with another person (i.e., a dictator game).
At CHECC, in a series of experiments, we gave young children 6 stickers and asked how many
they would like to share with another anonymous child (Castillo et al., 2020). Figure 3 summarizes
these data. Some clear patterns emerge. First, similar to dictator games with adults, we observe a
large concentration of sharing at the 50/50 "fair" norm, and children rarely share more than half
of their endowment (Panel A). We also observe a concentration in zero sharing--giving none of
the endowment to the other person. Yet, there remains marked heterogeneity in allocation
decisions. Second, even at young ages, children somewhat increase their sharing behavior as they
grow older, from ages 4 through 6.5 years old, both in terms of average amount of endowment
shared and the likelihood of sharing at the 50/50 norm (shown in Panel B).
                                       [ FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE ]
        A similar, and even more pronounced trend of increased sharing with age has been
documented in a number of studies over the past decade (e.g., Fehr et al., 2008; Angerer et al.,
2015a). These studies use dictator games similar to the work at CHECC, as well as allocation
decisions with restricted choice sets that allow for direct comparisons of, for example, fairness
and efficiency preferences. Studies also have found that trust, reciprocity, and cooperation
increase with age (Harbaugh et al., 2003; Sutter and Kocher, 2007; Evans et al., 2013). To study
trust, reciprocity, and cooperation, researchers typically use simplified variants of commonly
used paradigms in laboratory experiments, e.g., ultimatum, prisoner's dilemma, and public goods
games (Ledyard et al., 1995). In a field study to explore social preferences of individuals across
collector conventions (in public goods games), a television game show (in prisoner dilemma
games), and a university fundraising drive (charitable gifts), List (2004b) finds that in every
setting there is a strong relationship between age and other regarding preferences--in every case
the older subjects act more pro-socially.




13
  Kenneth Arrow (1972) perhaps put it best when noting: "virtually every commercial transaction has within itself an
element of trust... it can be plausibly argued that much of the economic backwardness in the world can be explained
by the lack of mutual confidence."


                                                                                                                 19
       Rather than showing how behaviors in games change with age, another research approach
is to design experiments that allow us to distinguish between theories. For example, List and
Samek (2013) study whether dictator game decisions at an early age were due to warm glow or
pure altruism, finding evidence for pure altruism but not warm glow. Fehr et al. (2013) explore
the evolution of egalitarian, altruistic, and spiteful preferences, finding that altruism became
more prominent with age, but that spitefulness and egalitarianism became less frequent with age.
Bereby-Meyer and Fiks (2013) find that negative reciprocity increases with age. There are also
some instances in which theories apply equally well to children as they do to adults. For
example, the theory of moral cost described in Cox et al. (2016), whereby people make decisions
based partly on the action set available to them, predict the behavior of children as young as 3 as
well as the behavior of adult subjects.
       Related work also uses social preference experiments with children to understand
preferences toward in-group or out-group members, or discrimination. For instance, List et al.
(2017) use dictator games that vary whether the recipient appears White or Black and find that 3-
5-year-old White and Hispanic children send more to the Black recipient than to the White
recipient ­ a pattern that is reversed in studies of adults (Riach and Rich, 2002). Related work
finds that language discrimination in a bilingual city in Italy increases with the child's age
suggesting that perhaps preferences toward minorities develop with age (Angerer et al., 2016),.
       An open question revolves around what triggers social preferences to manifest in children.
A potential explanation in the case of fairness preferences is that children become more concerned
about fairness after they have developed the math skills that allow them to create and comprehend
an equal division of the endowment (Chernyak et al., 2016). This underscores the importance of
considering cognitive skills that develop concurrently when measuring economic preference
development. Such within-period complementarities of skills are captured in our conceptual
framework of skill formation. Other explanations about why social preferences increase with age
include socialization (Fehr et al., 2013) and the ability to take into account the preferences and
viewpoints of others (Bereby-Meyer and Fiks, 2013).


5.2 Time and risk preferences
       Time and risk preferences play an important role in a wide range of decision-making
contexts, which are of interest to economists in fields that span from household finance to health



                                                                                                   20
to education. To measure time and risk preferences, economists usually put people in situations
where they make decisions about receiving rewards sooner versus later, and about receiving sure
rewards versus being entered into a lottery for rewards, respectively.
         Research shows that time preferences, and especially present-biased preferences, are
related to participation in financial education programs and credit card borrowing among adults
(Meier and Sprenger, 2010; Meier and Sprenger, 2013). These preferences are also related to health
outcomes ­ for example, impatience is correlated with higher BMI (Ikeda et al., 2010; Sutter et
al., 2013; Golsteyn et al., 2014; Weller et al., 2008) and more smoking, drinking, and drug abuse
behaviors (Bradford et al., 2017; Chabris et al., 2008). Risk tolerance is also linked to smoking
and drinking (Anderson and Mellor, 2008). Finally, time preferences are linked to misbehavior,
educational attainment, and lifetime income (Castillo et al., 2011; Castillo et al, 2019a; Golsteyn
et al., 2014).
         Understanding time and risk preference development is important for several reasons. First,
we want to understand the origins of such preferences, and how they are shaped by parents and
schooling. Second, we want to understand time and risk preferences of children to inform policy
interventions. For example, most studies find that patience increases with age (see Sutter et al.,
2019, for an excellent overview). This suggests that interventions targeting children should focus
more on the present than on the future ­ i.e., when giving incentives for reaching education or
health goals, these incentives should be distributed as soon as possible (Levitt et al., 2016b).
Alternatively, adults may be more willing to accept delays in receipt of their incentives. As another
example, researchers worry about the apparent greater risk tolerance of adolescents that can lead
to detrimental behaviors like smoking and drinking, yet experiments show us that we should be
most worried about their tolerance toward ambiguity, i.e., toward unknown risks (Tymula et al.,
2012).
         Using the CHECC data, Castillo et al. (2020) find that time preferences measured at age 3-
5 are associated with disciplinary referrals years later in elementary school. Importantly, these
preferences are distinct from cognitive skills (e.g., reading, writing, math) and executive functions
(e.g., inhibitory control and working memory) in that they have an independent role in predicting
disciplinary referrals. Hence, Castillo et al. (2020) refer to economic preferences as a key factor
previously missing in our understanding of human capital formation.




                                                                                                  21
        Figure 4 shows the raw data from time and risk preference experiments we conducted at
CHECC when children were 3-5 years old. In time preference experiments (Panel A), we gave
children choices between smaller, earlier candy rewards and larger, later rewards. 14 In risk
preference experiments (Panel B), we gave children opportunities to choose between smaller,
certain rewards or different probabilities of larger rewards.
                [ FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE: HISTOGRAM OF CHECC DATA ]
        In Figure 4, we immediately observe heterogeneities in economic preferences, even at these
young ages. This lends empirical support for the conceptual framework in Section 4. There is a
range of behaviors manifested by the children. How these heterogeneities arise, and how malleable
they are, remain open questions for future research.


5.3 The Competitiveness Gender Gap
        A concern in the field of labor economics is that in many developed countries women are
pursuing higher education at similar, or higher, rates than men, yet women continue to have
relatively lower earnings and are less likely to hold executive positions in firms (Bertrand, 2009;
Blau et al., 2010; Bertrand and Hallock, 2001; Wolfers, 2006). Gender differences in
competitiveness have been proposed as one reason for this gap, and a large literature has used
experiments to show that men and women have heterogeneous preferences over wage contracts,
with men preferring relative wage incentives more than women (Gneezy et al., 2003; Niederle and
Vesterlund, 2007; Gneezy et al., 2009; Flory et al., 2015; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011, provides
a review).
        For their part, experiments with children have begun to inform us when this gap develops
and what we can do about it. In an early paper on this topic, Gneezy and Rustichini (2004) asked
Israeli children to run a short distance either alone or in competition. The authors find that
competition improved the running time of boys, but not of girls. The work that followed has mostly
preferred a choice-based measure of competitiveness preference rather than a performance-based
measure. Most of this work followed Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) by asking children to perform




14
  Children also completed the "marshmallow" task (Mischel, 1989). In Castillo et al. (2020), we show that the time
preference task and the marshmallow task are distinct drivers of behavior and only time preferences were predictive
of disciplinary referrals.


                                                                                                                 22
a task under a piece rate and under a tournament, and then eliciting a choice of piece rate or
tournament to assess willingness to compete.
        An overview of the findings in this literature is that competitiveness increases as children
get older, and that girls are generally less competitive than boys (for an example, see Sutter and
Glätzle-Rutzler, 2015). 15 However, there are some important additional take-aways. First, culture
seems to have a large influence. The gender gap in the running task is not observed among Swedish
children or Armenian children (Dreber et al., 2011; Khachatryan et al., 2015), in contrast to Israeli
children (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2004). Nor is there a gender gap in ball throwing in a matrilineal
society in India (Andersen et al., 2013). Girls from same-sex schools are as competitive as boys
(Booth and Nolen, 2012). Second, task differences also seem to be important. For example, the
gender gap in competitiveness is not observed in the "female" sports of skipping rope and dancing
(Dreber et al., 2014; Khachatryan et al., 2015).
        The literature suggests that culture, norms, and social learning play critical roles in the
development of competitiveness preferences. Cultural norms of behavior may impose rigidities on
the expression of skills so that patterns of gender differences in competitive preferences seemingly
reverse (see Andersen et al., 2013, as an example). Culture and norms may also play a role in time,
risk, and social preferences, where there is as much diversity across countries as within (Falk et
al., 2018). This highlights the import of task selection (and potentially needing many types of
tasks) to elicit a competitiveness trait. In light of the model discussed in Section 4, the broad
literature is consonant with the notion that the "band" of competitiveness preferences of boys is to
the right of that of girls, but there is an overlap, and culture and norms affect whether or not there
is a manifested gender gap in competitive preferences. For instance, while most boys might be
more competitive than most girls, different influences from culture or parenting can cause girls
and boys to look similar (i.e., end up in the overlapping part of the band) or reverse the identity.




15
   Yet, the work of Flory et al. (2018) shows that while research on competitiveness has emphasized sex as a
physiological determinant, their evidence shows that women's preferences over competition change with age such
that the gender gap, while large for young adults, disappears in older populations due to the fact that older women
are much more competitive. This result suggests that a simple gender-based view of competitiveness is misleading,
and that age seems just as important as sex. Future field experiments with children in this space can bear valuable
fruit, as early life events will surely be meaningful.


                                                                                                                 23
6. What Variables Correlate with Children's Preferences?
           A key to understanding the causes of children's behavior is having a firm grasp of their
preferences, not only the origination of such preferences but also the correlates. Children can be
influenced by a myriad of factors, from their parents to their neighbors to their environment. This
section explores correlates with children's behaviors from a broad variety of empirical approaches
but focuses on studies using field experiments, as defined in Harrison and List (2004).


6.1 Children and their Parents
           Children spend a disproportionate amount of time with their parents, especially when they
are young. As described in our model in Section 4, the influence that parents have on their children
could affect their skills and economic preferences for their patience, willingness to take risks,
competitive attitudes, and prosocial behavior. The literature on improving the outcomes of
disadvantaged children has started to focus on parental investments (see List et al., 2018, for an
overview). Fryer et al. (2015) use the CHECC program to explore the impact of intervening with
parents on improving child non-cognitive skills.
           Researchers hypothesize that parenting shapes economic preferences (Bisin and Verdier,
2001; Lundberg et al., 2009; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2017; Del Boca et al., 2019). This could occur
as the child grows and decisions shift from being made by the parent to being made by the child.
During this time, parents transmit their preferences to the child, whether their child might agree
with their parent or not (possibly through parental investments in the child, see our model in
Section 4). Understanding if and how this occurs requires an empirical evaluation of children and
their parents.
           Certain evidence shows that parents and their adult children share similarities in economic
preferences (Dohmen et al., 2011; Kimball et al., 2009). However, research with parents and
children finds mixed evidence of a correlation for patience (Bettinger and Slonim, 2007; Kosse
and Pfeiffer, 2012; Andreoni et al., 2017; Samek et al., 2019) and no evidence for a correlation in
altruism (Ben-Ner et al., 2017; Bettinger and Slonim, 2006). There does seem to be a correlation
for risk preferences between children and parents (Alan et al., 2017; Chowdhury et al., 2018;
Samek et al., 2019). 16 Further, Khadjavi and Nicklisch (2018) find that parents' ambitions for their
children are correlated with child competitiveness. We interpret the literature as suggestive

16
     Alan et al. (2017) study mothers and the correlation is only present for daughters.


                                                                                                   24
evidence that parents do indeed transmit their preferences to their children. Furthermore, the
finding of a more persistent correlation among adult children than among young children suggests
that many years of parental socialization are required for preferences to "stick." An alternative
explanation is that the correlation exists even at young ages but that preferences are difficult to
measure ­ or are noisier - in early childhood.
       A related area of study is how children affect decision-making in the household and how
that decision-making affects a child's choices. A child's preferences interact with her parent's
preferences, and this can affect many aspects of behavior within and outside of a household, such
as human capital development of children, products purchased in the household, and constraints
parents might place on a child's time. The interaction between parent and child within the
household is typically modeled as a non-cooperative game and preferences are inferred from
survey data or parameterized from auxiliary experimental data sets (Lundberg et al., 2009; Del
Boca et al., 2019).
       Examining the interaction of children and parents in decision-making, Houser et al. (2015),
using children from CHECC, experimentally examine the effect of having a child present when
parents make a decision whether to cheat. They find that in the presence of girls ­ but not of boys
­ parents are less likely to cheat when their child can observe their behavior, especially when the
gift is for the child. In another CHECC study, Ben-Ner et al. (2017) examine the impact of children
on donation decisions of their parents. In this study, parents are asked to make a donation decision
that in some cases is observed by their child. The authors find that some sub-sets of parents
(fathers, and parents of generous children) are more likely to model generous behavior when they
know that their child will see their decision. These results suggest that parents do make decisions
aimed at influencing children's preferences, as we predict in our model in Section 4 ­ for example,
modeling honest or generous preferences in a potential attempt to encourage their children to adopt
such preferences.


6.2 Children and their Socio-Economic Status
       Inequality is an important societal issue that is of interest in all fields of economics. What
explains inequality, and how to reduce inequality, are open questions. In light of our model
discussed in Section 4, intervening in childhood can lead to changes in the outcomes within the
"bands" of children from different socio-economic backgrounds. For example, Dynarski et al.



                                                                                                  25
(2018) conduct a field experiment to evaluate the impact of information and promise of financial
assistance upon admission on encouraging low-income, high-achieving students to enroll at the
University of Michigan. The number of students who apply and enroll doubles, suggesting such
an approach could have strong impacts on closing income gaps through college choice.
       One possibility is that inequalities are persistent due to differences in economic preferences
between different populations. Indeed, experiments with children show associations of SES with
economic preferences. Research shows that children and adolescents from low-SES backgrounds
tend to be less patient and more risk seeking than higher-income counterparts (Eckel et al., 2012;
Deckers et al., 2015; Falk and Kosse, 2016). With one exception (Almås et al., 2016), most studies
also find that lower SES children are less altruistic/egalitarian (Benenson et al., 2007; Bauer et al.,
2014b; Deckers et al., 2015; Falk and Kosse, 2016; Kosse et al., 2019).
       The findings are relevant since exhibiting more impatience as a young child or adolescent
could have compounding effects on educational choices - e.g., misbehavior in school or graduating
from high school (Castillo et al., 2011; Castillo et al., 2019a; 2020). Adolescents who are more
tolerant to risk may take up drugs or other risky behaviors, which could also impact their future
outcomes (Rao et al., 2011). It is less obvious how other preferences ­ e.g., social preferences ­
affect inequality. However, as children become adults and start making decisions that affect
institutions, more egalitarian preferences in society can lead to different policy decisions (e.g.,
with regards to taxation and redistribution) (Cappelen et al., 2020).
       An important caveat is that we should not draw causal inference from the studies described
above. It is not clear whether differences in SES cause the differences in preferences, or whether
omitted variables drive these differences. Omitted variables could include differences in access to
resources, differences in parenting, or differences in cognitive abilities. Incorporating these
variables into the analysis will help to limit (but not fully solve) this problem. Another open
question is whether differences in preferences by SES are present at birth, or whether interactions
with the environment result in these differences. There is some evidence for the latter in a study
by Rao (2019) ­ the economic preferences of adolescents from higher income backgrounds are
affected by random assignment to classrooms with adolescents from lower income backgrounds.




                                                                                                    26
6.3 Children and their Peers
       In the framework developed in Section 4, we discuss a group-level norm of  that
incentivizes the child to conform to the norm. To this end, related experimental literature evaluates
the impact of peers and neighborhoods. In List et al. (2020), the authors take advantage of the
CHECC field experiment to explore the social side of human capital formation and skill
development. While most of behavioral economics is founded on psychological concepts, List et
al. (2020) leverage insights from sociology (for example, Coleman, 1988) to examine neighbor
and peer effects on human capital formation of 3-5 year-olds. They are able to make causal
statements on neighbor effects because CHECC randomized treatment allocation across space and
time, effectively creating a checkerboard panel data set to exploit. List et al. (2020) document
large, localized spillover effects on control children who live near treated children. For our
purposes, perhaps the most compelling evidence that speaks to our theoretical framework is the
underlying economic mediator (mechanisms) at work. They find that the spillover effect on
executive function scores operates through the child's social network while parental investment is
an important channel through which cognitive spillover effects operate. Both results highlight that
human capital accumulation is fundamentally a social activity, even at very young ages.
       Peer effects are also explored in Rao (2019), who examines the effects of a change in school
policy in India whereby children from poor families are placed in classrooms with rich families.
Rao (2019) collects administrative and experimental data on affected children and finds that
children from rich families are more prosocial after having been exposed to children from poor
families. By contrast, there are limited impacts of such exposure on academic achievement.
       Another approach to understand the impact of peers is to conduct manipulations in which
child decisions are either made public or private. This is most commonly done to study social
preferences. In work that uses this approach, children as young as age 5 are more generous when
the recipient is aware of their donation options (Leimgruber et al., 2012). Similar results are found
in Houser et al. (2012) for children aged 9 and above when their decisions are made in public
environments, and in Chen et al. (2016) for children aged 8 when their choices are displayed to
their peers. Children also tend to be more generous toward in-group than out-group members, see
for example Bindra et al. (2018) for a study with children ages 3-6, Bauer et al. (2014a) for ages
7-18, Sparks et al. (2017) for ages 4-6, and Zhu et al. (2015) for ages 2.5-6.5.




                                                                                                  27
       Related work finds some evidence for peer effects on other economic preferences of
children, but this work is limited. Eckel et al. (2012) find that a higher percentage of low-income
peers in a school is correlated with greater risk aversion among adolescents. However, this paper
does not seek to identify whether this was a causal effect. Charness et al. (2019) find that prompting
children to think about peers improves their performance on a ToM task.


7. Do Preferences Correlate with Field Behavior?
       A large literature evaluates the association of adults' economic preferences with field
behaviors. This work finds that economic preferences are associated with field behaviors in ways
that are consistent with the framework in sub-section 4.2. For example, increased patience is
associated with savings behavior, lower credit card debt, and improved health outcomes, which
are also associated with what we view as positive life outcomes (Chapman and Coups, 1999;
Picone et al., 2004; Weller et al., 2008; Bradford, 2010; Meier and Sprenger, 2010; Leonard et al.,
2013). Research with children and adolescents finds similar associations. These results are
important since they suggest that economists are measuring a construct that also has field relevance
among children. Importantly, however, observing preferences and behavior at the same time does
not speak to causal effects as preferences and behavior may co-evolve.
       The literature does teach us that time and risk preferences of children and adolescents are
correlated with smoking, drinking, body mass index (BMI), savings, and conduct at school some
of the time (e.g., Sutter et al., 2013). Focusing on a small sample of truant adolescents, risk and
time preferences are not found to be correlated with school attendance (Antrobus et al., 2017).
Samek et al. (2019) find an association of time preferences with BMI of adolescents when time
preferences are measured using a stated-preference survey, but not when preferences are measured
using an incentivized experimental elicitation task. In another paper, competitive preferences are
correlated with adolescent choices of academic track in school (Buser et al., 2014).
       Increasing the distance in time between the measurement of preferences and field behavior
allows for an examination of the significance of early preferences on future outcomes. Issues of
causality remain relevant ­ for example, other co-evolving omitted variables could drive the
associations, increasing causal density. This problem can be mitigated somewhat by including a
large number of covariates as control variables. Finding that measured preferences earlier in life




                                                                                                   28
are correlated with longer-run behavior confirms the importance of understanding children to
understand adults, yet in the end the results remain correlational.
        In a nutshell, however, the literature does show that time and risk preferences measured in
adolescence are correlated with educational and labor market outcomes later in life. More
impatient and risk-taking adolescents, as measured with incentivized experiments, are more likely
to misbehave in school (Castillo et al., 2011; Castillo et al., 2018) and are less likely to graduate
from high school five years later (Castillo et al., 2019a), even controlling for demographics,
cognitive ability and school effects. Other studies using unincentivized measures find a
relationship between present-biasedness, self-control, and impulsivity in children, adolescents, and
young adults and labor market and health outcomes (DellaVigna and Paserman, 2005; Moffitt et
al., 2011). Golsteyn et al. (2014) use a hypothetical time preference measure with teenagers and
find a relationship with labor market outcomes 20 years later. Cadena and Keys (2015) use a
measure of impatience from an interviewer report of whether the young adult is "impatient or
restless" during the interview and find that it is related to school drop-out and labor market
outcomes later in life.
        Examining behaviors at even younger ages, we find that there is evidence for preferences
playing a role in life outcomes as well. Mischel et al. (1989) show that a child's ability to resist
eating a marshmallow at age four predicts social and cognitive competency during adolescence
(see also Mischel et al., 1988; Shoda et al., 1990). However, some scholars challenge the
robustness of these findings with additional data (Watts et al., 2018; Falk et al., 2019). In particular,
the marshmallow paradigm may not be a clean measure of the ability to delay, since manipulating
the uncertainty in the environment also has large impacts on delay decisions (Kidd et al., 2013).
Further, Benjamin et al. (2019) collect data from the original Mischel and Ebbesen (1970) sample
40 years later and find no effect of the duration of time waited on a variety of life outcomes, but
they do find an impact of an index of self-regulation measured at various later ages on adult
outcomes. This study suggests that the marshmallow paradigm could also be picking up aspects of
the child's environment or is less informative for later life outcomes than advertised in the
literature and popular press. It also points again to the importance of considering omitted variables
as discussed in sub-section 6.2.
        Exploring behaviors in CHECC children, we find that child time preferences as measured
by incentivized experiments at age 3-5 explain disciplinary referrals in elementary school up to six



                                                                                                      29
years later, even when controlling for cognitive abilities and executive functions (Castillo et al.,
2020). Importantly, we find that economic preferences are a third, distinct factor shaping life
outcomes (in addition to cognitive skills and executive functions).


8. Identification of Preference Development
         Discovering causal relationships is invaluable since they represent the key to theory testing,
the basis of fact, and are vital for informed policy prescriptions. For example, one important
exercise is to identify the impact of the inputs ­ child, parent, and school ­ on human capital
formation, as discussed in Section 4. Using naturally occurring data (in many cases "natural
experiments") and invoking various assumptions represents the standard approach to provide such
causal estimates in economics. However, the economics community has turned increasingly to
using random assignment, or field experiments with well-specified models. 17 For some policy
questions of interest, this approach can be challenging to implement or potentially unethical or ill-
advised. For example, to test the effects of domestic violence or low SES on a child's economic
preferences, we would not want to force individuals into disadvantaged circumstances. Instead,
interventions should have the intention of delivering positive change. For example, random
assignment to income transfers to increase the household budget would be an appropriate way to
experimentally measure the effects of a change in income. Or, an intervention to reduce household
violence could be used to evaluate the effect of violence on child skills and preferences.
         There is a large and growing literature on the effects of early childhood, or in utero,
environmental effects on child cognitive skills and misbehavior (Almond and Currie, 2011). Yet
research on the effects of interventions, natural experiments, environmental conditions or negative
shocks on economic preferences is still in its infancy. Our model in Section 4 suggests that it is
also important to understand these effects since we consider preferences malleable. Interventions
aimed at improving household financial wellbeing ­ such as cash transfers ­ or interventions aimed
at improving child cognitive skills through educational programming ­ may have unintended
(positive or negative) consequences on economic preferences. 18 In turn, preferences shaped in



17
  Fryer (2017) provides a review of randomized field experiments in human capital formation.
18
  There is a large literature on the effects of conditional cash transfer or support programs on a variety of life
outcomes (e.g., Hoynes et al., 2016 on SNAP in the U.S.; Attanasio et al., 2012 and Parker and Todd, 2017 on
PROGRESA in Mexico)


                                                                                                                     30
childhood may affect individual outcomes in adulthood, as well as voting and decision-making
that potentially impacts institutions more broadly.
       When measuring contemporaneous environmental factors and economic preferences
without relying on experimentation, there can be a problem of reverse causality. A good example
of a reverse causality problem is in the nutrition field, which reports that restrictive parent feeding
practices are positively correlated with childhood obesity (Shloim et al., 2015; Boswell et al.,
2019). Is it the case that obesity is caused by restrictive feeding practices, or that obesity causes
parents to restrict feeding? Outside of an experimental evaluation, one solution is separating the
evaluation in time as is done in several papers in Section 7 ­ e.g., measuring feeding practices at
t=0 and returning a year later to measure BMI at t=1. This separation in time must still address the
omitted variables problem discussed in sub-section 6.2, since other factors could be driving the
correlational effects observed. While one could strive to incorporate all manner of observable
characteristics as controls, other unobserved drivers of behavior are still possible. This points again
to the benefits of randomization for identification.


8.1 Exploiting natural experiments to understand preferences
       Economists have been exploiting natural experiments for decades. A common example of
a natural experiment uses changes in compulsory schooling rules to understand the returns to
education (e.g., Pischke and von Wachter, 2008; Bhuller et al., 2017). Natural disasters, wars,
bombings, and civil conflict are other exogenous events that can have a profound effect on
outcomes and preferences. Bauer et al. (2014a) show that children exposed to war become more
egalitarian towards their in-group. Castillo et al. (2019b) find that being exposed to political
violence while in utero produced a higher willingness to take risks 20-30 years later as an adult,
and Castillo (2020) finds children exposed to domestic violence are more risk averse at age 12.
Callen et al. (2014) examine how psychological priming interacts with exposure to violence 0-8
years earlier on risk preferences. Adults exposed to violence up to 8 years earlier and primed with
fear were more likely to prefer certain outcomes relative to uncertain outcomes.
       Income shocks can also be used as natural experiments. Carrillo (2020) examines the
variation in coffee cultivation in Colombia during children's schooling years and finds that cohorts
that faced higher returns to coffee-related work in childhood completed less schooling and had




                                                                                                    31
lower adult earnings. He suggests that these findings are consistent with the possibility that
students ignore or heavily discount the future when faced with immediate income gains.
       Changes in school policies and assignment to classrooms and schools may provide
interactions with new groups of individuals. We discussed studies that take advantage of these new
interactions to study peer effects in sub-section 6.3 (List et al., 2020; Rao, 2019).


8.2 Interventions and effects on preferences
       The literature on interventions to understand the stability and malleability of preferences is
of two types. The first type develops a program that specifically targets a particular economic
preference and evaluates the impact of the program on that preference. For example, Alan and
Ertac (2018a) find that a curriculum targeting forward-looking behavior and imagining a future-
self increases patience in incentivized intertemporal choice experiments. Lührmann et al. (2018)
find that a financial literacy program increases time consistency. Alan et al. (2019) find that an
educational intervention teaching grit increases persistence in a real effort task, improves math test
scores, and reduces the gender gap in competitiveness (Alan and Ertac, 2018b). Based on the
framework in Section 4, such interventions work by changing the inputs of the schools, S.
       The second strand of this literature evaluates the impact of interventions with alternative
aims ­ e.g., programs aimed at reducing the academic achievement gap ­ on economic preferences.
For example, the CHECC program was designed to impact educational attainment through early
interventions with children and parents. This included a Parent Academy program that targeted
parents (through classes on how to teach to children at home) and a Preschool program that targeted
children (by providing a free, full-day high-quality preschool). Because these programs affect
inputs P and S, respectively, they might also affect economic preferences. For example, the Parent
Academy program might affect children through changing how parents interact with their children
or how they model behavior, while the Preschool program might affect children through exposing
them to interaction with peers and teachers.
       Cappelen et al. (2020) report causal evidence of the impact of these programs on social
preferences. They find that the CHECC Parent Academy increases the relative weight children
place on efficiency versus fairness, while the Preschool makes children more egalitarian in their
fairness views, relative to the control group. To explain these results, Capellen et al. (2020) suggest
that parents modeled more efficient allocations in the Parent Academy treatment, and that the



                                                                                                    32
Preschool exposed children to sharing rules. A related study by Kosse et al. (2019) finds that a
mentoring program aimed at enriching the social environment for children ages 7-9 increases pro-
sociality by 27% of a standard deviation relative to the control group. Similarly, Bettinger and
Slonim (2006) examine the effect of school vouchers on pro-sociality of children (ages 8-16 years
old). They find that children in families that received an educational voucher are more generous
when given the opportunity to make donations to a charity but are no more generous when given
the opportunity to share with a peer.
       There is little evidence on the long run effects of interventions on preferences. It is
important to collect long-run data because such effects may emerge later in life. For example,
displacement effects of moving out of public housing in Chicago due to demolition show minimal
short-run effects (Jacob, 2004), but have large positive effects on long-run outcomes, such as
employment and earnings (Chyn, 2018). Research shows that the effects of early childhood
interventions tend to fade out in the intermediate term, yet the Perry Preschool project has positive
impacts on treated children in adulthood, and further, this program has intergenerational effects on
the children of treated children (Heckman and Karapakula, 2019).
       Studying moderators, or the heterogeneous impact of an intervention, benefits from
understanding the children themselves. For example, Fryer et al. (2020) show that the CHECC
preschool is most beneficial for children with below-median cognitive and executive functioning
skills. A related area is to explore how economic preferences interact with an intervention. One
example of such a study is by Datar et al. (2019), who find that adolescent time preferences mediate
the impact of environment on obesity. There are additional open questions related to interaction
effects. For example, what determines parental investments in a child and how might that interact
with child behaviors or preferences? Also, how much does the mapping (or returns) of parental
investment vary across children?


9. Child Competencies and Experimental Design
       The disciplines of developmental psychology, education, and neuroscience provide
insights into the child development process, but the design features of economic experiments are
unique and require further interpretation. The rapid increase in experiments with children is
promising, but it is important to step back to consider how best to design experiments for every
age range. This can reduce noise in the data and make comparisons across experiments more



                                                                                                  33
useful. While we cannot answer what would constitute the best practice yet, we make steps in this
direction in several ways.
         First, we discuss the development of child competencies taken from the sister sciences ­
developmental psychology, education, and neuroscience ­ that are important to consider when
designing economics experiments. Second, we summarize the methods used in experiments with
children of different ages to date, including organizing our thoughts around what we think are the
key design and protocol considerations and synthesizing the above to provide suggestions for how
competencies can be taken into account when designing experiments. To assist in this task, we
must integrate an understanding of when competencies develop (from the developmental
psychology and cognitive neuroscience disciplines) with an understanding of what educational
tools are effective for explaining concepts to children at different ages (from the education
discipline).


9.1 Child Competencies to Consider in Design
         Two core child competencies that we must consider for the design of experiments are
academic skills (e.g., literacy, numeracy) and executive functions (working memory, inhibitory
control, attention shifting). Additional aspects of child development that merit consideration are
abstract thought, the ability to take the viewpoints of others into account, and fine motor skills.
Our goal is to align the design of the experiment with these competencies. 19 If a child is unable to
process a concept or do a calculation required, this will generate noise in the data and make it
difficult to assess the underlying preference; in fact, in such situations no optimization principles
may underlie even the most straightforward of choices, rendering an experimental exercise
difficult, if not impossible. 20
         Here, we outline 5 competencies that we consider relevant for conducting economics
experiments with children. We focus on the development of competencies from ages 3-18. 21


19
   While we focus attention on traditional experimental approaches with children, it is instructive to consider the work
of Ye et al. (2021), which highlights the demands when using electroencephalogram (EEG). In this case, the situation
demands that the child sits still for a certain amount of time with the EEG nodes on, is not easily distracted by noise
such as traffic, fully understands the task, etc. If using children that are too young, the attrition in such work will be
substantial, therefore limiting the usefulness of data collected since the discard rate is so high. Broadly, this study
highlights, in an extreme case, the importance of aligning child competencies to the demands of the experimental task.
20
   An exception to this is if the goal of the study is to examine the ability to perform a complex task.
21
   Other social scientists have developed methods to evaluate children at even younger ages. For example, eye tracking
and measures of attention can be used with infants (e.g., Meristo and Surian, 2013). However, beyond work with


                                                                                                                      34
         1. Numeracy: Numeracy is the ability to understand and work with numbers. Foundational
numeracy allows children as young as age 3 to compare groups of items and understand whether
groups contain equal or different amounts of numbers. Formal set knowledge ­ i.e., counting each
item only once, counting in order, and stopping at the end of the count ­ develops later in life
(Gelman and Gallistel, 1978). Before young children have set knowledge, they may use shortcuts
to divide items, for example by using a turn-taking heuristic to split a pile of prizes equally between
two people.
         The take-away here is that experiments with young children should be designed to appeal
to foundational, and not set, knowledge. For example, by age 3, children should be able to identify
that larger amounts of rewards are better than smaller amounts. This is of great import because
maintaining control within the experiment requires that the reward medium is not only salient, but
that utility is increasing in the reward (Smith, 1982). At the same time, they may not be able to
accurately count how many rewards they have received. Hence, in a dictator game, rather than
asking children to report how many of a set they want to share with another person, experimenters
should give children a plate of items and tell them to divide them as they wish, without using
numbers. This general approach helps to achieve dominance within the experiment, a condition
whereby the reward structure dominates the subjective cost of the activities of the experiment
(Wilde, 1980). Further, the literature teaches us that using familiar objects that are similar to one
another, and arranging objects in lines with similar spacing can help children with making
comparisons (Carper, 1942; Potter and Levy, 1968; Tan and Bryant, 2000; Clements et al., 2019).
         Importantly, one must distinguish the ability to count from set knowledge ­ just because
children can count, it does not mean that they have set knowledge that allows them to count items
in an experiment accurately. Set knowledge can be tested by asking children to share "X items"
and observing whether the correct number are shared. As children get older, they evolve from
being able to count 2-3 items reliably, to being able to count more. Set knowledge (up to 10-20
items) and basic addition and subtraction are part of the core mathematics standards for 5-year-old
Kindergarteners in the U.S., and therefore by age 6, children should become more savvy in their
ability to manipulate up to 20 items in an economics experiment (California Common Core State
Standards, 2013). By 1st grade ­ around age 7 ­ students should be able to extend this knowledge


parents, and how their inputs into infants map to certain outcomes (such as, e.g., List et al., 2018 and Leung et al.,
2020), we did not find any economic experiments using infants, therefore, we limit our discussion to ages 3 and up.


                                                                                                                  35
to 100 items. Note that addition and subtraction lags counting ­ children can typically count to
higher numbers earlier than they can add or subtract (Zur and Gelman, 2004; Campbell, 2005).
          The next numeracy milestone relevant to economics experiments is understanding
multiplication, division, and fractions. This more formal knowledge is useful for e.g., explaining
public goods games that vary the marginal per capita return (MPCR) that determines payoffs. The
formal understanding of multiplication and division is expected by 3rd grade ­ around age 9. But,
the next several years are spent on solidifying this knowledge and learning to perform more
complex manipulations of fractions. However, even if children do not have a formal understanding
of division yet, they are able to understand how a set of physical items can be distributed among
themselves and others. Hence, using physical props and familiar language can overcome this
hurdle.
          The final useful numeracy concept is understanding of probability. In the U.S., the common
core math standards expect this concept to be formally introduced in 6th grade ­ around age 12 ­
with more in-depth statistics instruction following in grades 7th and 8th - age 13-14 (California
Common Core State Standards, 2013). However, children at younger ages than 12 are exposed to
­ and likely understand ­ the basic concept of probability. Efraim Fischbein is credited with early
work on the development of probabilistic thinking. His novel experiments evaluated the ability of
children as young as age 3 to reason about probabilities and fractions (Fischbein, 1975). His work
suggests that intuitive reasoning about probability and chance develops early, and he finds that in
some cases children ages 3-5 perform better than children ages 12-14 when evaluating the chances
of events (Fischbein, 1975). Further, children older than 14, as well as adults, may have difficulties
with probability concepts. For example, research documents persistent over-estimation of small
probabilities and under-estimation of large probabilities among adults (Kahneman and Tversky,
1979; Burns et al., 2010).
          A potential path to harness intuitive understanding of probability in economics experiments
is to use spinners ­ wheels with differently colored slices ­ to explain concepts of risky options.
This is done in the early work of Harbaugh et al. (2002) and in many other experiments that we
reviewed. Physical examples that are used in laboratory experiments with university students can
be applied to experiments with children. For example, Halevy (2007) uses bins with balls to
explain ambiguity and risk in laboratory experiments. The use of physical bingo cages is also




                                                                                                   36
popular in laboratory experiments and can be used with children (Harbaugh et al., 2002; Harrison
et al., 2007; Tanaka et al., 2010).
         2. Literacy: Literacy is the ability to communicate using language. For researchers working
with young children, an important distinction is productive vocabulary (spoken language) versus
receptive vocabulary (understanding when spoken to). Receptive vocabulary develops sooner than
productive vocabulary, meaning that at any given time, children can understand more than they
can speak. Young children who cannot speak many words may still be able to respond to the
experimenter through pointing and other gestures. This represents a key impetus as to why we
suggest one-on-one implementation and providing physical props for children below age 5.
         Another experimental milestone in children is reading and writing, since this allows
researchers to give subjects the independence to read instructions and mark their preferences. Most
children learn to read by age 7, with fluent and independent reading emerging around age 9
(Morphett and Washburne, 1931; Fitzgerald and Shanahan, 2000). Unlike with numeracy, there is
no intuitive reading or writing ability that emerges earlier than this, though of course some children
master reading and writing at earlier ages. We therefore do not advise conducting experiments that
require substantial reading or writing with children below the age of 10.
         The good news is that there are many alternative options. One alternative is instructions
that involve pictorial representations (e.g., pictures of smaller amounts of candies today and larger
amounts of candies tomorrow, in a time preference task). In such instances, children can circle
which of the options they prefer. However, very young children (below age 5) may still struggle
with this task since their fine motor skills may not be sufficiently advanced. Hence, another
alternative is electronic instructions (delivered on a computer or iPad) with pictorial
representations that allow for clicking or tapping responses on a screen. 22
         In sum, to maintain experimental control we suggest keeping language simple no matter
the age of the respondents. Research shows that adults in America read at an 8th grade reading
level on average (Wolf and Davis, 2004). Healthcare is one area where readability of materials is
particularly important; hence, healthcare organizations provide guidelines for patient materials. A




 To elicit risk and time preferences of their elementary school sample, Brocas et al. (2019) used electronic tablets
22

programmed with Matlab. In this study, children viewed vignettes and made their choices by touching their
preferred options on the screen.


                                                                                                                   37
variety of national organizations have suggested that patient materials for adults be at or lower
than a 5th, 6th or 8th grade reading level (see Badarudeen and Sabharwal, 2010 for more discussion).
       3. Executive functions: Executive functions are higher-level cognitive abilities that
encompass cognitive flexibility, attentional control, inhibitory control, and working memory
(Naglieri and Goldstein, 2014). These abilities cut across many aspects of experimental design.
Cognitive flexibility is the ability to switch between tasks or switch between different aspects of a
problem. Attentional control is the ability to avoid distractions. Research suggests that these skills
develop with age (Dajani and Uddin, 2015). We find it difficult to provide guidelines for how to
design studies that incorporate this developing ability into experimental procedures. However, a
useful rule of thumb is to avoid requiring children to "switch" their attention throughout the study:
this is why, for example, when we conduct experiments at CHECC, we are careful to use
differently colored props for each decision task to avoid requiring children to work to switch their
definition of a particular set of props (e.g., we use red/blue plates in a dictator game, and then use
green/orange plates in a time preference elicitation task if it is in the same session.)
       Working memory is the ability to consider and manipulate multiple facts simultaneously.
Research on memory suggests that auditory memory is separate from visual and tactile memory,
and that recall is better when information is presented via visuals (Gathercole et al., 2004; Cohen
et al., 2009; Bigelow and Poremba, 2014). This suggests that experimental instructions should be
presented visually when possible. Research shows that the main components of working memory
are in place by age 6, and that their capacity increases linearly through early adolescence
(Gathercole et al., 2004). Research requiring children to memorize numbers finds large increases
in working memory with age, whereas research requiring children to memorize familiar objects
documents a much more gradual development (for a summary, see Schneider, 2011). This follows
because familiarity with numbers develops concurrently ­ children asked to memorize numbers
perform poorly on the task if they are unfamiliar with them. The take-away here is that familiar
objects and representations should be used when possible in economic experiments.
       A related concept is focus and attention span. How long should experimental sessions
reasonably last, based on the child's age? We were unable to find any direct guidance for this,
partly because how attention is measured affects the results (in the parlance of hard scientists, the
"Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle" at work, or in psychology the "observer effect" if the act of
observation itself matters). Educators have developed rules of thumb based on some function of



                                                                                                   38
the child's age; e.g., multiply a child's age by 2, and this gives you the number of minutes that a
child can pay attention. This implies that a 5-year-old can usefully participate in a study for 10
minutes, a 10-year-old for 20 minutes, and so on. 23 Until further research is conducted, we
cautiously endorse this rule to maintain experimental control, though we suspect the rule should
be non-linear, especially during the adolescent years. Brocas and Carrillo (2020) suggest a
maximum limit of 40-50 minutes for an experiment for children up to middle-school age.
           Of course, the situation itself will matter as well, making it equally important to consider
how to sustain attention. The literature reveals that children can pay attention longer if there are
fewer distractions (Dixon et al., 2006; Fisher et al., 2014; Gaspelin et al., 2015). Hence, minimizing
auditory and visual distractions is key for increasing the attention span of child participants.
Another approach that works well is to take frequent breaks to engage in some physical activity,
i.e., asking children to stand up and do a few jumping jacks (Ólafsson et al., 2013) and to keep
children engaged by making sure that the instructions are interactive, i.e., by asking the child's
input while proceeding through instructions (Morgan et al., 2002; Punch, 2002).
           Inhibitory control is the ability to control impulses. The now well-known "marshmallow
task" ­ where children who can avoid eating a marshmallow for some period of time receive two
marshmallows - evaluates this skill (Mischel and Ebbesen, 1970). More recent research in
neuroscience suggests that inhibitory control is associated with future-oriented behavior in
children (Steinbeis and Crone, 2016). Our research suggests that inhibitory control can be
decoupled from time preferences by incorporating a front-end delay for rewards in the experiment
(Castillo et al., 2020). More generally, experimental designs that trigger an impulse to make an
immediate choice should be avoided, since we generally want subjects to make deliberative
decisions that are not driven by self-control issues. This is a key assumption to maintain
dominance in the experiment.
           4. Abstract thought: Abstract thought is the ability to think beyond the concrete, for
example, thinking about possibilities and forming new ideas. Abstract thought develops
throughout the 3-17 year-old period and affects children's understanding of anonymous partners
in a game or games involving possible outcomes that are difficult to represent with visual aids.
Children begin to reason using abstract and symbolic thought as early as age 3-5, when they use
ordinary objects in pretend play (Bergen, 2002). This suggests that children could understand

23
     See, for example, http://www.laurenqhill.com/understanding-the-of-attention-spans-of-elementary-aged-students/


                                                                                                                39
anonymous partners at an early age. However, the abstract thought needed to represent concepts
like probabilities is more challenging. For example, research shows that over- or under-estimation
of probabilities can be due to concrete, rather than abstract, thinking (Lermer et al., 2016).
        The ability to think about future events is part of abstract thought. Research suggests that
3-year-olds have trouble describing planned future activities, but that 5-year-olds are much better
at this task (Busby and Suddendorf, 2005). In experiments eliciting time preferences, researchers
have choices about how far in the future payments should extend. Some evidence suggests that
children ages 3-5 perceive a 1-day delay as "long" (Schwarz et al., 1983). Hence, Andreoni et al.
(2019b) use a 1 day delay for children ages 3-12. Most research with older children, however, uses
longer delay periods on the order of 4-8 weeks (Bettinger and Slonim, 2007; Angerer et al., 2015b;
Castillo et al., 2011).
        5. Theory of Mind (ToM): The ability to separate one's own information set and desires
from that of others - or ToM ­ is crucial for most social interactions and is relevant for many
experiments we may consider conducting with children. Basic ToM usually develops around age
4. Prior to this age, children have difficulty understanding that someone else's viewpoint can differ
from their own, which makes games with different information sets unreliable for this age group.
By age 5, normally developing children have developed ToM, though higher order thinking skills
continue to develop through young adulthood (Wellman et al., 2001). Within our CHECC data we
find that, for 3-6 year olds, making the presence of other children salient increases their ToM
(Charness et al., 2019). This is important experimentally since there is some evidence that children
from lower SES families lag children from higher SES families (Devine and Hughes, 2018).


Evaluation of competencies
        There are at least two reasons to evaluate child competencies. First, as discussed in sub-
section 10.4, researchers may be concerned that concurrent development in cognitive abilities may
create confounds and may therefore want to control for cognitive abilities. Standardized
assessment tools are available for this purpose. Proprietary tests, such as the Woodcock-Johnson
Test of Achievement (WJ), include sub-tests for numeracy (e.g., Applied Problems, Quantitative
Concepts) and literacy (Letter-Word Identification, Spelling) that can be used with children ages
3 and up (Mather et al., 2001). The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) is a good measure
of receptive vocabulary (Dunn et al., 1965; Williams, 1999).



                                                                                                  40
         A highly recommended test for executive functions and other cognitive skills is the NIH
Toolbox, which is administered on an iPad (Gershon et al., 2013; www.nihtoolbox.com). The NIH
Toolbox includes sub-tests for cognitive flexibility, attentional control, working memory and
language. Additional constructs include processing speed, immediate recall, and episodic memory.
Most tests described above require 1:1 administration with a trained interviewer. If researchers
have access to grades or standardized test scores, these can sometimes be used as proxies for
cognition, since these are often correlated. 24
         A second reason for measuring child competencies is that researchers may be interested in
learning whether children can solve a specific problem or understand a specific concept in their
experiment. That is, they may wish to know whether behavior in their study is due to an inability
to understand a task, or due to true underlying preferences. Likewise, such an exploration can yield
insights on the cognitive effort children must make to complete the exercise. This understanding
can help to ensure experimental control by providing an indication of the level of rewards one
should use to ensure salience and dominance (Smith, 1982). This would not require a
comprehensive assessment. Instead, researchers should develop their own questions. We discuss
the use of such comprehension checks in sub-section 9.2.


9.2 Experimental Design by Child Development Age
         Table 1 provides a summary that describes the range of methods that have been used in
experiments with children and adolescents. The papers summarized in this table come from a
comprehensive search of the literature using economic experiments with children, including papers
from other fields that use incentivized economic games. The appendix describes our search process
in greater detail. We identified 257 papers for inclusion in the table. Nearly half of the studies were
conducted in Europe, about a third were conducted in North America, and most of the rest were
conducted in Asia and Africa.
                                            [ Table 1 About Here ]
         We split the table's contents into five age categories: ages 3-5 (roughly translating to
preschool age in the U.S.), ages 6-8 (early elementary school), ages 9-11 (late elementary school),
ages 12-14 (early adolescence) and ages 15-17 (late adolescence). We do not include any studies


24
  Access to these materials has historically required providing evidence that the researcher has reasonable
qualifications.


                                                                                                              41
of children below age 3 because there are very few (we identified only 8) and because we believe
that children below age 3 generally do not have the competencies needed to participate in an
economics experiment as we define them here. We do not include statistics from any studies of
participants ages 18-22, since experimental economists have been conducting studies with
university students for the past several decades. Instead, the last column of Table 1 provides the
generally accepted standard for experiments with university students. Note that neuroscience
research concludes that the brain does not fully mature until the mid-twenties (Pujol et al., 1993).
How young adults differ from older adults is also an interesting research question but not one we
address in this paper.
       Below, we describe how features of experimental design in our review of the literature
broadly change as we move from younger to older ages. We also compare the methods used with
children to methods typically used in laboratory experiments with adults. This provides a summary
rather than a set of recommendations, though as we outline below, many times the commonly used
method in each age category is also most appropriate given the child competencies discussed in
sub-section 9.1.
       Instruction Delivery Format: This refers to the number of children participating per
experimenter (one-on-one or in a group). 56% of experiments with 3-5 year-old children use one-
on-one implementation, while this changes to small group and to larger groups with age (e.g., 61%
of 15-17 year-olds are in a group). By comparison, laboratory experiments with university students
include a typical session size of 20-30 students, limited by the number of computers in a standard
lab. Given the limited ability of children to focus attention, and ease of being distracted discussed
in sub-section 8.1, as aforementioned, we believe that one-on-one administration for younger
children is appropriate. Yet, this approach does not come for free. Such one-on-one administration
leads to the assessor potentially playing a much larger role in the experiment. With young children,
instructions are spoken and potentially not read verbatim, responses are usually verbalized instead
of written, and with the one-on-one temporal constraints, if there is variation in assessor quality,
different subjects are receiving different versions of the treatment, violating The Stable Unit
Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). We return to this issue in Section 10.
       Identity of partner: The identity of the partner can be relevant, especially for young
children who may not have sufficient skills to employ abstract thinking skills. Hence, for children
ages 3-5, it is common to see the partner in person (33%) and relatively less common for the



                                                                                                  42
partner to be anonymous (26%). Alternatively, for later ages it is most common to have an
anonymous partner (about 50% of the time for ages 12-17) and indeed this is also the norm for
standard laboratory experiments that use undergraduates as subjects.
       Instructions and Instruction Aids: This category refers to how instructions are presented
to participants. Instructions are read aloud most (75-91%) of the time for all ages, and this is also
true for standard laboratory experiments, where instructions are usually read aloud to a group while
participants follow along. Physical props ­ e.g., plates/envelopes as containers of items for
recipients, or physical tokens to be allocated among recipients ­ accompany instructions less than
a third of the time among ages 3-5 and 6-8 and about a quarter of the time for ages 9-11. Physical
props are rarely used for adolescents, and rarely used in laboratory experiments with adults (with
the exception of bingo cages to reveal payouts used in some lab games).
       Graphical aids are used in a quarter of the cases for ages 3-11, and more frequently - about
35% of the time - for children ages 12 and up. Such aids are useful to harness foundational math
knowledge discussed in sub-section 9.1. Electronic instruction delivery is rarely used, but when
used it is a more common format for older children who are more capable of using these devices
independently. Overall, electronic devices are utilized roughly 5% of the time for children below
age 14 and used in 14% of the experiments for children ages 15-17. Since electronic devices have
become cheaper and easier to program over time, the rate of their usage has increased significantly
since 2015. In experiments from 2015 onwards, electronic instructions were used in 80% of the
experiments for ages 15-17.
       Subject decision format: Subjects can make decisions in an experiment by pointing or
moving objects (physical), verbally (oral), in writing by circling a response or writing in a response
(written) or by clicking a button on a computer (electronic). About two thirds of 3-5 year-old
experiments feature physical subject decision format, which is important here because as we
discussed in sub-section 9.1, receptive vocabulary emerges before productive vocabulary.
Moreover, a written format is rarely used until subjects are at least 6 years old. A written format
is used in only about 25% of experiments with children below 12, and in only about 4% of
experiments with children ages 3-5. This is also reasonable given that writing abilities are only
emerging at early elementary age. By comparison, for adolescent subjects ages 12-17, decision
format is more likely to be written (about 40-50%) or electronic (about 25%). This mirrors closely
the standards for laboratory experiments, which are either conducted using paper-and-pencil with



                                                                                                   43
written responses, or conducted electronically with ZTree (Fischbacher, 2007) or similar software
(e.g., Matlab, such as in Brocas et al., 2019).
          Comprehension check: We identify whether there was a comprehension check before
proceeding to the decision, which could be oral, physical, written, or electronic. Comprehension
checks are often used in standard laboratory experiments and should be even more important for
young children given the uncertainty about what they are able to understand. Surprisingly very
few studies across age groups mention comprehension checks ­ comprehension checks are
documented in only 30-60% of experiments across all age groups, with seemingly no pattern by
age. A potential reason for this result is that comprehension checks are used, but not mentioned in
the description of the experiment; or that given the shorter session times, are not used to save time.
The comprehension check strikes us as a valuable addition to any experiment with children ­
especially given the limited cognitive abilities of children relative to adults - and we therefore
suggest that experimenters use this tool and report the results of comprehension checks in their
papers.
          Total number of subject decisions and experiment length: This category refers both to
the time subjects spend in the experiment (in minutes, with minimum, maximum, mean, and
standard deviation), and the number of decisions that subjects make in the experiment (again, with
minimum, maximum, mean and standard deviation). Among children ages 3-11, subjects make 9
decisions on average. This increases to 34 decisions for ages 12-17. Experiments take 32 minutes
on average for children ages 3-8 and 40-50 minutes on average for children ages 9-17, all of which
exceed our recommendations on experimental duration discussed above but falling within the
Brocas and Carrillo (2020) recommendation to keep experiments a maximum of a class period in
length. By comparison, laboratory experiments with adults tend to last 45 minutes to 2 hours.
          Payout for repeated decisions: In cases where subjects make many decisions, it is common
in standard laboratory experiments to pay out only one randomly selected decision to avoid
confounds caused by paying out all decisions, such as income effects and portfolio effects. But
children may have difficulty understanding the concept that only one decision is paid. Indeed, over
80% of experiments in the 3-8 year-old age group pay for play in all rounds. We find that it is more
common to pay only one round at older ages, with nearly 50% of experiments paying for choices
in only one round at ages 9-17. Paying for choices in one round, while a common strategy in typical
laboratory experiments, is less common in experiments with children. This is reasonable, since as



                                                                                                   44
we noted in sub-section 9.1, children have difficulty understanding probabilities, and paying out
one round adds an additional layer of complexity, in some cases likely causing dominance or
salience to be violated.
       Incentives: We identified four main approaches for incentivizing children in the literature:
giving out a pre-set prize such as candy, a sticker, or small toy; giving out tokens that can be
exchanged for prizes in a "store"; using gift cards; and, using money. Our survey of the literature
finds that common prizes include packets of Skittles, crayons, and balloons for ages 3-11 and
chocolate bars, pens, and markers for ages 12-17. The appendix provides a detailed list of the
prizes used by age group (see Table A1).
       As shown in Table 1, for children ages 3-8, a prize store is the most common incentive
(about 35%), and candy is the second most common (about 20%). The store is also the most
popular at ages 9-11 and is used nearly in half of the studies. In some experiments that use a prize
store, the prizes are revealed to the children before they play the game (Sutter et al., 2018; Brocas
et al., 2019), and in others, they are simply told they will get rewards but are not told what they
will be (Bügelmayer and Spiess, 2014; Zhao et al., 2019). The former approach seems more
appropriate to insure that the incentives are salient. The second most popular approach at this age
is to use money (about 20%). After age 11, money becomes more popular and is used in 47% of
the cases for ages 12-14, and 69% of the studies for ages 15-17. Gift cards are less common and
are used in only 6% of the studies for ages 12-17. By comparison, the standard in laboratory
experiments is to use money. In our view, this difference in payoffs over the age range is
reasonable since the payment medium should yield a salient reward where the subject's utility is
increasing in the reward and non-satiation holds. Of course, incentives are a cornerstone of
economics and therefore deserve more careful attention. In sub-section 10.7, we highlight
important considerations when using incentives with children.
       Exchange rate: When an exchange rate from points earned in the experiment to prizes or
money is used, it is most common for this exchange rate to be 1:1 at age 3-5 (51%) and to be more
complex for ages 6 and up (50-70% of the time, increasing with age range). Exchange rates in
laboratory experiments also tend to be more complex than exchanges in experiments with children.
       Types of Experimental Games: The last row of Table 1 provides information about the
types of games used in the experiments that we surveyed. A large proportion of economics
experiments used with young children ages 3-5 were dictator games (40%), and this is partly



                                                                                                  45
because this is one of the easiest games to explain and partly because of the rise in popularity of
dictator games among developmental psychologists, who are interested in the evolution of social
preferences at a young age. Starting at about age 9, many standard economics games become well-
represented (e.g., games eliciting time, risk and competitive preferences; games of strategy;
ultimatum games).
       Comparing Methods: A limited set of papers investigate how design features affect
children's decisions. Bunch et al. (2007) test a variation of the children's gambling task, wherein
they introduce either a "gains only" or a "losses only" deck against a variable deck. With this
variation, they lower the relational complexity and find that all children succeeded in these tasks.
Angerer et al. (2015b) compare two methods of time preference elicitation in a large group of
children, finding that a multiple price list and a single choice measure yield similar results in the
aggregate. We urge future research to explore such methodological considerations, as a maturation
of this field will depend on such new insights.
       With the extant literature and its many heterogeneities in mind, we turn to a set of ten tips
that serve as guidance for the researcher interested in conducting field experiments with children.
The ten tips might also help consumers of this literature more deeply understand the various design
choices and their consequences.


10. Ten Tips for Pulling Off Experiments with Children
       Sprinkled throughout the previous sections are numerous experiments conducted with
children as subjects. The experiments sometimes leverage randomization for identification of the
key treatment insight, sometimes leverage natural variation by judiciously applying experimental
control in that setting to obtain preferences or other information to inform a model, and sometimes
do both. Regardless of approach, the literature teaches us that similar to the spirit in which
astronomy draws on the insights from particle physics and classical mechanics to make sharper
inference, experiments with children can provide principles to sharpen inference around economic
issues of import. Likewise, such experiments can help to determine whether received insights
should be reinterpreted or defined more narrowly than first believed.
       Our own experiences with experiments with children range from baseball card shows in
the early 1990s to open air markets in the early 2000s to starting our own schools in Chicago and
Bangladesh to lab experiments in several parts of the U.S. We have learned that the notion of



                                                                                                  46
conducting controlled studies with children might appear daunting. Figuring out the market, how
to randomize relevant features within a complex situation, and avoiding pitfalls is not taught in
standard economic or even social science courses.
       In this section we offer ten tips for executing successful experiments with children. We
suggest that all economists conducting experiments with children carefully consider these tips,
which range from tips about idea generation, to avoiding pitfalls that are present in much of the
current literature, and practical considerations such as recruitment and incentives. These tips were
borne out of our interpretation of where the literature with children should be taking us, as well as
discussions with colleagues who had practical questions about how to conduct experiments with
children. These tips are not intended to be treated as universal truths; rather, they are intended to
help researchers think through the design and implementation of experiments with children.
       The first two tips drive home the point that it is important to consider theory and
mechanisms when developing research agendas using children. The next two tips remind
researchers to be cognizant that children are not just "little adults." Children develop rapidly in
childhood and adolescence. It is critical to incorporate measurement of this development and to
acknowledge potential limitations in interpreting findings due to this development. The fifth tip
straddles interpretation issues and practical design issues. It focuses on recruitment, and in
particular, reminds researchers to seek representative samples or to be cautious of drawing broad
conclusions from non-representative samples. The next four tips provide practical advice related
to procedures, incentives, ethics concerns and documentation. Finally, the last tip discusses scaling
concerns, which is relevant for researchers designing interventions for children.


10.1 Use economic theory to guide your design and as a lens to interpret your data

       This tip is ubiquitous, and any researcher interested in experimentation should begin here.
Indeed, this is tip #1 from List's (2011) 14 tips for pulling off a controlled field experiment. Yet,
it bears repeating here since economic theory is portable. By themselves, data from experiments
with children can only offer a limited understanding about what is likely to happen in a new setting
or with a new population of children. Incorporating guiding principles or hypotheses that drive
the research agenda ­ whether this is a formal theory or an informal conceptual framework ­ is
key for guiding the interpretation of results. Together, theory and experimental results provide a
powerful tandem to learn about the world and provide prescriptions for improvement.


                                                                                                  47
10.2 Go Beyond A/B Testing to Deepen our Understanding of Children
       A natural starting point from 10.1 is to explore mediators to observed relationships. Such
mechanism exploration begins with theory, which is a key guide to determining a path deeper than
simple A/B testing. There is a large literature in human capital development that relies on A/B
testing ­ i.e., comparing educational interventions to control groups ­ to draw inferences relevant
for public policy (e.g., Heckman et al., 2010; Attanasio et al., 2012; Sylvia et al., 2020). This is an
important approach that highlights the value of experiments with children. Throughout this article,
we have also highlighted how we can use experiments with children to deepen our understanding
of the underlying mechanisms behind the data patterns observed. In this manner, in addition to
measuring the intervention effects (e.g., does this new Kindergarten curriculum lead to higher test
scores?), researchers should design sub-treatments tightly linked to economic theory to reap the
true benefits of the experimental method by exploring why it works (e.g., a sub-treatment, or
information gathered in a complementary survey, which shows the channels through which the
Kindergarten curriculum worked). Getting to the whys of an intervention also have important
effects on scaling, as discussed in sub-section 10.10. Czibor et al. (2019) provide a deeper
discussion of going beyond A/B testing in broader economic settings.
       In a nutshell, the combination of 10.1 and 10.2 provides a natural umbrella for a research
agenda with children. As an example, if the researcher is interested in human capital formation,
one first examines the optimal timing and type of investment over the life cycle, such as
characterizing the types of interventions that are optimal. At that point, explorations going beyond
A/B tests determine the important moderators and mediators of the examined interventions (see,
e.g., the work at CHECC cited above using traditional experimental approaches and the work of
Ye et al. (2021) for an example using EEG). With that knowledge in hand--the why's, where's,
when's, and for whom--applicable theories and optimal policies are better understood, and the
basics for scaling are in place.


10.3 Align Child Competencies to Experimental Design
       We next turn to issues that are specifically relevant to studies of children. The importance
of aligning competencies to experimental design cannot be under-emphasized, since children are
not simply "little adults," and the developmental process is complex. This is why Section 9 is
devoted to describing how child competencies develop with age and the key design features that



                                                                                                    48
should be taken into account when designing experiments with children and adolescents. Aligning
child competencies to experimental design requires an understanding of cognitive skills and
executive functions. Table 1 in Section 9, which summarizes how related work has tackled this
issue, can help guide the design of the experiment.
       When studying how child preferences develop with age, competencies that develop around
the same age range can be a confound. This is especially true for cognitive abilities. For example,
research in developmental psychology shows that a young child's ability to split rewards equally
is associated with math ability (Chernyak et al., 2016). Research in economics also shows
correlations of cognitive abilities with child preferences (Benjamin et al., 2013; Andreoni et al.,
2019a), and suggests there is an association between theory of mind development and sharing
behavior (Cowell et al., 2015). Competency development can also be related to SES since children
from low-income households tend to have lower literacy and numeracy skills than their higher-
income peers at the same ages (Liaw and Brooks-Gunn, 1994; Noble et al., 2007). Moreover,
consistent with our framework outlined in Section 4, within the same age range and background,
children can vary greatly in their level of cognitive development (Sternberg, 2011). Hence, it is
important to consider the associations between competencies and decision-making in the
experiment. In the next tip, we discuss assessment of competencies as an important way to avoid
confounds. Importantly, experiments that are not designed to be appropriate for the range of
cognitive abilities in the study sample may introduce serious endogeneity issues if subjects who
do not understand the experiment cannot participate due to lack of understanding.
       As aforementioned, when we align child competencies with optimal design, we might be
presented with unique problems. One such example is if one-on-one administration is necessary
(as we suggest in Section 9 for 3-5 year-olds), and there is variation in assessor quality. In this
case, a key assumption underlying the internal validity of the experiment is violated: the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). This is because different subjects are receiving
different versions of the treatment, rendering any simple comparison between treatment and
control groups uninterpretable. We therefore urge the researcher to devote special attention to how
assessors are allocated to subjects, making sure that assessors are distributed evenly across
treatments, and examining if the assessor fixed effects are important to outcomes.




                                                                                                49
10.4 Consider Stability and Confounds with Cognitive Development
       The timing of preference development is an important question. For example, when
applying theories of rational decision-making to children, it is necessary to consider at what ages
children can choose rationally. When designing interventions for children, one needs to have some
idea of utility functions that would allow policymakers to assure that interventions are appropriate
(e.g., providing immediate incentives for younger children, who are more impatient than older
children). Finally, learning about how preference development is assisted by or interacts with
cognition can give us a deeper understanding of what key milestones are needed for economic
preferences to develop.
       When evaluating the development of preferences with age, it is important to consider
stability of measurement. For example, if economic preferences are unstable with age, does this
mean that the underlying processes affecting this development are not stable or that the elicitation
methods used are not stable? One way to evaluate stability while reducing measurement error is to
elicit preferences using several methods (as discussed in, e.g., Gillen et al., 2019; Angerer et al.,
2015b used two methods to elicit preferences, as do Datar et al., 2019; Samek et al., 2019) and
account for decision error (e.g. Castillo et al., 2018). When eliciting preferences over a large age
range, different methods were often used with different age groups (e.g., as in Andreoni et al.,
2019b). When using different methods for different ages, it is useful to have overlap in the methods
and age ranges to assure that there is a correlation with methods.
       Cognition itself can also be an issue since it changes over time. Hence, if economic
preferences are correlated with cognitive ability, but cognitive ability is not measured, then it is
difficult to determine whether cognition is one channel through which age-related development
affects preferences. Further, if researchers report that time preferences are correlated with a
particular field outcome, it is unclear whether time preferences themselves, or a correlated factor,
drive that relationship. Measuring and controlling for cognitive ability is one way to improve on
existing methods; and this was done in a number of CHECC papers (e.g., Cappelen et al., 2020;
Castillo et al., 2020). For example, Castillo et al. (2019a) report that time preferences measured
early in life are associated with later field outcomes, even while controlling for SES, cognitive
abilities, non-cognitive abilities and other economic preferences.
       Measuring cognitive ability also helps with another problem, which is that lack of sufficient
cognitive skills to understand a decision task can result in greater errors in the task at younger ages



                                                                                                    50
than at older ages, reducing the precision of the estimates at younger ages. One way to assess
whether difficulties in understanding the task affect the results is to include questions on
understanding in all experimental instructions (and to record the child's answers to these
questions). Relatedly, insufficient non-cognitive abilities could affect responses to a task. For
example, Brocas and Carrillo (2018) found that children may have the ability to think strategically,
but may not have sufficient noncognitive skills to act strategically.
       Children who do not understand the experiment may either not respond or may provide
random answers. Researchers may need to impute data or drop data in this case (dropping data
seems to be most common). Such treatment of the data has a major limitation, which is that the
subjects that remain would be a selected (higher cognitive ability) sample, which will introduce
endogeneity and affect interpretation. A far better alternative is to create an experimental design
that is suitable and easy to understand for the lowest-performing children in the sample. This can
be achieved through following our guidelines in the prior tip and doing iterative pilot testing.
       An area that has received less attention in economics than it has in psychology,
psychometrics, or medicine is test-retest reliability (DeVon et al., 2007). Test-retest reliability is
relevant for constructs that are not expected to change over time. Conducting experiments with the
same group of children over a short time period would help to illuminate exactly how much error
exists in the measures that we use (see Gillen et al., 2019, for such an approach with adults).
Designing batteries of tests all aimed at measuring a particular economic preference would help to
reduce this error problem.


10.5 Recruit a Representative Population
       This tip straddles issues of interpretation and practical concerns. With regards to
interpretation, if the researcher wishes to make broad conclusions about children, it is important
to either recruit a representative sample or to acknowledge the limitations in terms of drawing
broad conclusions from a sample that is not representative. Most studies with children use selected
samples. Unlike standard laboratory experiments with university students (also a selected sample),
there are several ways in which subjects can be recruited, and in turn, several ways in which child
samples can be selected. Selection can occur on the basis of the SES of the participating school,
buy-in from only a sub-set of parents or even based on criteria for cognitive abilities required to
complete the task. Depending on the research question, selection may be desired. For instance, a



                                                                                                   51
researcher wishing to study economic preferences of children with specific mental illness would
wish to target recruitment to a sample of children that is representative of the population of children
with mental illness. In what follows, we outline several popular approaches for recruiting children
and discuss the benefits and drawbacks for each.
       Recruitment of child populations is the first obstacle in conducting research with children.
A popular approach in economics is to forge partnerships with schools and contact parents through
these schools to invite participation (see, e.g., Angerer et al., 2015a; 2015b; List and Samek, 2015;
Castillo et al, 2011; Houser et al, 2015; Harbaugh et al, 2001). A major benefit of such an approach
is that schools have large lists of eligible children, and parents may be more likely to participate if
they receive the information from a trusted source. Further, schools can often benefit from the
knowledge gained from the study. However, a potential drawback is that many schools are already
overwhelmed with research requests and might not have the capacity to engage in another project.
Also, some districts have additional application processes before allowing research with their
students. If parent consent is necessary for the research, researchers should use a multi-pronged
approach to engage parents, including sending flyers home in backpacks, as well as recruitment
events on site and phone calls. This is because many parents will not return a consent form sent
home in a backpack, but they may respond when provided with more information. If a school
partnership is possible, we believe this is one of the best ways to proceed due to the large potential
sample size available and the collaboration between researcher and schools. Schools are also a
good idea if researchers wish to follow-up with children at a later date, since schools could provide
updated contact information for children if they have not moved out of the school district. Another
advantage is the ability to link children with administrative data (e.g., grades, standardized test
scores or disciplinary referrals) with parent and student consent.
       Some researchers cite difficulty in getting school buy-in as a major obstacle to recruitment
and propose alternatives. An alternative approach that has been gaining popularity among
developmental psychologists is conducting recruitment in public places, such as museums and
public parks (see, for example, Blake and McAuliffe, 2011). This includes setting up a table at a
location and inviting families who pass by to participate. Museums sometimes charge researchers
to use the space, while public parks are free (though may still require permission from the city).
This method can be effective if the researchers can provide credibility, parents are not rushed, and
their child can participate on the spot. But the drawback for researchers wishing to recruit subjects



                                                                                                    52
for an intervention or longitudinal study is that it could be more difficult to keep track of
populations recruited this way. Another drawback is that if the research question involves a
particular sub-population of children (e.g., those with mental illness) then attempting to recruit in
public spaces may be time consuming and sub-optimal.
        Another possibility is recruiting through existing parent networks such as Parent-Teacher
Associations (PTAs) affiliated with nearby schools and asking them to forward information about
the study to parents (cites this as one of their most successful approaches). This may work better
than recruiting at museums or public parks if researchers are seeking children with a particular
characteristic (e.g., children of a specific age). Another alternative along these lines is to post
messages in social media groups, which has the benefit of being able to select groups associated
with a particular characteristic that is targeted (e.g., mental illness). This approach does require
interested parents to follow through with bringing their child to the experiment.
        Finally, one can obtain registry data to mail invitation letters to families. For example,
county birth records are used to send mailed recruitment letters to parents of infants for some
psychology studies (e.g., Kim and Johnson, 2013). Registry data is also used in Deckers et al.
(2015), who saw a recruitment rate of about 12% from their mailings (they offered participation
in a free program as part of the study incentive). While we have been unable to find recruitment
rates for related psychology studies, we suspect it to be substantially lower as many of these studies
do not offer incentives.
        Having a representative sample of children in the study is important for drawing general
conclusions or making claims of external validity. The registry data approach may give researchers
the highest chance of obtaining a representative sample since it involves recruiting a wide sample
of the population, though even then the participants who choose to participate are likely to be
selected. Focusing the study on one school reduces representativeness since children within a
single school are likely to be representative of only a single area, hence an alternative to improve
representativeness is to select schools with children from a range of backgrounds. 25
        Suggestions for reaching out to parents include using simple language to communicate
study goals (this can be very broad, e.g., understanding how children develop) and making study
participation as convenient as possible (i.e., nearby study locations, catching the parent at a time


25
  An example of such an approach is Brocas and Carrillo (2019b), who conduct their study in a private school in a
relatively rich area and a public school in a relatively disadvantaged area.


                                                                                                                53
they are not rushed and offering participation on the spot, providing flexible scheduling options).
Offering an appropriate participation payment and gift for the child can also incentivize parents to
participate.


10.6 Adopt Appropriate Study and Experimental Procedures
        This tip and the following three tips deal primarily with practical concerns. An important
consideration is where and how the research should be conducted. A standard approach in
developmental psychology for research on children is to ask parents to bring the child to a child-
friendly `laboratory' on campus. Such a facility should include age-appropriate seating, provisions
for a parent waiting area, and adequate parking. Economists typically won't have a facility like
this. But the good news is that economic experiments do not require major equipment, so setting
up a "mobile" laboratory is not difficult.
        One possibility is to develop a partnership with a school, which is already child-friendly,
and then either conducting experiments during class time or by asking parents to accompany
children to the school in the afternoons or weekends. Another alternative is to recruit children to
participate at the recruitment location, for instance at public parks or children's museums (more
on this in the next tip). A major benefit of these alternatives relative to participation on a university
campus is that it does not require the parents to travel very far to participate. However, a major
drawback is that not all schools will be amenable to this approach ­ for example, poorly funded
schools in low-income developing countries may be noisy, disorganized, and violent. Another
drawback is that even if the school is conducive to research, more extensive set-up time will be
required at the field sites; for example, it is a good idea to try to remove visual distractions by
putting up cardboard dividers and to look for areas that do not have high distracting noise levels.
        Another possibility is to conduct experiments in participants' homes. In this approach, the
experimenters (teams of 2 are a good idea for safety reasons) arrange and then conduct home visits.
This approach is also not without drawbacks, since particularly in low-SES environments, homes
may be overcrowded and full of distractions. Further, not all families will feel comfortable with
researchers visiting their homes.
        Since many of the experiments we describe (especially those with young children) rely on
verbal and physical interactions, the capabilities of the experimenter are of vital importance.
Experimenters should be experienced in interacting with young children. A number of training



                                                                                                      54
sessions specific to the protocol should be conducted to assure that the experimenter has
memorized the instructions and can easily carry out the experiment. In our work, we often train
undergraduate students at the university to conduct sessions. The university students we hire most
often come from fields such as public policy, social work, and education.
        The above has provided a number of alternatives for where to conduct experiments with
children. We are not aware of data that explores the association of study environment with
outcomes, but we think it is reasonable to assume that reducing the level of distraction in the
environment will lead to higher precision of estimates.


10.7 Understand How to Use Incentives to Motivate Children
        The topic of incentives arises most frequently when discussing design features of
experiments with children. The pioneers of the experimental approach argued that incentives are
an important component of the experimental environment because of the control that they provide.
In particular, the reward medium must satisfy three conditions: non-satiation, salience, and
dominance (Smith, 1982). As discussed earlier, cash incentives, which are typically used in
laboratory experiments with university students, may not work for all age groups. Table 1 presents
a progression of incentives by age, which shows that incentives at early ages most often take the
form of candy or stickers, middle-childhood incentives often take the form of prizes, and
adolescents can be compensated with gift cards or cash. This progression is appropriate, since
children are not usually shopping on their own until middle to late adolescence. 26 When
considering non-cash rewards, many begin with attempting to solve heterogeneity issues. While
heterogeneity over the valuation of the reward medium does not present problems of internal
validity if the groups are balanced across treatment and control, the use of non-monetary rewards
does present unique challenges in other ways.
        For example, consider the case of providing non-cash rewards, such as stickers, to 5-year-
olds and asking them to play a dictator game. This is usually done as a means to measure social
preferences among young children. The researcher wishes to interpret "number of stickers shared"
as a social preference measure, yet such a measure is easily confounded with, e.g., the child's
preference for the certain types of stickers in his/her endowment, by the child's preference for


26
  Note that some local IRBs may not allow incentives, and that schools or other spaces where the experiment is
conducted may have guidelines or limitations on types of incentives used.


                                                                                                                 55
stickers more generally, or by the child's expectation about the preferences toward stickers of his
or her partner. While these issues are also present when considering the allocation of dollar bills
of University students in standard dictator games (utility value of money is indeed heterogeneous),
dollars can buy a myriad of goods and serve a useful intermediary role in modern economies.
Alternatively, there is not a ready resale market for stickers, and therefore they are best considered
for final consumption. As such, in experiments of this ilk, we learn a lot about preferences over
certain stickers, but perhaps nothing more generally without further assumptions. Alternatively,
when we use a medium of exchange, such as currency, as an incentive, we learn about preferences
over that medium, and non-satiation, salience, and dominance are more likely to hold.
        One way to begin to address this issue is by allowing the child to first choose stickers that
he or she most prefers to play with, as in Cox et al. (2016). Similarly, children may be asked to
sort potential prizes in order of desirability, and the top few are chosen as the incentives for future
games (Rice and Broome, 2004). This approach assures that the children value the incentive.
Another possibility is to use a prize store with prizes that are pre-selected based on desirability by
the target group. Here, the children make decisions with tokens that are exchanged for goods in
the prize store. Provided the prize store is stocked with goods that all children like, and they assume
other children like them as well, then this is closer to using monetary payoffs, although the payoffs
are made in lumpy, discrete amounts. There is a problem of potentially large diminishing marginal
utility over two of a similar item; therefore the prize store should have a large enough variety to
limit satiation.
        The prize store is flexible, since researchers can include prizes, toys, school supplies and
so on that appeal to different age groups and tastes. The prize store is also easily explained ­ for
very young children, a 1:1 exchange rate of points earned in the experiment to prizes can be used,
which limits the need for calculating prices of items. Using a prize store also allows for
comparisons across age groups or for longitudinal data collection, since the store can be set up
with items that appeal to all age groups. For example, in studies which children and their parents,
children could earn points to exchange for small toys, while parents could earn points to exchange
for small items like snacks, office supplies or travel toiletries.
        The other aspect that frustrates interpretation in experiments with children is that children
are often rewarded by parents or teachers for doing what the adults want ­ and punished for doing
what the adults do not want. Therefore, the potential for demand effects ­ especially when choices



                                                                                                    56
are not made privately ­ are potentially large. In addition, parents may expect children to share
prizes with siblings after the experiment. Hence, measured preferences can be confounded with
expectations about background consumption. The former issue can be minimized to some degree
by allowing for private decision-making whenever possible. We have previously attempted to
minimize the latter issue by including notes sent home to parents asking them not to require their
children to share their incentive (although, such notes are more useful in repeated experiments,
since in the first experiment children may expect a sharing requirement).
       The problems raised in this section are more relevant for studies attempting to measure
economic preferences than to studies considering treatment effects. Interpreting the level of an
economic preference ­ e.g., social preferences, risk preferences, or discount rates ­ relies on
making assumptions about valuation of prizes. The issues are less problematic in experiments that
seek to measure treatment effects if an assumption is made that valuation for incentives does not
interact with treatments, provided salience, dominance, and non-satiation are satisfied.
       In summary, we recommend prize stores be used for very young children whenever
possible. Children begin having more independence over spending their own money to purchase
snacks or toys by around age 9. If the researchers do not intend to compare to a younger age group,
then money should be used from this point forward. Money could take the form of gift cards if the
experiment is conducted in schools that prefer not to distribute cash or if the experiment is in the
field and the experimenter(s) prefer to limit the amount of cash they are carrying at one time. We
found that the most commonly used type of gift card varies by country. Walmart and Amazon gift
cards were commonly used in the U.S. (Castillo et al., 2011; 2018; Barash et al., 2019), while
Bol.com vouchers were used in the Netherlands (Bekkers, 2017).


10.8 Obtain IRB approval and Pre-Register
       This tip revolves around two key pre-experimental administrative tasks that are invaluable.
Indeed, this tip applies to experiments with children, but also spans all work that involves human
subjects. We will discuss each in turn. In the United States, and many other developed countries,
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) or ethics committee provides oversight into research
activities involving human subjects. Some US-based researchers may wish to conduct human
subjects work in developing countries. They may therefore face additional regulations based on
local laws and IRB requirements. Whether researchers have obtained local IRB and even if there



                                                                                                 57
is no local IRB, researchers must still obtain IRB approval from their home institution. Much of
the below provides guidance for the typical rules at US-based IRBs. Researchers based in or
working outside of the US should do their own investigation to determine what rules apply.
        Children are considered a vulnerable population and require special additional protections.
However, most IRBs are open to experiments with children, provided that the researchers have
identified a clear rationale for why children are included in the study and have addressed ethics
concerns specific to children and broader ethics concerns that would also apply to studies with
adults. IRBs are familiar with research with children since many researchers in departments such
as psychology and education conduct research with children.
        Most studies described here will generally fall into the category of minimal risk. As such,
the only additional consideration is that the consent process proceeds in stages. First, the parent
will be asked to complete a consent form on behalf of their child. Usually, the consent of one
parent is sufficient. 27 Second, children will be asked to agree to participate (called "assent") either
verbally or on a written form. Each IRB may have their own requirements for assenting children,
and they will usually consider the age and maturity of the child to determine a) whether assent is
required and b) whether assent needs to be documented in writing or can be elicited verbally.
        Studies with children that provide an intervention or require longer-term follow-up have a
more in-depth IRB process than one-off studies measuring an economic preference. For example,
because the CHECC program featured an early childhood intervention administered by the
researchers, as well as a consent form allowing for 14+ years of long-term follow-up, the CHECC
study underwent full board review. This included a presentation to the IRB regarding the nature of
the study and the plans to minimize risks.
        Just as with studies that use adult subjects, a key ethical consideration is that children do
not feel coerced into participation ­ either from experimenters, teachers, parents or peers. Ways to
minimize potential for coercion from teachers or peers are to have children choose whether to
assent in private. Ways to minimize potential for coercion from parents are to stress to parents that
it is up to the child whether or not he/she wants to assent and to not withdraw the parents'




27
  As noted by a reviewer, some areas where research might be conducted may have low literacy rates or no written
language. In these cases, written consent may not be practical, and the researcher should work with his/her IRB to
develop appropriate consenting procedures.


                                                                                                                58
participation payment if the child does not wish to participate. 28 And, incentive payments to
children ­ which often take the form of gift cards or small gifts or candies ­ should not be so
extreme that children feel compelled to participate or to share their payment with parents, siblings
or friends.
         In many cases, obtaining consent from the parents of all the children that are eligible for
the study is challenging. For example, a researcher may be conducting a school-based intervention,
but only some parents have consented for their child to participate. The most typical solution is to
offer the program to all children in the study, but only evaluate or keep the data from those children
who have consent on file. In other cases, for example, if the research involves minimal risk and
would be undertaken during the school day anyway, the IRB may allow the researchers to waive
consent and instead provide parents with information sheets with the ability to opt out. In our
experience, the proportion of consent forms that are returned is highly dependent on the SES of
the school as well as the buy-in from the teacher (who can nudge parents to return forms).
         Sub-section 10.5 discussed various ways to recruit participants. All of the proposed
channels should be documented for the IRB to assure that they follow guidelines and are not
considered coercive. For example, contacting parents or students through social media would
require IRB approval. It is against the policy of most IRBs that we are aware of to provide referral
bonuses or incentives that are linked to recruitment of subjects.
         Finally, just as with adult subjects, a careful consideration of costs and benefits should be
undertaken. Children should not be used as a convenience sample ­ that is, just because one can
go into a school to conduct experiments with children, does not mean that they should be used
instead of adults. Child subjects should be used when the research question would benefit from the
participation of children in the study, such as when the researcher is studying the development of
economic preferences in childhood.
         While IRB approval has been around for decades, a relatively new (at least for economics)
pre-experiment task of import is pre-registration. Established in May 2013, the AEA-RCT registry
provides a venue for researchers to document their experiments in a manner that is searchable by
external audiences (Abrams et al., 2020). Researchers document the specific details of the



28
  There are also possible costs to paying parents based on their child's performance in a task, and such interventions
should only be considered after careful ethical review. For example, parents who do not receive an expected reward
due to their child's performance may retaliate against their child, which would be a concern to consider carefully.


                                                                                                                  59
experimental design, target number of observations, etc. and can also include a pre-analysis plan
detailing how the researcher plans to analyze the data. 29 In theory, if used appropriately, this
innovation can tackle key issues in the credibility crisis, most specifically, the "file drawer"
problem and "p-hacking." Both issues are key to solving the false positive problem. As Abrams
et al. (2020; p. 1) discuss, the registry thus far has had quite limited success: "over 90% of
randomized control trials (RCTs) in economics do not register, only 50% of the RCTs that register
do so before the intervention begins, and the majority of these preregistrations are not detailed
enough to significantly aid inference." While other registries show similar impotence, and
therefore provide limited advice on improvement, as part of this tip we follow Abrams et al. (2020)
and urge experimentalists to at least submit their IRB materials in the pre-registration before any
collection of data.


10.9 Document Procedures and Promote Replication
        Beyond attenuating false positives via pre-registration, replication represents a key feature
that can lower long-run false positives. Proper documentation of experiment procedures is key for
future replication. 30 Laboratory experiments have benefitted from unwritten standards about what
is important to report ­ and researchers who report on laboratory experiments typically provide
information on session size, experiment length, average payout, how instructions were provided,
whether privacy dividers were in place and whether questions on understanding were used.
Further, a standard in laboratory experiments is to provide experiment instructions in an appendix.
We propose that similar standards be adopted for experiments with children, since many papers
that we surveyed did not report on these key factors. For example, some papers failed to report on
the session size, the exchange rate between tokens received in the experiment to prizes in the prize
store, and a description of the setting, e.g., level of privacy and presence or absence of distractions.
Papers should also report on the environment in which the study was conducted - including details
such as level of privacy and distraction ­ which could help researchers understand how important
such details are for the measurement of outcomes. These variables are all important for future
attempts at replication and for moving the methodological literature forward.


29
   A researcher can register a study without submitting a pre-analysis plan and can submit a pre-analysis plan
without registering (although not on the AEA-RCT site).
30
   Further, proper documentation is also important for pre-registration and pre-analysis plans, which are becoming
necessary standards and conditions for publication.


                                                                                                                 60
10.10 Use Backward Induction to Design Interventions that will Scale
         A complement to the representativeness of the population discussion in sub-section 10.5 is
the representativeness of the situation. Indeed, to take both discussions to a higher level is to
consider whether your insights will scale. This tip is aimed at the first silo that deals with
conducting experimental interventions. When doing that type of experimental intervention,
researchers should always be aware of how our interventions scale or have effects at levels beyond
the setting of the experiment. To be more perspicuous, consider the "voltage effect," from the
implementation science literature. When considering the effects of programs at scale, a common
finding is that the effect sizes diminish substantially (see Al-Ubaydli et al., 2017a, 2017b). We
are only at the beginning of understanding the science of using science, but there is some evidence
that shows there are good economic reasons why program effects fade at scale, and how
benefit/cost ratios change at scale. Al-Ubaydli et al. (2020) examine the market for knowledge and
show that the incentives of the various actors (researchers, government policymakers, citizens)
themselves can lead to the scale-up problem. Importantly, if researchers backward induct when
setting up their original research plans to ensure accurate and swift transference of programs to
scale, not only are initial insights useful, but they also aid in the generality (external validity)
problem. Al-Ubaydli et al. (2021) provide a checklist for both researchers and policymakers that
involves design choice from idea inception to roll out at scale. 31

11. Discussion and Conclusions
         Experiments with children are uniquely situated to provide insights to economists and
policymakers. Our framework proposes that child outcomes depend both on genetics and
environment, and that investments by parents, schools, and the children themselves affect these
outcomes. The literature that we survey documents large heterogeneity in preferences even at an
early age and finds evidence that parenting and school-based interventions have an impact both
for the formation of child skills and economic preferences. Our model further suggests that child
economic preferences affect both contemporaneous and future child outcomes. The literature that
we survey estimates the economic preferences of children and links these preferences to SES,
parents, peers, and field outcomes.

31
   This is not the only consideration when conducting intervention studies. For example, interventions should be
designed to be culturally appropriate, which can be achieved through iterative discussions with relevant
stakeholders, e.g., families, teachers, school administrators in the area where the intervention will be conducted.


                                                                                                                      61
        We view the main methodological takeaways from the experimental literature as follows.
First, general patterns in economic preferences related to age or demographics have now been
identified, especially for elicitation tasks that are relatively easy to explain (i.e., for dictator games,
time preferences and risk preferences). Second, links between some experimental tasks and some
field behaviors have been established. This is good news since it means that methods currently
used are mostly appropriate for measuring the intended constructs. An outlier is competitiveness
­ evidence in this area is more mixed and authors have attributed these results to differences across
cultures or methods. Third, results on parental transmission of preferences and impact of
environment are also mixed. A commonly accepted set of methods for conducting experiments
with children will be helpful in reconciling some of these diverse results.
        In the introduction to this manuscript, we discussed several questions that are important for
silo 2 ­ understanding children to understand adults. Namely, we asked about the association of
preferences with family background, the role of experience in shaping preferences, and about when
traits and preferences emerge and how they change over time. The literature to date has begun to
provide answers to these questions. For instance, as evidenced by the research summarized in
Sections 5 and 6, we are learning that preferences are associated with family background but are
also malleable in the sense that they evolve as children grow up. The research described in Section
8 shows that inputs from external factors such as schooling affect preferences, in the sense that
(some) preferences can be affected by (some) interventions. A remaining open question here is
whether such interventions affect preferences themselves, or whether they affect the behavioral
strategies that are used by the children. That is, if we use an intervention to affect willingness to
wait for future rewards, have we changed underlying preferences or simply provided children with
tools to use to help them wait for future rewards?
        Further, we have begun to answer the question about whether parents and external
influences affect preferences. It is clear that SES and parental preferences are critically important
since research summarized in sub-sections 6.1 and 6.2 shows that both SES and parental
preferences are correlated with child preferences. In the case of parental preferences, the
correlations are more commonly found in studies of older children and not strong in studies with
younger children, suggesting that perhaps the transmission of preferences from parent to child
takes time to manifest. This provides inferences into understanding why preferences of adults are




                                                                                                        62
widely heterogeneous. In particular, when considering inequalities by SES among adults, one
important driver could be the differences in economic preferences manifested at an early age.
       Finally, it is interesting to note that many preferences and behaviors are already present at
a very early age. As discussed in Section 3, very young children are able to make rational decisions
and make trades in markets. Further, as discussed in sub-section 5.4, the gender gap in
competitiveness observed in adults emerges at an early age. Thus, there seems to be a component
of economic preferences that arises early in life, even prior to formal schooling. This points to the
importance of studying children prior to school-age, which is also discussed in List et al., (2018).
       There are also a number of open questions in the related work. First, few papers focus on
field outcomes that are long term. Instead, many of the existing papers discuss abstract topics or
experiments in very controlled settings with short-term outcomes. A deeper understanding of how
preferences affect field outcomes in the long-term ­ for example, how economic preferences affect
human capital formation; household production; consumption; within-household behavior; and
between peer behavior ­ would be valuable. Such work would need to be longitudinal in nature
and would be valuable to understand decisions over the life course. This would lead policymakers
and researchers to place more value on economic preferences. Another open question is how
preferences affect wellbeing. This does not mean that intermediate-term outcomes should be
ignored; indeed, research suggests that collecting multiple intermediate outcomes can be helpful
for drawing inference about long-term outcomes (e.g., Athey et al., 2019).
       Second, few papers gather causal evidence. Instead, much of the work correlates SES or
parenting with economic preferences. This correlational work is important, but causal inference
demands either natural or field experiments to assess how investments in children affect
preferences. It is also instructive to explore heterogeneous treatment effects, since how children
respond to an intervention might itself be affected by preferences. Interventions designed to affect
a skill or welfare (such as early childhood programs) may provide benefits in that area, but may
also have unintended consequences on preferences. Understanding the consequences on
preferences (as is done in Cappelen et al., 2020) is valuable, since if policies shape preferences,
then they ultimately shape institutions as children become adults. Another open question is
whether there are "critical periods" to intervene with children. Conducting experiments that
exogenously manipulate the environment at different ages would allow researchers to answer such
questions. Finally, we pointed out in this paper that children can be considered "inexperienced"



                                                                                                  63
subjects in many ways, hence they can be used for further study to understand how experience
affects decision making, as in List (2004a).
       The field is relatively new, and therefore a common methodology for conducting
experiments with children has not yet been established. While Table 1 identifies what methods
most papers use in each age range, there are a number of papers that diverge from the most common
­ and therefore potentially from the most appropriate ­ method. It is our hope that this paper
advances our understanding of how best to conduct experiments with children and adolescents,
and provides a common set of guidelines that allow experimental designs to become more
consistent with one another. This will allow for more direct comparability in findings.
       The field has had a historic lack of discussion with the sister sciences. Tools from
psychology ­ such as using multiple measures and assessing test-retest reliability ­ can be helpful
in advancing our understanding of how preference measurements should be collected. Multiple
measures are especially important in cases where we expect error, and economists have thought
about this issue (e.g., Heckman et al., 2013; Gillen et al., 2019). Collecting data on how other fields
measure similar constructs (such as using stated-preference questionnaires for risk or time) can be
valuable for designing multiple measures. Alternatively, economists also have value to add to the
sister sciences. For instance, economists use incentivized, context-free elicitation tasks that differ
significantly from those used in the sister sciences. As such, a number of papers in the psychology
literature already use economic games such as dictator games. Economists are also well trained in
quantitative methods, and can impart knowledge about power, multiple hypothesis testing and
related concepts to researchers in other fields.




                                                                                                    64
12. References

Abrams, Eliot, Jonathan Libgober, and John A. List. 2020. "Research Registries: Facts, Myths,
   and Possible Improvements," Artefactual Field Experiments 00703, The Field Experiments
   Website.
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John A. List, and Dana L. Suskind. 2017b. "What Can We Learn from
   Experiments? Understanding the Threats to the Scalability of Experimental
   Results." American Economic Review 107 (5): 282­86.
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John A. List, Danielle Lore, and Dana Suskind. 2017a. "Scaling for
   Economists: Lessons from the Non-Adherence Problem in the Medical Literature." Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 31 (4): 125­44.
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John List, and Dana Suskind. 2020. "The Science of Using Science: Towards
   an Understanding of the Threats to Scaling Experiments." International Economic Review,
   61(4): 1387-1409.
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, Min Sok Lee, John A. List, Claire Mackevicius, and Dana Suskind. 2021.
   "How Can Experiments Play a Greater Role in Public Policy? 12 Proposals from an
   Economic Model of Scaling." Behavioural Public Policy, 5(1): 2-49..
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2018a. "Fostering Patience in the Classroom: Results from
   Randomized Educational Intervention." Journal of Political Economy 126 (5): 1865­1911.
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2018b. "Mitigating the Gender Gap in the Willingness to Compete:
   Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment." Journal of the European Economic
   Association 17 (4): 1147­85.
Alan, Sule, Nazli Baydar, Teodora Boneva, Thomas F. Crossley, and Seda Ertac. 2017.
   "Transmission of Risk Preferences from Mothers to Daughters." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 134: 60­77.
Alan, Sule, Teodora Boneva, and Seda Ertac. 2019. "Ever Failed, Try Again, Succeed Better:
   Results from a Randomized Educational Intervention on Grit." The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 134 (3).
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2019. "Cutthroat Capitalism
   versus Cuddly Socialism: Are Americans More Meritocratic and Efficiency-Seeking than
   Scandinavians?" Journal of Political Economy.
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, Kjell G. Salvanes, Erik Ø. Sørensen, and Bertil
   Tungodden. 2016. "Fairness and Family Background." Politics, Philosophy & Economics 16
   (2): 117­31.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. "Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins
   Hypothesis." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 153­72.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2018. "Childhood Circumstances and
   Adult Outcomes: Act II." Journal of Economic Literature 56 (4): 1360­1446.
Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertac, Uri Gneezy, John A. List, and Sandra Maximiano. 2013.
   "Gender, Competitiveness, and Socialization at a Young Age: Evidence From a Matrilineal
   and a Patriarchal Society." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4): 1438­43.
Anderson, Lisa R., and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2008. "Predicting Health Behaviors with an
   Experimental Measure of Risk Preference." Journal of Health Economics 27 (5): 1260­74.
Andreoni, James, Amalia Di Girolamo, John List, Claire Mackevicius, and Anya Samek. 2019a.
   "Risk Preferences of Children and Adolescents in Relation to Gender, Cognitive Skills, Soft
   Skills, and Executive Functions." National Bureau of Economic Research, no. w25723.



                                                                                           65
Andreoni, James, Anya Samek, John A List, and Charles Sprenger. 2017. "Field Experiments on
   the Development of Time Preferences." The Field Experiments Website, no. 00615.
Andreoni, James, Michael Kuhn, John List, Anya Samek, Kevin Sokal, and Charles Sprenger.
   2019b. "Toward an Understanding of the Development of Time Preferences: Evidence from
   Field Experiments." National Bureau of Economic Research, no. w25590.
Angerer, Silvia, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, and Matthias Sutter. 2015a.
   "Donations, Risk Attitudes and Time Preferences: A Study on Altruism in Primary School
   Children." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 115: 67­74.
Angerer, Silvia, Philipp Lergetporer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2015b. "How
   to Measure Time Preferences in Children: a Comparison of Two Methods." Journal of the
   Economic Science Association 1 (2): 158­69.
Angerer Silvia, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, Matthias Sutter.
   2016. "Cooperation and discrimination within and across language borders: Evidence from
   children in a bilingual city" European Economic Review 90: 254-264
Antrobus, Emma, Deborah A Cobb-Clark, Lorraine Mazerolle, and Agnieszka Tymula. 2017.
   "The Risk and Time Preferences of Young Truants and Their Parents."
Athey, Susan, Raj Chetty, Guido W. Imbens, and Hyunseung Kang. 2019. "The surrogate index:
   Combining short-term proxies to estimate long-term treatment effects more rapidly and
   precisely." National Bureau of Economic Research no. w26463.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1972. "Gifts and Exchanges." Philosophy & Public Affairs, 343­62.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Costas Meghir, and Ana Santiago. 2012. "Education Choices in Mexico:
   Using a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate Progresa." The Review
   of Economic Studies 79 (1): 37-66.
Attanasio, O., S. Cattan, E. Fitzsimons, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina. 2020. "Estimating the
   production function for human capital: results from a randomized controlled trial in
   Colombia." American Economic Review 110 (1), 48­85.
Badarudeen, Sameer, and Sanjeev Sabharwal. 2010. "Assessing Readability of Patient Education
   Materials: Current Role in Orthopaedics." Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
   Research® 468 (10): 2572­80.
Barash, Jori, Isabelle Brocas, Juan D. Carrillo, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2019. "Heuristic to
   Bayesian: The Evolution of Reasoning from Childhood to Adulthood." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 159: 305­22.
Bauer, Michal, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilová, and Joseph Henrich. 2014a. "War's Enduring
   Effects on the Development of Egalitarian Motivations and In-Group Biases." Psychological
   Science 25 (1): 47­57.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Barbara Pertold-Gebicka. 2014b. "Parental Background and
   Other-Regarding Preferences in Children." Experimental Economics 17 (1): 24­46.
Bekkers, Rene. 2017. "Do Two Eyes See More Generosity Than One?"
Ben-Ner, Avner, John A. List, Louis Putterman, and Anya S. Samek. 2017. "Learned
   Generosity? An Artefactual Field Experiment with Parents and Their Children." Journal of
   Economic Behavior & Organization 143: 28­44.
Benenson, Joyce F., Joanna Pascoe, and Nicola Radmore. 2007. "Childrens Altruistic Behavior
   in the Dictator Game." Evolution and Human Behavior 28 (3): 168­75.
Benjamin, Daniel J., David Cesarini, Christopher F. Chabris, Edward L. Glaeser, David I.
   Laibson, Gene Age, Vilmundur Guðnason et al. 2011. "The promises and pitfalls of
   genoeconomics."



                                                                                            66
Benjamin, Daniel J., David Laibson, Walter Mischel, Philip K. Peake, Yuichi Shoda, Alexandra
   Steiny Wellsjo, and Nicole L. Wilson. 2019. "Predicting Mid-Life Capital Formation with
   Pre-School Delay of Gratification and Life-Course Measures of Self-Regulation." Journal of
   Economic Behavior & Organization.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. "Who Is Behavioral?
   Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences." Journal of the European Economic
   Association 11 (6): 1231­55.
Bereby-Meyer, Yoella, and Shelly Fiks. 2013. "Changes in Negative Reciprocity as a Function
   of Age." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 26 (4): 397­403.
Bergen, Doris. 2002. "The Role of Pretend Play in Children's Cognitive Development." Early
   Childhood Research & Practice 4 (1): n1.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock. 2001. "The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs." ILR
   Review 55 (1): 3­21.
Bertrand, Marianne. 2009. "CEOs." Annual Review of Economics 1 (1): 121­50.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2006. "Using Experimental Economics to Measure the
   Effects of a Natural Educational Experiment on Altruism." Journal of Public Economics 90
   (8-9): 1625­48.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2007. "Patience among Children." Journal of Public
   Economics 91 (1-2): 343­63.
Bhuller, Manudeep, Magne Mogstad, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2017. "Life-cycle earnings,
   education premiums, and internal rates of return." Journal of Labor Economics 35, no. 4:
   993-1030.
Bigelow, James, and Amy Poremba. 2014. "Achilles' Ear? Inferior Human Short-Term and
   Recognition Memory in the Auditory Modality." PLoS ONE 9 (2): e89914.
Bindra, Parampreet Christopher, Daniela Rützler, and Philipp Lergetporer. 2018.
   "Discrimination at Young Age: Experimental Evidence from Preschool Children."
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
   Dynamics of Preferences." Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): 298­319.
Blake, Peter R., and Katherine McAuliffe. 2011. ""I Had So Much It Didn't Seem Fair": Eight-
   Year-Olds Reject Two Forms of Inequity." Cognition 120 (2): 215-224.
Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler. 2010. The Economics of Women,
   Men, and Work. 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Boneva, Teodora, and Christopher Rauh. 2018. "Parental beliefs about returns to educational
   investments--the later the better?" Journal of the European Economic Association 16, no. 6:
   1669-1711.
Booth, Alison, and Patrick Nolen. 2012. "Choosing to Compete: How Different Are Girls and
   Boys?" Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 81 (2): 542­55.
Boswell, Nikki, Rebecca Byrne, and Peter S.W. Davies. 2019. "An Examination of Children's
   Eating Behaviours as Mediators of the Relationship Between Parents' Feeding Practices and
   Early Childhood Body Mass Index zScores." Obesity science & practice 5 (2): 168-176.
Bradford, W. David, Charles Courtemanche, Garth Heutel, Patrick McAlvanah, and Christopher
   Ruhm. 2017. "Time Preferences and Consumer Behavior." Journal of Risk and
   Uncertainty 55 (2-3): 119­45.
Bradford, W. David. 2010. "The Association Between Individual Time Preferences and Health
   Maintenance Habits." Medical Decision Making 30 (1): 99­112.




                                                                                            67
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2018. "The Determinants of Strategic Thinking in
   Preschool Children." PLoS One 13 (5).
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2019a. "Money in the schoolyard: young children use
   commodities as an indirect medium of exchange." Working paper.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2019b. "Steps of reasoning in children and adolescents."
   Working Paper.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "Introduction to special issue "Understanding
   Cognition and Decision Making by Children." Studying decision-making in children:
   Challenges and opportunities." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179: 777-783.
Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D. Carrillo, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2017. "Altruism and Strategic Giving
   in Children and Adolescents."
Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D. Carrillo, T. Dalton Combs, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2016. "Value-
   Based Decision-Making: A New Developmental Paradigm."
Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D. Carrillo, T. Dalton Combs, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2019. "The
   Development of Consistent Decision-Making across Economic Domains." Games and
   Economic Behavior 116: 217­40.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf. 2001. "Discrete Choice with Social
   Interactions." The Review of Economic Studies 68 (2): 235­60.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf. 2002. "A Multinomial-Choice Model of
   Neighborhood Effects." American Economic Review 92 (2): 298­303.
Brosig-Koch, Jeannette, Timo Heinrich, and Christoph Helbach. 2015. "Exploring the Capability
   to Reason Backwards: An Experimental Study with Children, Adolescents, and Young
   Adults." European Economic Review 74: 286­302.
Bügelmayer, Elisabeth, and C. Katharina Spiess. 2014. "Spite and cognitive skills in
   preschoolers." Journal of Economic Psychology 45: 154-167.
Bunch, Katie M., Glenda Andrews, and Graeme S. Halford. 2007. "Complexity Effects on the
   Childrens Gambling Task." Cognitive Development 22 (3): 376­83.
Burns, Zach, Andrew Chiu, and George Wu. 2010. "Overweighting of Small
   Probabilities." Wiley Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science.
Busby, Janie, and Thomas Suddendorf. 2005. "Recalling Yesterday and Predicting
   Tomorrow." Cognitive Development 20 (3): 362­72.
Buser, Thomas, Muriel Niederle, and Hessel Oosterbeek. 2014. "Gender, Competitiveness, and
   Career Choices." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1409­47.
Cadena, Brian C., and Benjamin J. Keys. 2015. "Human Capital and the Lifetime Costs of
   Impatience." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3): 126­53.
California Department of Education. 2013. "California Common Core State Standards:
   Mathematics."
Callen, Michael, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, James D. Long, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2014.
   "Violence and Risk Preference: Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan." American
   Economic Review 104 (1): 123­48.
Campbell, Jamie ID. 2005. "Handbook of Mathematical Cognition." Psychology Press.
Cappelen, Alexander W., John A. List, Anya S. Samek, and Bertil Tungodden. Forthcoming.
   "The Effect of Early Childhood Education on Social Preferences." Journal of Political
   Economy, 2020.
Carper, Doris. 1942. "Seeing Numbers as Groups in Primary-Grade Arithmetic." The
   Elementary School Journal 43 (3): 166­70.



                                                                                             68
Carroll, John. B. 1962. "The prediction of success in intensive foreign language training." In R.
   Glaser (Ed.), Training research and education (pp. 87­136). University of Pitt. Press.
Carrillo, Bladimir. 2020. "Present Bias and Underinvestment in Education? Long-run Effects of
   Childhood Exposure to Booms in Colombia." Journal of Labor Economics 38, no. 4: 000-
   000.
Castillo, Marco, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2018. "Children's Rationality, Risk
   Attitudes and Field Behavior." European Economic Review 102: 62­81.
Castillo, Marco, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2019a. "Discount Rates of Children and
   High School Graduation." The Economic Journal 129 (619): 1153­81.
   doi:10.1111/ecoj.12574.
Castillo, Marco, John A List, Ragan Petrie, and Anya Samek. 2020. "Detecting Drivers of
   Behavior at an Early Age: Evidence from a Longitudinal Field Experiment." NBER Working
   Paper 28288.
Castillo, Marco, Paul J. Ferraro, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2011. "The Today and
   Tomorrow of Kids: Time Preferences and Educational Outcomes of Children." Journal of
   Public Economics 95 (11-12): 1377­85.
Castillo, Marco, Ragan Petrie, and Maximo Torero. 2019b. "Causal Evidence That Perinatal
   Conditions Affect the Risk Preferences of Adults." Working Paper.
Castillo, Marco. 2020. "Negative Childhood Experiences and Risk Aversion: Evidence from
   Children Exposed to Domestic Violence," IZA DP No. 13320
Chabris, Christopher F., David Laibson, Carrie L. Morris, Jonathon P. Schuldt, and Dmitry
   Taubinsky. 2008. "Individual Laboratory-Measured Discount Rates Predict Field
   Behavior." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37 (2-3): 237.
Chamberlin, Edward H. 1948. "An Experimental Imperfect Market." Journal of Political
   Economy 56 (2): 95­108.
Chapman, Gretchen B., and Elliot J. Coups. 1999. "Time Preferences and Preventive Health
   Behavior." Medical Decision Making 19 (3): 307­14.
Charness, Gary, John A. List, Aldo Rustichini, Anya S. Samek, and Jeroen Van De Ven. 2019.
   "Theory of Mind among Disadvantaged Children: Evidence from a Field
   Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 166: 174­94.
Chen, Jingnan, Daniel Houser, Natalia Montinari, and Marco Piovesan. 2016. "Beware of
   Popular Kids Bearing Gifts: A Framed Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 132: 104­20.
Chernyak, Nadia, Beth Sandham, Paul L. Harris, and Sara Cordes. 2016. "Numerical Cognition
   Explains Age-Related Changes in Third-Party Fairness." Developmental Psychology 52 (10):
   1555­62.
Chowdhury, Shyamal, Matthias Sutter, and Klaus Zimmermann. 2018. "Evaluating
   Intergenerational Persistence of Economic Preferences: A Large Scale Experiment with
   Families in Bangladesh." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Chyn, Eric. 2018. "Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition
   on Children." American Economic Review 108 (10): 3028­56.
Clements, Douglas H., Julie Sarama, and Beth L. Macdonald. 2019. "Subitizing: The Neglected
   Quantifier." Constructing Number Research in Mathematics Education, 13­45.
Cohen, Michael A., Todd S. Horowitz, and Jeremy M. Wolfe. 2009. "Auditory Recognition
   Memory Is Inferior to Visual Recognition Memory." Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences 106 (14): 6008­10.



                                                                                              69
Coleman, James S. 1988. "Social capital in the creation of human capital." American Journal of
   Sociology 94, S95-S120.
Cotton, Christopher, Brent R. Hickman, John A. List, Joseph Price, and Sutanuka Roy. 2020.
   "Productivity Versus Motivation in Adolescent Human Capital Production: Evidence from a
   Structurally-Motivated Field Experiment." Framed Field Experiments 00719 working paper,
   The Field Experiments Website and University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for
   Economics Working Paper 2020-150.
Cowell, Jason M., Anya S. Samek, John List, and Jean Decety. 2015. "The Curious Relation
   between Theory of Mind and Sharing in Preschool Age Children." PLoS One 10 (2):
   e0117947.
Cox, James C., John A. List, Michael Price, Vjollca Sadiraj, and Anya S. Samek. 2016. "Moral
   Costs and Rational Choice: Theory and Experimental Evidence." National Bureau of
   Economic Research, no. w22234.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation." American
   Economic Review 97 (2): 31­47.
Currie, Janet. 2001. "Early Childhood Education Programs." Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 15 (2): 213­38.
Czermak, Simon, Francesco Feri, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2016. "How
   Strategic Are Children and Adolescents? Experimental Evidence from Normal-Form
   Games." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 128: 265­85.
Czibor, Eszter, David Jimenez-Gomez, and John A. List. 2019. "The Dozen Things
   Experimental Economists Should Do (More of)". National Bureau of Economic Research,
   no. w25451.
Dajani, Dina R., and Lucina Q. Uddin. 2015. "Demystifying Cognitive Flexibility: Implications
   for Clinical and Developmental Neuroscience." Trends in Neurosciences 38 (9): 571­78.
Datar, Ashlesha, Nancy Nicosia, and Anya Samek. 2019. "The Moderating Effects of Time and
   Risk Preferences on the Relationship Between Neighborhood Environments and Obesity:
   Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Work in Progress.
Deckers, Thomas, Armin Falk, Fabian Kosse, and Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch. 2015. "How
   Does Socio-Economic Status Shape a Child's Personality?"
Del Boca, Daniela, Christopher Flinn, Ewout Verriest, and Matthew Wiswall. 2019. "Actors in
   the Child Development Process." National Bureau of Economic Research, no. w25596.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2005. "Job Search and Impatience." Journal of
   Labor Economics 23 (3): 527­88.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. 2013. "The Importance
   of Being Marginal: Gender Differences in Generosity." American Economic Review, 103 (3):
   586-90.
Devine, R., and C. Hughes. 2018. "Family Correlates of False Belief Understanding in Early
   Childhood: A Meta-Analysis." Child Development, 89: 971-987.
DeVon, Holli A., Michelle E. Block, Patricia Moyle-Wright, Diane M. Ernst, Susan J. Hayden,
   Deborah J. Lazzara, Suzanne M. Savoy, and Elizabeth Kostas-Polston. 2007. "A
   Psychometric Toolbox for Testing Validity and Reliability." Journal of Nursing
   Scholarship 39 (2): 155­64.
Dixon, Wallace E., Brenda J. Salley, and Andrea D. Clements. 2006. "Temperament,
   Distraction, and Learning in Toddlerhood." Infant Behavior and Development 29 (3): 342­
   57.



                                                                                           70
Dizon-Ross, Rebecca. 2019. "Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability:
    Implications for educational investments." American Economic Review 109, no. 8 : 2728-65.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2017. "Parenting With Style: Altruism and Paternalism
    in Intergenerational Preference Transmission." Econometrica 85 (5): 1331­71.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2011. "The Intergenerational
    Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes." The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2): 645­77.
Dreber, Anna, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2011. "Outrunning the Gender Gap--Boys
    and Girls Compete Equally." Experimental Economics 14 (4): 567­82.
Dreber, Anna, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2014. "Gender and Competition in
    Adolescence: Task Matters." Experimental Economics 17 (1): 154­72.
Dumontheil, Iroise, Ian A. Apperly, and SarahJayne Blakemore. 2010. "Online usage of theory
    of mind continues to develop in late adolescence." Developmental science 13, no. 2: 331-338.
Duncan, Greg J, and Katherine Magnuson. 2013. "Investing in Preschool Programs." Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 27 (2): 109­32.
Dunn, Lloyd M., Leota M. Dunn, Stephan Bulheller, and Hartmut Häcker. 1965. Peabody
    picture vocabulary test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Durlauf, Steven N. 2014. "Neighborhood Effects." Handbook of Regional and Urban
    Economics 4: 2173­2242.
Dweck, Carol. 2015. "Carol Dweck revisits the growth mindset." Education Week 35, no. 5 : 20-
    24.
Dynarski, Susan, C.J. Libassi, Katherine Michelmore, and Stephanie Owen. 2018. "Closing the
    Gap: The Effect of a Targeted, Tuition-Free Promise on College Choices of High-Achieving,
    Low-Income Students." National Bureau of Economic Research, no. w25349.
Eckel, Catherine C., Philip J. Grossman, Cathleen A. Johnson, Angela C. M. De Oliveira,
    Christian Rojas, and Rick K. Wilson. 2012. "School Environment and Risk Preferences:
    Experimental Evidence." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 45 (3): 265­92.
Evans, Anthony M., Ursula Athenstaedt, and Joachim I. Krueger. 2013. "The Development of
    Trust and Altruism during Childhood." Journal of Economic Psychology 36: 82­95.
Falk, Armin, and Fabian Kosse. 2016. "Early Childhood Environment, Breastfeeding and the
    Formation of Preferences." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Falk, Armin, Fabian Kosse, and Pia Pinger. 2019. "Re-revisiting the marshmallow test: a direct
    comparison of studies by Shoda, Mischel, and Peake (1990) and Watts, Duncan, and Quan
    (2018)." Psychological Science.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde.
    2018. "Global Evidence on Economic Preferences." The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 133 (4): 1645­92.
Fe, Eduardo, David Gill, and Victoria Prowse. 2020. Cognitive skills, strategic sophistication,
    and life outcomes. Working Paper.
Fehr, Ernst, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2013. "The Development of
    Egalitarianism, Altruism, Spite and Parochialism in Childhood and Adolescence." European
    Economic Review 64: 369­83.
Fehr, Ernst, Helen Bernhard, and Bettina Rockenbach. 2008. "Egalitarianism in Young
    Children." Nature 454 (7208): 1079.
Fischbacher, Urs. 2007. "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-Made Economic
    Experiments." Experimental Economics 10 (2): 171­78.




                                                                                             71
Fischbein, H. 1975. "The Intuitive Sources of Probabilistic Thinking in Children." Springer
    Science & Business Media 85.
Fisher, Anna V., Karrie E. Godwin, and Howard Seltman. 2014. "Visual Environment, Attention
    Allocation, and Learning in Young Children." Psychological Science 25 (7): 1362­70.
Fitzgerald, Jill, and Timothy Shanahan. "Reading and writing relations and their
    development." Educational Psychologist 35, no. 1 (2000): 39-50.
Flory, Jeffrey A., Andreas Leibbrandt, and John A. List. 2015. "Do Competitive Workplaces
    Deter Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job Entry
    Decisions." The Review of Economic Studies 82 (1): 122­155.
Flory, Jeffrey A. & Gneezy, Uri & Leonard, Kenneth L. & List, John A. 2018. "Gender, age, and
    competition: A disappearing gap?," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 150(C):
    256-276.
Foss, Elizabeth, Allison Druin, and Mona Leigh Guha. 2013. "Recruiting and Retaining Young
    Participants." Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and
    Children.
Fréchette, Guillaume R. 2016. "Experimental Economics across Subject Populations." The
    Handbook of Experimental Economics 2: 435­80.
Fryer Jr, Roland G. 2017. "The Production of Human Capital in Developed
    Countries." Handbook of Economic Field Experiments 2: 95­322.
Fryer Jr, Roland G., Steven D. Levitt, and John A. List. 2015. "Parental Incentives and Early
    Childhood Achievement: A Field Experiment in Chicago Heights." National Bureau of
    Economic Research, no. w21477.
Fryer Jr, Roland G., Steven D. Levitt, John A. List, and Anya S. Samek. 2020. "Towards an
    Understanding of What Works in Preschool Education." Work in Progress.
Gaspelin, Nicholas, Tessa Margett-Jordan, and Eric Ruthruff. 2015. "Susceptible to Distraction:
    Children Lack Top-down Control over Spatial Attention Capture." Psychonomic Bulletin &
    Review 22 (2): 461­68.
Gathercole, Susan E., Susan J. Pickering, Benjamin Ambridge, and Hannah Wearing. 2004.
    "The Structure of Working Memory From 4 to 15 Years of Age." Developmental
    Psychology 40 (2): 177.
Gaviria, Alejandro, and Steven Raphael. 2001. "School-Based Peer Effects and Juvenile
    Behavior." Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (2): 257­68.
Gelman, Rochel, and Charles R. Gallistel. 1978. "The Child's Understanding of
    Number." Harvard University Press.
Gershon, Richard C., Molly V. Wagster, Hugh C. Hendrie, Nathan A. Fox, Karon F. Cook, and
    Cindy J. Nowinski. 2013. "NIH Toolbox for Assessment of Neurological and Behavioral
    Function." Neurology 80 (11 Supplement 3): S2­S6.
Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg, and Leeat Yariv. 2019. "Experimenting with Measurement Error:
    Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study." Journal of Political
    Economy 127 (4): 1826­63.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2004. "Gender and Competition at a Young Age." American
    Economic Review 94 (2): 377­81.
Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List. 2009. "Gender Differences in Competition:
    Evidence From a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society." Econometrica 77 (5): 1637­64.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini. 2003. "Performance in Competitive
    Environments: Gender Differences." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3): 1049­74.



                                                                                            72
Golsteyn, Bart H.H., Hans Grönqvist, and Lena Lindahl. 2014. "Adolescent Time Preferences
    Predict Lifetime Outcomes." The Economic Journal 124 (580).
Halevy, Yoram. 2007. "Ellsberg Revisited: An Experimental Study." Econometrica 75 (2): 503­
    36.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate Krause, and Lise Vesterlund. 2002. "Risk Attitudes of Children and
    Adults: Choices over Small and Large Probability Gains and Losses." Experimental
    Economics 5 (1): 53­84.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate Krause, and Timothy R. Berry. 2001. "GARP for Kids: On the
    Development of Rational Choice Behavior." American Economic Review 91 (5): 1539­45.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate Krause, Steven G. Liday, and Lise Vesterlund. 2003. "Trust in
    Children." Trust and Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental Research,
    302­22.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List. 2004. "Field Experiments." Journal of Economic
    Literature 42 (4): 1009­55.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström. 2007. "Estimating Risk Attitudes
    in Denmark: A Field Experiment." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109 (2): 341­68.
Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
    Children." Science 312 (5782): 1900­1902.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz.
    2010. "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program." Journal of Public
    Economics 94 (1-2): 114­28.
Heckman, James, and Ganesh Karapakula. 2019. "Intergenerational and Intragenerational
    Externalities of the Perry Preschool Project." National Bureau of Economic Research, no.
    w25889.
Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. "Understanding the Mechanisms
    Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult
    Outcomes." American Economic Review 103 (6): 2052­86.
Hirsch, Jerry. 1963. "Behavior Genetics and Individuality Understood." Science 142 (3598):
    1436­42.
Houser, Daniel, John List, Marco Piovesan, Anya Savikhin Samek, and Joachim Winter. 2015.
    "On the Origins of Dishonesty: From Parents to Children." National Bureau of Economic
    Research, no. W20897.
Houser, Daniel, Natalia Montinari, and Marco Piovesan. 2012. "Private and Public Decisions in
    Social Dilemmas: Evidence from Children's Behavior." PLoS ONE 7 (8): e41568.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. "Long-run impacts
    of childhood access to the safety net." American Economic Review 106 (4): 903-34.
Ifcher, John, and Homa Zarghamee. 2016. "Do Gender-Variant Preferences For Competition
    Persist In The Absence Of Performance?" Economic Inquiry 54 (4): 1918­30.
Ijzendoorn, Marinus H. Van, Marian J. Bakermans-Kranenburg, and Richard P. Ebstein. 2011.
    "Methylation Matters in Child Development: Toward Developmental Behavioral
    Epigenetics." Child Development Perspectives 5 (4): 305­10.
Ikeda, Shinsuke, Myong-Il Kang, and Fumio Ohtake. 2010. "Hyperbolic Discounting, the Sign
    Effect, and the Body Mass Index." Journal of Health Economics 29 (2): 268­84.
Jacob, Brian A. 2004. "Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
    from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago." American Economic Review 94 (1): 233­58.




                                                                                          73
Joensen, Juanna Shroter, John List, Anya Samek, Haruka Uchida. 2021. "Using a Field
   Experiment to Understand Skill Formation in Adolescent Years" Work in progress
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
   Risk." Econometrica 47 (2): 263­91.
Kautz, T., Heckman, J.J., Diris, R., Weel, B.T. and Borghans, L. 2014. Fostering and Measuring
   Skills: Improving Cognitive and NonCognitive Skills to Promote Lifetime Success. Paris:
   OECD.
Khachatryan, Karen, Anna Dreber, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2015. "Gender and
   preferences at a young age: Evidence from Armenia." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 118: 318-332.
Khadjavi, Menusch, and Andreas Nicklisch. 2018. "Parents' ambitions and children's
   competitiveness." Journal of Economic Psychology 67: 87-102.
Kidd, Celeste, Holly Palmeri, and Richard N. Aslin. 2013. "Rational Snacking: Young
   Children's Decision-Making on the Marshmallow Task Is Moderated by Beliefs about
   Environmental Reliability." Cognition 126 (1): 109­14.
Kim, Hojin I., and Scott P. Johnson. 2013. "Do Young Infants Prefer an Infant-Directed Face or
   a Happy Face?" International Journal of Behavioral Development 37 (2): 125­30.
Kimball, Miles S., Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2009. "Risk preferences in the
   PSID: individual imputations and family covariation." American Economic Review 99 (2):
   363-68.
Kosse, Fabian, and Friedhelm Pfeiffer. 2012. "Impatience among preschool children and their
   mothers." Economics Letters 115 (3): 493-495.
Kosse, Fabian, Deckers, Thomas, Pinger, Pia, Schildberg-Hoerisch, Hannah, and Falk, Armin.
   2019. "The Formation of Prosociality: Causal Evidence on the Role of Social Environment."
   Journal of Political Economy.
Kremer, Michael. 2003. "Randomized Evaluations of Educational Programs in Developing
   Countries: Some Lessons." American Economic Review 93 (2): 102­6.
Lavecchia, Adam, Heidi Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2016. "Chapter 1 - Behavioral Economics
   of Education: Progress and Possibilities." Handbook of the Economics of Education 5: 1­74.
Ledyard, John O., John H. Kagel, and Alvin E. Roth. 1995. "Handbook of experimental
   economics." Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research: 111-194.
Lee, James J., Robbee Wedow, Aysu Okbay, Edward Kong, Omeed Maghzian, Meghan Zacher,
   Tuan Anh Nguyen-Viet et al. 2018. "Gene discovery and polygenic prediction from a
   genome-wide association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million individuals." Nature
   genetics 50, no. 8: 1112-1121.
Leimgruber, Kristin L., Alex Shaw, Laurie R. Santos, and Kristina R. Olson. 2012. "Young
   Children Are More Generous When Others Are Aware of Their Actions." PLoS ONE 7 (10):
   e48292.
Leonard, Tammy, Kerem Shuval, Angela De Oliveira, Celette Sugg Skinner, Catherine Eckel,
   and James C. Murdoch. 2013. "Health Behavior and Behavioral Economics: Economic
   Preferences and Physical Activity Stages of Change in a Low-Income African-American
   Community." American Journal of Health Promotion 27 (4): 211­21.
Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, and Sally Sadoff. 2016a. "The Effect of Performance-Based
   Incentives on Educational Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment," NBER
   Working Paper No. 22107.




                                                                                           74
Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. 2016b. "The
   behavioralist goes to school: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve educational
   performance." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8, no. 4: 183-219.
Lermer, Eva, Bernhard Streicher, Rainer Sachs, Martina Raue, and Dieter Frey. 2016. "Thinking
   Concretely Increases the Perceived Likelihood of Risks: The Effect of Construal Level on
   Risk Estimation." Risk Analysis 36 (3): 623­37.
Leung, Christy Y.Y., Marc W. Hernandez, Dana L. Suskind. 2020. Enriching home language
   environment among families from low-SES backgrounds: A randomized controlled trial of a
   home visiting curriculum, Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 50(1): 24-35.
Liaw, Fong-Ruey, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1994. "Cumulative Familial Risks and Low-
   Birthweight Childrens Cognitive and Behavioral Development." Journal of Clinical Child
   Psychology 23 (4): 360­272.
Lickliter, Robert, and David C. Witherington. 2017. "Towards a Truly Developmental
   Epigenetics." Human Development 60 (2-3): 124­38.
Linnér, Richard Karlsson, Pietro Biroli, Edward Kong, S. Fleur W. Meddens, Robbee Wedow,
   Mark Alan Fontana, Maël Lebreton et al. 2019. "Genome-wide association analyses of risk
   tolerance and risky behaviors in over 1 million individuals identify hundreds of loci and
   shared genetic influences." Nature genetics 51, no. 2: 245-257.
List, John A. 2002a. "Preference Reversals of a Different Kind," American Economic Review,
   92(5), 1636-1643.
List, John A. 2002b. "Testing Neoclassical Competitive Market Theory in the
   Field." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (24): 15827­30.
List, John A. 2003. "Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?" The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 118 (1): 41­71.
List, John A. 2004a. "Testing Neoclassical Competitive Theory in Multilateral Decentralized
   Markets." Journal of Political Economy 112 (5): 1131­56.
List, John A. 2004b. "Young, Selfish, and Male: Field Evidence of Social Preferences."
   Economic Journal 114: 121-149.
List, John A. 2011. "Why Economists Should Conduct Field Experiments and 14 Tips for
   Pulling One Off." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 3­16.
List, John A., and Anya C. Samek. 2013. "Exploring the origins of charitable acts: Evidence
   from an artefactual field experiment with young children." Economics Letters 118, (3): 431-
   434.
List, John A., and Anya S. Samek. 2015. "The Behavioralist as Nutritionist: Leveraging
   Behavioral Economics to Improve Child Food Choice and Consumption." Journal of Health
   Economics 39: 135­46.
List, John A., and Daniel L Millimet. 2008. "The Market: Catalyst for Rationality and Filter of
   Irrationality." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1).
List, John A., and Jason F. Shogren. 1998. "Calibration of the Difference between Actual and
   Hypothetical Valuations in a Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 37 (2): 193­205.
List, John A., Anya S. Samek, and Dana L. Suskind. 2018. "Combining Behavioral Economics
   and Field Experiments to Reimagine Early Childhood Education." Behavioural Public
   Policy 2 (1): 1­21.




                                                                                             75
List, John A., Fatemeh Momeni, and Yves Zenou. 2020. "The Social Side of Early Human
   Capital Formation: Using a Field Experiment to Estimate the Causal Impact of Neighbors."
   Natural Field Experiments 00722 working paper, The Field Experiments Website.
List, John A., Julie Pernaudet and Dana Suskind, 2021. "It All Starts with Beliefs: Addressing
   the Roots of Educational Inequalities by Changing Parental Beliefs." Working paper.
List, Annika J., John A. List, and Anya Samek. 2017. "Discrimination among pre-school
   children: Field experimental evidence." Economics Letters 157: 159-162.
Lührmann, Melanie, Marta Serra-Garcia, and Joachim Winter. 2018. "The Impact of Financial
   Education on Adolescents' Intertemporal Choices." American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy 10 (3): 309­32.
Lundberg, Shelly, Jennifer L Romich, and Kwok Ping Tsang. 2009. "Decision-Making by
   Children." Review of Economics of the Household 7 (1): 1­30.Mather, Nancy, and Richard
   W. Woodcock. 2001. Woodcock-Johnson III Tests of Achievement: Examiners Manual.
   Itasca, IL: Riverside Pub.
Mather, Nancy, Barbara J. Wendling, and Richard W. Woodcock. 2001. Essentials of WJ III
   Tests of Achievement Assessment. New York, NY: J. Wiley.
Mayer, Susan E., Ariel Kalil, Philip Oreopoulos, and Sebastian Gallegos. 2019. "Using
   behavioral insights to increase parental engagement the parents and children together
   intervention." Journal of Human Resources 54 (4): 900-925.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2010. "Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card
   Borrowing." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1): 193­210.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2013. "Discounting Financial Literacy: Time
   Preferences and Participation in Financial Education Programs." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 95: 159­74.
Meristo, Marek, and Luca Surian. 2013. "Do Infants Detect Indirect Reciprocity?" Cognition
   129 (1): 102-113.
Mischel, Walter, and Ebbe B. Ebbesen. 1970. "Attention in Delay of Gratification." Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology 16 (2): 329­37.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica I. Rodriguez. 1989. "Delay of Gratification in
   Children." Science 244 (4907): 933­38.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Philip K. Peake. 1988. "The Nature of Adolescent
   Competencies Predicted by Preschool Delay of Gratification." Journal of Personality and
   Social Psychology 54 (4): 687.
Moffitt, Terrie E., Louise Arseneault, Daniel Belsky, Nigel Dickson, Robert J. Hancox, HonaLee
   Harrington, Renate Houts, et al. 2011. "A Gradient of Childhood Self-Control Predicts
   Health, Wealth, and Public Safety." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108
   (7): 2693­98.
Morgan, Myfanwy, Sara Gibbs, Krista Maxwell, and Nicky Britten. 2002. "Hearing Childrens
   Voices: Methodological Issues in Conducting Focus Groups with Children Aged 7-11
   Years." Qualitative Research 2 (1): 5­20.
Morphett, Mabel Vogel, and Carleton Washburne. 1931. "When should children begin to
   read?" The Elementary School Journal 31, no. 7: 496-503.
Naglieri, Jack A, and Sam Goldstein. 2014. Handbook of Executive Functioning. Springer.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. "Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do
   Men Compete Too Much?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1067­1101.




                                                                                           76
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2011. "Gender and Competition." Annual Review of
   Economics 3 (1): 601­30.
Noble, Kimberly G., Bruce D. Mccandliss, and Martha J. Farah. 2007. "Socioeconomic
   Gradients Predict Individual Differences in Neurocognitive Abilities." Developmental
   Science 10 (4): 464­80.
Ólafsson, Kiartan, Sonia Livingstone, and Leslie Haddon. 2013. "How to Research Children and
   Online Technologies? Frequently Asked Questions and Best Practice." How to Research
   Children and Online Technologies? Frequently Asked Questions and Best Practice. London:
   EU Kids Online.
Parker, Susan W., and Petra E. Todd. 2017. "Conditional Cash Transfers: The Case of
   Progresa/Oportunidades." Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3): 866-915.
Petrie, Ragan, and Carmit Segal. 2017. "Gender Differences in Competitiveness: The Role of
   Prizes." Working Paper.
Picone, Gabriel, Frank Sloan, and Donald Taylor. 2004. "Effects of Risk and Time Preference
   and Expected Longevity on Demand for Medical Tests." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 28
   (1): 39­53.
Pischke, Jörn-Steffen, and Till von Wachter. 2008. "Zero Returns to Compulsory Schooling in
   Germany: Evidence and Interpretation." Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3): 592­98.
Potter, Mary C., and Ellen I. Levy. 1968. "Spatial Enumeration without Counting." Child
   Development.
Pujol, Jesús, Pere Vendrell, Carme Junqué, Josep L. Martí-Vilalta, and Antoni Capdevila. 1993.
   "When Does Human Brain Development End? Evidence of Corpus Callosum Growth up to
   Adulthood." Annals of Neurology 34 (1): 71­75.
Punch, Samantha. 2002. "Research with Children: The Same or Different from Research with
   Adults?" Childhood 9 (3): 321­41.
Rao, Gautam. 2019. "Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination, and
   Diversity in Delhi Schools." American Economic Review 109 (3): 774­809.
Rao, Uma, Tanuj Sidhartha, Karen R. Harker, Anup S. Bidesi, Li-Ann Chen, and Monique
   Ernst. 2011. "Relationship between adolescent risk preferences on a laboratory task and
   behavioral measures of risk-taking." Journal of Adolescent Health 48 (2): 151-158.
Rea, David, and Tony Burton. 2020. "New evidence on the Heckman curve." Journal of
   Economic Surveys 34, no. 2: 241-262.
Riach Peter A., Judy Rich. 2002. "Field experiments of discrimination in the market place" The
   Economic Journal, 112 (483): F480-F518.
Rice, Marti, and Marion E. Broome. 2004. "Incentives for children in research." Journal of
   Nursing Scholarship 36 (2): 167-172.
Rosenthal, Robert, and Lenore Jacobson. 1968. "Pygmalion in the Classroom." The Urban
   Review 3 (1): 16­20.
Sadoff, Sally. 2014. "The Role of Experimentation in Education Policy." Oxford Review of
   Economic Policy 30 (4): 597­620.
Samek, Anya, Andre Gray, Ashlesha Datar, and Nancy Nicosia. 2019. "Adolescent Time and
   Risk Preferences: Measurement, Determinants and Field Consequences." CESR-Schaeffer
   Working Paper Forthcoming.
Schlam, Tanya R., Nicole L. Wilson, Yuichi Shoda, Walter Mischel, and Ozlem Ayduk. 2013.
   "Preschoolers' Delay of Gratification Predicts Their Body Mass 30 Years Later." The Journal
   of Pediatrics 162, no. 1.



                                                                                           77
Schneider, Wolfgang. 2011. "Memory Development in Childhood." In The Wiley-Blackwell
   Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development, 2nd ed., 347­76. Blackwell Publishing.
Schwarz, J. Conrad, Janet B. Schrager, and Andrea E. Lyons. 1983. "Delay of Gratification by
   Preschoolers: Evidence for the Validity of the Choice Paradigm." Child Development, 620­
   25.
Sher, Itai, Melissa Koenig, and Aldo Rustichini. 2014. "Children's Strategic Theory of
   Mind." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (37): 13307­12.
Shloim, Netalie, Lisa R. Edelson, Nathalie Martin, and Marion M. Hetherington. 2015.
   "Parenting Styles, Feeding Styles, Feeding Practices, and Weight Status in 4­12 Year-Old
   Children: A Systematic Review of the Literature." Frontiers in psychology 6: 1849.
Shoda, Yuichi, Walter Mischel, and Philip K. Peake. 1990. "Predicting Adolescent Cognitive
   and Self-Regulatory Competencies from Preschool Delay of Gratification: Identifying
   Diagnostic Conditions." Developmental Psychology 26 (6): 978.
Smith, Vernon L. 1962. "An Experimental Study of Competitive Market Behavior." Journal of
   Political Economy 70 (2): 111­37.
Smith, Vernon L. 1982. "Microeconomic Systems as an Experimental Science." The American
   Economic Review 72 (5): 923-955.
Sparks, Erin, Meghan G. Schinkel, and Chris Moore. 2017. "Affiliation Affects Generosity in
   Young Children: The Roles of Minimal Group Membership and Shared Interests." Journal of
   Experimental Child Psychology 159: 242­62.
Steinbeis, Nikolaus, and Eveline A. Crone. 2016. "The Link Between Cognitive Control and
   Decision-Making Across Child and Adolescent Development." Current Opinion in
   Behavioral Sciences 10: 28-32.
Sternberg, Robert J. 2011. "Individual Differences in Cognitive Development." In The Wiley-
   Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development, 2nd ed., 749­74. Blackwell
   Publishing.
Sutter, Matthias, Anna Untertrifaller, and Claudia Zoller. 2018. "Busy little bees--An
   experiment on diligence and endogenous time scheduling in early childhood." Work in
   progress.
Sutter, Matthias, and Daniela Glätzle-Rützler. 2015. "Gender Differences in the Willingness to
   Compete Emerge Early in Life and Persist." Management Science 61 (10): 2339­54.
Sutter, Matthias, and Martin G. Kocher. 2007. "Trust and Trustworthiness across Different Age
   Groups." Games and Economic Behavior 59 (2): 364­82.
Sutter, Matthias, Claudia Zoller, and Daniela Glätzle-Rützler. 2019. "Economic Behavior of
   Children and Adolescents ­ A First Survey of Experimental Economics Results." European
   Economic Review 111: 98­121.
Sutter, Matthias, Martin G Kocher, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Stefan T. Trautmann. 2013.
   "Impatience and Uncertainty: Experimental Decisions Predict Adolescents Field
   Behavior." American Economic Review 103 (1): 510­31.
Sylvia, Sean, Nele Warrinnier, Renfu Luo, Ai Yue, Orazio Attanasio, Alexis Medina, and Scott
   Rozelle. 2020. "From quantity to quality: Delivering a home-based parenting intervention
   through China's family planning cadres." The Economic Journal.
Tan, Lynne S. C., and Peter S. C. Bryant. 2000. "The Cues That Infants Use to Distinguish
   Discontinuous Quantities: Evidence Using a Shift-Rate Recovery Paradigm." Child
   Development 71 (5): 1162­78.




                                                                                           78
Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F Camerer, and Quang Nguyen. 2010. "Risk and Time Preferences:
   Linking Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam." American Economic
   Review 100 (1): 557­71.
Tymula, Anieszka, Lior A. Rosenberg Belmaker, Amy K. Roy, Lital Ruderman, Kirk Manson,
   Paul W. Glimcher, and Ifat Levy. 2012. "Adolescents Risk-Taking Behavior Is Driven by
   Tolerance to Ambiguity." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (42):
   17135­40.
Watts, Tyler W., Greg J. Duncan, and Haonan Quan. 2018. "Revisiting the marshmallow test: A
   conceptual replication investigating links between early delay of gratification and later
   outcomes." Psychological science 29, no. 7: 1159-1177.
Weller, Rosalyn E., Edwin W. Cook, Kathy B. Avs-ar, and James E. Cox. 2008. "Obese Women
   Show Greater Delay Discounting than Healthy-Weight Women." Appetite 51 (3): 563­69.
Wellman, Henry M, David Cross, and Julanne Watson. 2001. "MetaAnalysis of Theoryof
   Mind Development: The Truth about False Belief." Child Development 72 (3): 655­84.
Wilde, Louis. 1980. "On the Use of Laboratory Experiments in Economics." in Joseph Pitt, ed.,
   The Philosophy of Economics, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Williams, Janet. 1999. "Test Review." Canadian Journal of School Psychology 14 (2): 67­73.
Wolf, Michael S, and Terry C Davis. 2004. "Health Literacy: Implications for Family
   Medicine." FAMILY MEDICINE-KANSAS CITY 36 (8): 595­98.
Wolfers, Justin. 2006. "Diagnosing Discrimination: Stock Returns and Ceo Gender." Journal of
   the European Economic Association 4 (2-3): 531­41.
Ye, Karen J., Anya Samek, Keith J. Yoder, Jean Decety, Ali Hortacsu, and John A. List. 2021.
   "Early Childhood Programs Change Test Scores but do They Change Brain Activity?" Work
   in Progress.
Yeager, David S., Paul Hanselman, Gregory M. Walton, Jared S. Murray, Robert Crosnoe,
   Chandra Muller, Elizabeth Tipton et al. 2019. "A national experiment reveals where a growth
   mindset improves achievement." Nature 573, no. 7774: 364-369.
Zhao, Li, Gail D. Heyman, Lulu Chen, Wenjin Sun, Rui Zhang, and Kang Lee. 2019. "Cheating
   in the name of others: Offering prosocial justifications promotes unethical behavior in young
   children." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 177: 187-196.
Zhu, Yi, Xian Guan, and Yansong Li. 2015. "The Effects of Intergroup Competition on
   Prosocial Behaviors in Young Children: a Comparison of 2.5-3.5 Year-Olds with 5.5-6.5
   Year-Olds." Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 9: 16.
Zur, Osnat, and Rochel Gelman. 2004. "Young Children Can Add and Subtract by Predicting
   and Checking." Early Childhood Research Quarterly 19 (1): 121­37.




                                                                                             79
                                         FIGURES AND TABLES

                    Figure 1: Growth in Economic Experiments with Children




Notes: This figure shows the growth in publications (including working papers posted online) that use experiments
with children, between 2000 and today. The papers included here come from a comprehensive search of the literature
by 1) searching Google Scholar with keywords "economic experiment" (including searches specific to economic
games commonly used in the laboratory) and "children" or "adolescents" and 2) reaching out to the Economic Science
Association (ESA) mailing list and to authors of papers identified on Google Scholar to find papers that we may have
missed. More details about our search are available in the appendix.

                           Figure 2: Markets with Children in List (2004a)




Notes: Reproduction of Figures 6 and 7 from List (2004a). Experienced children (left) and inexperienced children
(right).




                                                                                                                   80
           Figure 3: Heterogeneity in Time and Risk Preferences of Young Children




Notes: This figure uses data from CHECC reported on in Castillo et al. (2020) to plot a histogram showing
heterogeneity in time preferences (Panel A) and risk preferences (Panel B). Data is depicted as the proportion of
delayed choices in a menu of earlier/later decisions and proportion of risky choices in a menu of safe/risky
decisions.

         Figure 4: Heterogeneity in Social Preferences and Social Preferences by Age

                  Panel A: Heterogeneity                                Panel B: Social Preferences by Age




Notes: This figure uses data from CHECC reported on in Castillo et al. (2020) to plot a histogram showing
heterogeneity in social preferences (Panel A) and preferences by child age, from 4 to 6.6 years old (Panel B). Data is
depicted as proportion of the reward shared (out of 6). Here, we only use "Wave 2012" data because this is the data
for which we have the largest age range. Panel B also includes the proportion who share exactly half of their
endowment.




                                                                                                                    81
             Table 1: Aspects of Experiment Design by Child Development Age

                         Preschool      Early        Late         Early          Late       Standard
                                     Elementary   Elementary   Adolescence   Adolescence    Practices
                           (3-5)        (6-8)       (9-11)       (12-14)       (15-17)

  Instruction Delivery
        Format
One-on-one               55.96%      43.90%       39.31%       32.48%        35.48%        Group
Group                    42.20%      53.66%       59.31%       63.25%        61.29%
NP                       1.83%       2.44%        1.38%        4.27%         3.23%
N                        109         164          145          117           93

       Identity of
    Partner/Group
In-Person                33.04%      30.00%       26.79%       25.23%        23.08%        Anonym-
Non-Human                1.74%       3.00%        3.57%        2.70%         2.56%         ous
Photo                    15.65%      11.50%       7.14%        0.90%         0%
Gender                   13.04%      9.00%        6.55%        5.41%         3.85%
Age                      13.04%      16.50%       15.48%       17.12%        16.67%
Anonymous                26.09%      30.50%       36.90%       47.75%        47.44%
Other                    6.96%       9.50%        8.33%        9.91%         12.82%
N                        115         200          168          111           78

      Instructions
Electronic               1.83%       3.66%        3.45%        5.98%         13.98%        Experime-
Physical                 8.26%       4.27%        2.07%        2.56%         2.15%         nter reads
Written                  0%          0.61%        2.07%        5.98%         7.53%         instruct-
Oral                     88.99%      90.24%       91.03%       82.91%        75.27%        ions out
NP                       0.92%       1.22%        1.38%        2.56%         1.08%         loud
N                        109         164          145          117           93

   Instruction Aids
Physical                 31.65%      31.03%       24.89%       12.35%        8.11%         None
Graphical                23.42%      24.90%       24.02%       34.71%        35.81%
Videos                   0.63%       0.38%        0.87%        0%            0%
None                     44.30%      43.68%       50.22%       52.94%        56.08%
N                        158         261          229          170           148

    Subject Decision
         Format
Electronic               6.96%       9.96%        13.54%       22.35%        25.50%        Electronic
Physical                 63.29%      46.36%       35.37%       22.94%        12.08%        (e.g.,
Written                  3.80%       20.31%       29.69%       38.82%        48.32%        zTree),
Oral                     24.68%      22.22%       20.09%       14.71%        14.09%        rarely on
NP                       1.27%       1.15%        1.31%        1.18%         0%            paper
N                        158         261          229          170           149

Comprehension Check
Electronic               2.63%       1.95%        3.13%        2.99%         4.03%         Typically
Physical                 10.53%      8.20%        4.02%        3.59%         1.34%         yes
Written                  1.97%       3.13%        4.02%        7.78%         7.38%
Oral                     42.11%      38.67%       36.16%       26.95%        19.46%
None                     42.76%      48.05%       52.68%       58.68%        67.79%
N                        158         261          229          170           149



                                                                                                    82
                            Preschool       Early         Late          Early          Late        Standard
                                         Elementary    Elementary    Adolescence   Adolescence     Practices
                              (3-5)         (6-8)        (9-11)        (12-14)       (15-17)

    Total Number of
    Subject Decisions
 Min                       1             1             1            1              1              ~20-40
 Max                       50            100           54           320            320
 Mean                      5.679         5.859         6.282        12.278         13.543
 SD                        8.374         9.840         8.357        33.380         35.129
 N                         158           260           228          170            144

   Experiment Length
 Min                       10            0.25          3            5              5              ~1-2 hours
 Max                       120           120           120          120            120
 Mean                      31.88         31.781        38.617       49.990         45.045
 SD                        27.096        26.953        29.582       32.386         32.958
 N                         158           261           229          170            149

  Payout for Repeated
        Decisions
 All Rounds                90.70%        73.33%        68.67%       57.01%         43.62%         One
 One Round                 9.30%         26.67%        30.00%       39.25%         55.32%         randomly
 Multiple But Not All      0%            0%            1.33%        3.74%          1.06%          selected,
 N                         86            150           150          107            94             or All

        Incentives
 Token/Store               25.48%        36.92%        39.04%       28.40%         17.57%         Money
 Money                     1.91%         8.85%         19.74%       47.93%         68.92%         (Cash)
 Gift Card                 0%            0%            0.88%        5.92%          6.76%
 Candy                     24.20%        21.54%        17.11%       7.10%          2.70%
 Food                      7.64%         4.62%         4.82%        1.78%          3.38%
 Toys                      9.55%         8.46%         8.77%        3.55%          0%
 Stickers                  29.30%        14.62%        7.89%        1.78%          0%
 Stationery                6.37%         4.62%         2.63%        1.56%          0.93%
 Other                     0%            0.38%         0%           1.99%          0%
 N                         158           261           229          170            149

     Exchange Rate
 1:1                       51.02%        30.83%        21.85%       23.17%         18.33%         Varies
 1:Many                    20.41%        46.67%        59.66%       60.98%         63.33%
 NP                        22.45%        20.83%        18.49%       15.85%         18.33%
 N                         49            120           119          82             60

        Game Type
 Risk                      9.49%         10.34%        11.35%       21.18%         29.53%         All
 Time                      12.03%        9.58%         10.92%       9.41%          13.42%
 Dictator                  39.87%        35.63%        36.24%       25.88%         19.46%
 Strategy                  16.46%        16.86%        14.85%       11.76%         8.05%
 Competition               3.16%         4.60%         4.37%        9.41%          10.07%
 Ultimatum                 5.06%         6.13%         5.24%        6.47%          5.37%
 Other                     13.92%        16.86%        17.03%       15.88%         14.09%
 N                         158           261           229          170            149
Notes: This tables summarizes the 257 papers found that used economics experiments with children. The appendix
provides detail about how this information was summarized.



                                                                                                           83
Appendix
A.1 Paper Identification Criteria

The papers were included if they met all of the following conditions:

   1.   They conduct an "economic game" using children under the age of 18 years,
   2.   They provide an outcome-based incentive to children participating,
   3.   They do not deceive the participants in any form,
   4.   And if the child has a "real" partner (when applicable).

The "economic games" that we report on are ­ all allocation (dictator and ultimatum), fairness,
real effort, risk preference, strategy and rationality (coordination, competition, prisoner's
dilemma, etc.), time preference, and trust games.

Vast economic literature supports incentivizing task behavior to gauge actual behavior. Hence,
we only reviewed papers where the outcome of the task the child participated in determined
his/her payout.

It is standard practice in economics experiments to not deceive the subjects. Consequently, we
consider papers where the children were not deceived, and if they had a partner, the partner was
a real person (e.g., not a puppet, stuffed toy, or hand-drawn picture of another child or
hypothetical child).

In 2016, we sent emails asking for papers that met this criteria. The email was sent to the esa-
discuss list and to researchers who were authors or appeared in citation lists of papers we had
identified to that point.

We searched Google Scholar with relevant terms, such as "Preschoolers Dictator Task," "Real
Effort Experiment Children," or "Coordination Task Adolescents," to find additional papers that
met our criteria. We completed a thorough search through December 31, 2020.

Each paper was entered twice on Excel and compared by at least two different undergraduate
research assistants to minimize errors. Seven authors were emailed for additional clarification
since some papers did not provide sufficient detail to be included in the table. All but one author
responded. In March, 2021, all unpublished papers were searched on Google Scholar for updated
journal publication status.

A.2 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Table 1

Table 1 presents a summary of 257 papers we identified.

We limit our findings to children over the age of 3 years (an additional 8 papers featured children
below age 3).




                                                                                                   84
In addition to how experiments were conducted with children, we present a column with
standard practices as used in economics experiments with university students. These were
compiled using the authors' knowledge of that literature and not based on a particular reference.

A.3 Description of the Development of Table 1

Next, we provide an explanation of the variables presented in Table 1. Our coding process is
detailed along with a brief list of examples found in the literature. The section features an
asterisk (*) if the coding followed a hierarchy system. By this we mean that a study used two or
more of the formats and we chose the best term that encompassed the other responses. For
example, for subject decision format, the hierarchy was electronic > physical > written > oral.
This means that if the subject responded by announcing their answer verbally and also typing it
in electronically it was coded as "electronic" only. We coded it this way because it would have
been too difficult to try to explain the combination of formats used, and we felt it would not be as
informative to use a "select all that apply" approach. The format types are listed in order of the
hierarchy where applicable.

   1. Instructions*: How instructions were delivered to the children. Possible media include ­
          a. Electronic ­ children received instructions on an electronic device, such as a
              vignette showcased on a tablet or computer
          b. Physical ­ experimenters conducted a live-demonstration of the procedure for the
              children to follow along, or acted out a sequence to depict a plotline
          c. Written ­ children were presented with a textual guide detailing their tasks, or
              experimenters wrote instructions on a board in a class
          d. Oral ­ children followed along with verbal commands announced by the
              experimenter
          e. NP ­ experimenters do not provide a method for how children were instructed

       When instructions were given in multiple media, we used the hierarchy system (above)
       wherein the superior medium could include any of the subordinate media. E.g.:
       Instructions provided on an electronic tablet could be accompanied with verbal
       commands. Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

   2. Instruction Aids: Were the children instructed using any additional tools. Possible tools
      include ­
          a. Physical ­ experimenters used actual objects and props, such as urns and marbles
          b. Graphical ­ children were shown pictures or charts of supplemental materials
          c. Videos ­ children viewed clips or vignettes
          d. None ­ no additional facilitators used

       Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

   3. Instruction Delivery Format: How many children received instructions at the same time.
      Possible options include ­
          a. One-on-one ­ each child received instructions individually
          b. Group ­ children received instructions in a cohort



                                                                                                 85
       c. NP ­ experimenters do not provide information on session sizes

   Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

4. Identity of Partner/Group*: Who the children played with or against. Partners could be
   identified using the possible options ­
       a. In-Person ­ child's partner is physically present or they know the exact identity,
           such as when experimenters identify the child's "mother" or "math teacher"
       b. Non-Human ­ the partner is a computer or an institution, such as a charity or
           NGO
       c. Photo ­ child is shown a picture of another child
       d. Gender ­ child is told the gender of their partner, such as when experimenters tell
           the child their partner is "another boy/girl (gender matched)"
       e. Age ­ partner's age is revealed to the child, such as when experimenters tell a
           child their partner is "another child in their class"
       f. Anonymous ­ the child is not given any identifying information about the partner
       g. Other ­ the child is given any other information, such as the socio-economic
           status or lingual-group membership of their partner

   This variable also followed a hierarchy system when children were given multiple
   identifiers. This hierarchy follows the same order as above, but with ties for In-Person
   and Non-Human, and Gender and Age. This was conditional on being a group task. Only
   one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

5. Subject Decision Format*: How the children made their choices. Possible media are ­
      a. Electronic ­ children responded by making decisions on an electronic device
      b. Physical ­ the child had to operate his/her own body to perform their preferred
          response, such as pulling a lever to make an allocation decision
      c. Written ­ the child had to mark or hand-write their response
      d. Oral ­ the child made a verbal announcement as a response
      e. NP ­ the experimenters do not provide information on how children made their
          decisions

   When the children made their responses in multiple media, we coded it using a hierarchy
   system (above). Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

6. Total Number of Subject Decision: How many times did the child play that game. This
   count includes each decision round of a game, such as every row in a multiple price list
   (MPL). E.g.: A child plays three variations of a time-preferences elicitation task, with
   five decisions each, here the total number of subject decisions would be the product, 15.
   This was coded as a numeric response.

7. Experiment Length: How long on average did the total experimental procedure last per
   child. This is presented in minutes. When the publications specified a range, we include
   in our calculations the median time as most studies only provide the average length of
   gameplay. If the experimenters gave both the length of the gameplay and instructional



                                                                                           86
   period, we take the combined total time for consistency, as other studies only provide the
   total experiment length. This was coded as a numeric response.

8. Payout for Repeated Decisions: How many of the rounds played per child were
   incentivized for a payout. Number of incentivized rounds were coded as follows ­
       a. All Rounds ­ each round of the game affected the child's total reward, such as in
           a gambling task
       b. One Round ­ only one of the multiple rounds of the game count for the outcome,
           such as in a risk-lottery task
       c. Multiple But Not All ­ some of the multiple rounds affect the child's reward

   This was conditional on children receiving a reward in the game played. Only one
   response in this category was chosen per experiment.

9. Incentives: What the children were offered as the outcome of the game or compensation.
   Additional incentives examples, segregated by age, are presented in Appendix A.4. Prizes
   were coded as one of the following ­
       a. Token/Store ­ when a child is offered any non-monetary object that holds a fixed
          intrinsic value, as determined by the experimenter, which can be later exchanged
          for a desirable good. The store could include candies, snack foods, toys, clips and
          bracelets, stickers, or coloring and drawing supplies.
       b. Money ­ when children were given a cash reward or tokens that would later be
          translated to money, usually in the local currency
       c. Gift Card ­ children's rewards were translated and loaded on a gift card, usually
          from a locally recognized vendor
       d. Candy ­ children received sweets as prizes, such as Skittles, M&Ms, or
          regionally-preferred sweet-snacks
       e. Food ­ children received other edible foods as prizes, such as regionally-preferred
          food-snacks like maize, or bags of chips/crisps and wafers.
       f. Toys ­ children received age-appropriate toys as prizes, such as stuffed animals,
          toy cars, and clay dough
       g. Stickers ­ children received individual or sticker packs as reward, such as animal
          or cartoon character stickers, shiny/glittering and scented stickers, and large-sized
          stickers
       h. Stationery ­ children received writing or drawing supplies, such as crayons, color
          pencils, erasers, and pens

   All applicable responses in this category were chosen.

10. Exchange Rate: How the child's experimental outcome was converted to a reward. This
    was coded as one of the following -
       a. 1:1 ­ each experimental token/currency unit was exchanged for one reward
       b. 1:Many ­ the child received multiple rewards per unit they earned
       c. NP ­ the experimenters do not provide information on how the reward were
           translated from the experimental procedure




                                                                                            87
   Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

11. Game Type: What games were played with children. Each publication could include
    multiple games. The game types were coded as follows ­
       a. Risk ­ children played risk-preferences elicitation games, such as a gambling task
           or a lottery task
       b. Time ­ children played a time-preferences elicitation game, such as the
           marshmallow experiment or delayed rewards
       c. Dictator ­ children played the dictator task, or a variation of the game
       d. Strategy ­ children played a coordination game, prisoner's dilemma game,
           investment game, or any variation of such games
       e. Competition ­ children played a competitive game against another child
       f. Ultimatum ­ children played the ultimatum task with another child
       g. Other ­ children played any other game, such as a real effort, fairness, trust,
           public goods, market preferences, cheating game, or any such variation

   Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

12. Comprehension Check*: How the experimenters' gauged the child's understanding of the
    instructions provided. Their questions were framed as follows ­
        a. Electronic ­ children answered checks using an electronic device, such as a tablet
            or computer
        b. Physical ­ children had to perform a sample or a trial of the actual game
        c. Written ­ children marked or wrote their response to signify understanding
        d. Oral ­ children announced their verbal response to questions from an
            experimenter
        e. None ­ no indication of whether children were tested on their understanding of
            the instructions; this was also used when this information was not provided in the
            experiment procedure or within the child instruction script

   If the checks were conducted in multiple media, we follow the hierarchy system (above).
   Only one response in this category was chosen per experiment.

13. Sample size: This is the number of children in the analysis sample of the papers. When the
    experiments in the paper were comprised of multiple age groups and the breakdown of
    children by group was not specified, we assumed there were an equal number of children
    from each age group. We only include children who were part of the analysis sample (e.g.,
    children who participated in a pilot that was later not evaluated are not included). This was
    coded as a numeric response.

14. N: This is the number of studies reviewed that included this age group and had
    information about the experimental aspect. This was coded as a numeric response.

15. Incentives: The most common incentives for each age group are given at the bottom of
    Table A1. This was coded as a string response.




                                                                                              88
                                   Table A1: Further Detail from Table 1

               Developmental    Under 3     Preschool       Early         Late          Early           Late
                Stage (Ages)
Experimental                                             Elementary    Elementary    Adolescence    Adolescence
  Aspect                       (Ages 0-2)   (Ages 3-5)      (6-8)        (9-11)        (12-14)        (15-17)

       Continents
Africa                         0%           1.83%        2.42%         2.36%         3.42%          5.32%
Asia                           42.86%       17.43%       23.39%        25.020%       16.7.09%       14.89%
Europe                         14.29%       27.52%       40.32%        48.03%        42.74%         44.68%
North America                  42.86%       50.46%       36.29%        30.71%        36.5.90%       34.04%
South America                  0%           5.50%        4.84%         4.72%         1.71%          2.13%
Australia                      0%           1.83%        0%            1.57%         1.71%          3.19%

       Sample Size
Min                            18           9            9             10            10             11
Max                            550          2331         2331          3000          2331           2983
Mean                           140.571      146.349      221.851       257.212       253.832        253.305
SD                             185.856      264.537      340.242       390.772       353.582        382.686
N                              7            109          168           146           119            95

             Year
Min                            2011         2001         1966          1966          1966           1966
Max                            2020         2020         2020          2020          2020           2020
Mean                           2015         2014.908     2014.762      2014.603      2014.101       2014.568
SD                             3.266        4.366        6.250         6.456         6.489          6.808
N                              7            109          168           146           119            95

         Incentives

Sweets                         Marshma-     Skittles     Skittles      Skittles      Skittles       Skittles
                               llows        M&Ms         M&Ms          M&Ms          M&Ms           M&Ms
                               Chocolate-   Gummy-       Chocolate-    Chocolate-    Chocolate-     Chocolate-
                               Bars         Bears        Bars          Bars          Bars           Bars
                                            Chocolate-
                                            Bars
Stationery                     Stickers     Stickers     Scented-      Pens          Pens           Pens
                                            Color-       Stickers      Pencils       Pencils        Pencils
                                            Pencils      Pens          Erasers       Erasers        Markers
                                            Wax-         Pencils       Art &         Markers        Highlighters
                                            Crayons      Erasers       School        Highlighters   Notebooks
                                                         Art -         Supplies      Notebooks      & Notepads
                                                         Supplies                    & Notepads
Toys                           Stuffed-     Plastic-     Bracelets     Miniature-    Silly Bandz
                               Animals      Animals      Silly Bandz   vehicles      Bouncy-
                                            Balloons     Hair-Clips    Silly Bandz   Balls
                                            Bouncy-      Miniature-    Beads
                                            Balls        vehicles
Food                           Cookies      Cookies      Cookies       Fruits        Fruits         Fruits
                                            Wafers       Fruits        Juice-Box     Juice-Box      Juice-Box
                                            Fruits       Juice-Box     Chips Bags    Chips Bags     Chips Bags
                                            Ice-Cream    Ice-Cream     Ice-Cream     Ice-Cream




                                                                                                                 89
A.5 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Figure 1

Figure 1 presents the year of publication for 257 studies that met our criteria. (1 from 1966 is
excluded).

We include studies conducted with children of all ages (0-17).

We limit our findings to years 2000-2020.

A.6 Reference List of all Papers Included In Table 1

Aguilar-Pardo, David, Rosario Martínez-Arias, and Fernando Colmenares. 2013. "The Role of
   Inhibition in Young Children's Altruistic Behaviour." Cognitive Processing 14 (3): 301­7.
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2015. "Patience, Self-Control and the Demand for Commitment:
   Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 115: 111­22.
Alan, Sule, Nazli Baydar, Teodora Boneva, Thomas F. Crossley, and Seda Ertac. 2017.
   "Transmission of Risk Preferences from Mothers to Daughters." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 134: 60­77.
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2018. "Mitigating the Gender Gap in the Willingness to Compete:
   Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment." Journal of the European Economic
   Association 17 (4): 1147­85.
Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2018. "Fostering Patience in the Classroom: Results from
   Randomized Educational Intervention." Journal of Political Economy 126 (5): 1865­1911.
Alan, Sule, Teodora Boneva, and Seda Ertac. 2019. "Ever Failed, Try Again, Succeed Better:
   Results from a Randomized Educational Intervention on Grit." The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 134 (3): 1121­62.
Alan, Sule, Seda Ertac, and Mert Gumren. 2020. "Cheating and Incentives in a Performance
   Context: Evidence from a Field Experiment on Children." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 179 (November): 681­701.
Alencar, Al, José de Oliveira Siqueira, and Maria Emilia Yamamoto. 2008. "Does Group Size
   Matter? Cheating and Cooperation in Brazilian School Children." Evolution and Human
   Behavior 29 (1): 42­48.
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, Erik Ø. Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2010.
   "Fairness and the Development of Inequality Acceptance." Science 328 (5982): 1176­78.
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, Kjell G. Salvanes, Erik Ø. Sørensen, and Bertil
   Tungodden. 2016. "Fairness and Family Background." Politics, Philosophy & Economics 16
   (2): 117­31.
Amato, Clara, Francesca Gino, Natalia Montinari, and Pierluigi Sacco. 2020. "Cheating,
   Inequality Aversion, and Appealing to Social Norms." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 179 (November): 767­76.
Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertac, Uri Gneezy, John A. List, and Sandra Maximiano. 2013.
   "Gender, Competitiveness, and Socialization at a Young Age: Evidence From a Matrilineal
   and a Patriarchal Society." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4): 1438­43.




                                                                                                   90
Andreoni, James, Michael Kuhn, John A. List, and Anya Samek. 2017. "Field Experiments on
   the Development of Time Preferences." The Field Experiments Website, no. 00615.
Andreoni, James, Amalia Di Girolamo, John A. List, Claire Mackevicius, and Anya Samek.
   2020. "Risk Preferences of Children and Adolescents in Relation to Gender, Cognitive Skills,
   Soft Skills, and Executive Functions." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179
   (November): 729­42.
Angerer, Silvia, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, and Matthias Sutter. 2015.
   "Donations, Risk Attitudes and Time Preferences: A Study on Altruism in Primary School
   Children." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 115: 67­74.
Angerer, Silvia, Philipp Lergetporer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2015. "How
   to Measure Time Preferences in Children: a Comparison of Two Methods." Journal of the
   Economic Science Association 1 (2): 158­69. doi:10.1007/s40881-015-0016-0.
Angerer, Silvia, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, and Matthias Sutter. 2016.
   "Cooperation and Discrimination within and across Language Borders: Evidence from
   Children in a Bilingual City." European Economic Review 90: 254­64.
Angerer, Silvia, E. Glenn Dutcher, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, and Matthias
   Sutter. 2017. "Gender Differences in Discrimination Emerge Early in Life: Evidence from
   Primary School Children in a Bilingual City." Economics Letters 152: 15­18.
Antrobus, Emma, Victoria Baranov, Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, Lorraine Mazerolle, and Anieszka
   Tymula. 2017. "The Risk and Time Preferences of Young Truants and Their Parents."
Apicella, Coren L., and Anna Dreber. 2014. "Sex Differences in Competitiveness: Hunter-
   Gatherer Women and Girls Compete Less in Gender-Neutral and Male-Centric
   Tasks." Adaptive Human Behavior and Physiology 1 (3): 247­69.
Armin, Falk, and Fabian Kosse. 2016. "Early Childhood Environment, Breastfeeding and the
   Formation of Preferences." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Apesteguia, Jose, Steffen Huck, Jörg Oechssler, Elke Weidenholzer, and Simon Weidenholzer.
   2018. "Imitation of Peers in Children and Adults." Games 9 (1): 11.
Asscheman, J. Susanne, Jin He, Susanne Koot, J. Marieke Buil, Lydia Krabbendam, and Pol A.
   van Lier. 2020. "Classroom Peer Preferences and the Development of Sharing Behavior with
   Friends and Others." International Journal of Behavioral Development 44 (5): 412­23.
Avinun, Reut, et al. 2011. "AVPR1A Variant Associated with Preschoolers Lower Altruistic
   Behavior." PLoS ONE 6 (9).
Azar, Ofer H., and Mark Applebaum. 2020. "Do Children Cheat to Be Honored? A Natural
   Experiment on Dishonesty in a Math Competition." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 169 (January): 143­57.
Barash, Jori, Isabelle Brocas, Juan D. Carrillo, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2019. "Heuristic to
   Bayesian: The Evolution of Reasoning from Childhood to Adulthood." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 159: 305­22.
Barron, Kai, Heike Harmgart, Steffen Huck, Sebastian O. Schneider, and Matthias Sutter. 2020.
   "Discrimination, Narratives and Family History: An Experiment with Jordanian Host and
   Syrian Refugee Children." SSRN Electronic Journal, June.
Bartling, Björn, Ernst Fehr, and Daniel Schunk. 2012. "Health Effects on Children's Willingness
   to Compete." Experimental Economics 15 (1): 58­70.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Barbara Pertold-Gebicka. 2013. "Parental Background and
   Other-Regarding Preferences in Children." Experimental Economics 17 (1): 24­46.




                                                                                            91
Basi, Zvonimir, Armin Falk, and Fabian Kosse. 2020. "The Development of Egalitarian Norm
   Enforcement in Childhood and Adolescence." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 179 (November): 667­80.
Bekkers, Rene. 2017. "Do Two Eyes See More Generosity Than One?"
Belot, Michèle, and Jeroen Van De Ven. 2011. "Friendships and Favouritism on the
   Schoolground ­ A Framed Field Experiment." The Economic Journal 121 (557): 1228­51.
Benenson, Joyce F., Joanna Pascoe, and Nicola Radmore. 2007. "Childrens Altruistic Behavior
   in the Dictator Game." Evolution and Human Behavior 28 (3): 168­75.
Ben-Ner, Avner, John A. List, Louis Putterman, and Anya Samek. 2017. "Learned Generosity?
   An Artefactual Field Experiment with Parents and Their Children." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 143: 28­44.
Benozio, Avi, and Gil Diesendruck. 2015. "Parochialism in Preschool Boys Resource
   Allocation." Evolution and Human Behavior 36 (4): 256­64.
Bereby-Meyer, Yoella, and Shelly Fiks. 2013. "Changes in Negative Reciprocity as a Function
   of Age." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 26 (4): 397­403.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2007. "Patience among Children." Journal of Public
   Economics 91 (1-2): 343­63.
Bindra, Parampreet Christopher, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Philipp Lergetporer. 2020.
   "Discrimination at Young Age: Experimental Evidence from Preschool Children." Journal of
   Economic Behavior & Organization 175 (May): 55­70.
Blake, Peter R., and David G. Rand. 2010. "Currency Value Moderates Equity Preference
   among Young Children." Evolution and Human Behavior 31 (3): 210­18.
Blake, Peter R., and Katherine McAuliffe. 2011. "`I Had so Much It Didn't Seem Fair': Eight-
   Year-Olds Reject Two Forms of Inequity." Cognition 120 (2): 215­24.
Blake, Peter R., Marco Piovesan, Natalia Montinari, Felix Warneken, and Francesca Gino. 2015.
   "Prosocial Norms in the Classroom: The Role of Self-Regulation in Following Norms of
   Giving." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 115: 18­29.
Blake, Peter R., et al. 2015. "The Ontogeny of Fairness in Seven Societies." Nature 528 (7581):
   258­61.
Blake, Peter R., David G. Rand, Dustin Tingley, and Felix Warneken. 2015. "The Shadow of the
   Future Promotes Cooperation in a Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma for Children." Scientific
   Reports 5 (1).
Blake, Peter R., John Corbit, Tara C. Callaghan, and Felix Warneken. 2016. "Give as I Give:
   Adult Influence on Children's Giving in Two Cultures." Journal of Experimental Child
   Psychology 152: 149­60.
Booth, Alison L., and Patrick Nolen. 2012. "Choosing to Compete: How Different Are Girls and
   Boys?" Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 81 (2): 542­55.
Booth, Alison L., and Patrick Nolen. 2012. "Gender Differences in Risk Behaviour: Does
   Nurture Matter?" The Economic Journal 122 (558).
Borghans, Lex, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, James Heckman, and Huub Meijers. 2009. "Gender
   Differences in Risk Aversion and Ambiguity Aversion." Journal of the European Economic
   Association 7 (2-3): 649­58.
Breitkopf, Laura, Shyamal Chowdhury, Shambhavi Priyam, Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch, and
   Matthias Sutter. 2020. "Do Economic Preferences of Children Predict Behavior? Evidence
   from Sibling Comparisons." DICE Discussion Paper, no. 342 (June).




                                                                                            92
Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D. Carrillo, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2017. "Altruism and Strategic Giving
   in Children and Adolescent." CEPR Discussion Paper, no. DP12288.
Brocas, Isabelle, Juan D. Carrillo, T. Dalton Combs, and Niree Kodaverdian. 2019. "The
   Development of Consistent Decision-Making across Economic Domains." Games and
   Economic Behavior 116: 217­40.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2019. "Self Serving, Altruistic, and Spiteful Lying in the
   Schoolyard." Working Paper, December.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "Adverse Selection and Contingent Reasoning in
   Preadolescents and Teenagers." Working Paper, June.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "The Development of Randomization and
   Deceptive Behavior in Mixed Strategy Games." Working Paper, June.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "The Development of Social Strategic Ignorance
   and Other Regarding Behavior from Childhood to Adulthood." Journal of Behavioral and
   Experimental Economics 85 (April).
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "The Evolution of Choice and Learning in the Two-
   Person Beauty Contest Game from Kindergarten to Adulthood." Games and Economic
   Behavior 120 (January): 132­43.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "Iterative Dominance in Young Children:
   Experimental Evidence in Simple Two-Person Games." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 179: 623­37.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2020. "Steps of Reasoning in Children and Adolescents."
   Working Paper, November.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2021. "Young Children Use Commodities as an Indirect
   Medium of Exchange." Games and Economic Behavior 125: 48­61.
Brosig-Koch, Jeannette, Timo Heinrich, and Christoph Helbach. 2015. "Exploring the Capability
   to Reason Backwards: An Experimental Study with Children, Adolescents, and Young
   Adults." European Economic Review 74: 286­302.
Bucciol, Alessandro, and Marco Piovesan. 2011. "Luck or Cheating? A Field Experiment on
   Honesty with Children." Journal of Economic Psychology 32 (1): 73­78.
Bucciol, Alessandro, Daniel Houser, and Marco Piovesan. 2011. "Temptation and Productivity:
   A Field Experiment with Children." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 78 (1-2):
   126­36.
Bueno-Guerra, Nereida, David Leiva, Montserrat Colell, and Josep Call. 2016. "Do Sex and Age
   Affect Strategic Behavior and Inequity Aversion in Children?" Journal of Experimental
   Child Psychology 150: 285­300.
Bunch, Katie M., Glenda Andrews, and Graeme S. Halford. 2007. "Complexity Effects on the
   Childrens Gambling Task." Cognitive Development 22 (3): 376­83.
Buser, Thomas, Muriel Niederle, and Hessel Oosterbeek. 2014. "Gender, Competitiveness and
   Career Choices." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1409­47.
Bügelmayer, Elisabeth, and C. Katharina Spiess. 2014. "Spite and Cognitive Skills in
   Preschoolers." Journal of Economic Psychology 45: 154­67.
Cadsby, C. Bram, Fei Song, and Xiaolan Yang. 2019. "Dishonesty among Children:
   Rural/Urban Status and Parental Migration." Dishonesty in Behavioral Economics, July, 31­
   52.
Cadsby, C. Bram, Fei Song, and Xiaolan Yang. 2020. "Are `Left-behind' Children Really Left
   behind? A Lab-in-Field Experiment Concerning the Impact of Rural/Urban Status and



                                                                                               93
   Parental Migration on Children's Other-Regarding Preferences." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 179 (November): 715­28.
Cappelen, Alexander W., John A. List, Anya Samek, and Bertil Tungodden. 2019. "The Effect
   of Early Childhood Education on Social Preferences." Journal of Political Economy.
Castelli, Ilaria, Davide Massaro, Alan G. Sanfey, and Antonella Marchetti. 2010. "Fairness and
   Intentionality in Children's Decision-Making." International Review of Economics 57 (3):
   269­88.
Castillo, Marco, Paul J. Ferraro, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2011. "The Today and
   Tomorrow of Kids: Time Preferences and Educational Outcomes of Children." Journal of
   Public Economics 95 (11-12): 1377­85.
Castillo, Marco. 2020. "Negative Childhood Experiences and Risk Aversion: Evidence from
   Children Exposed to Domestic Violence." IZA DP No. 13320.
Castillo, Marco, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2018. "Children's Rationality, Risk
   Attitudes and Field Behavior." European Economic Review 102: 62­81.
Castillo, Marco, Jeffrey L Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2018. "Discount Rates of Children and
   High School Graduation." The Economic Journal 129 (619): 1153­81.
Charness, Gary, John A. List, Aldo Rustichini, Anya Samek, and Jeroen Van De Ven. 2019.
   "Theory of Mind among Disadvantaged Children: Evidence from a Field Experiment."
   Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 166 (September): 174­94.
Chen, Jingnan, Daniel Houser, Natalia Montinari, and Marco Piovesan. 2016. "Beware of
   Popular Kids Bearing Gifts: A Framed Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 132: 104­20.
Chiang, Yen-Sheng, and Chyi-In Wu. 2015. "Social Influence and the Adaptation of Parochial
   Altruism: a Dictator-Game Experiment on Children and Adolescents under Peer
   Influence." Evolution and Human Behavior 36 (6): 430­37.
Chierchia, Gabriele, Blanca Piera Pi-Sunyer, and Sarah-Jayne Blakemore. 2020. "Prosocial
   Influence and Opportunistic Conformity in Adolescents and Young Adults." Psychological
   Science 31 (12): 1585­1601.
Choshen-Hillel, Shoham, Zhenni Lin, and Alex Shaw. 2020. "Children Weigh Equity and
   Efficiency in Making Allocation Decisions: Evidence from the US, Israel, and China."
   Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179 (November): 702­14.
Chowdhury, Shyamal, Matthias Sutter, and Klaus Zimmermann. 2018. "Evaluating
   Intergenerational Persistence of Economic Preferences: A Large Scale Experiment with
   Families in Bangladesh." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Chung, Dongil, Kyongsik Yun, Jin Ho Kim, Bosun Jang, and Jaeseung Jeong. 2011. "Different
   Gain/Loss Sensitivity and Social Adaptation Ability in Gifted Adolescents during a Public
   Goods Game." PLoS ONE 6 (2).
Cingl, Lubomír, and Václav Korbel. 2020. "External Validity of a Laboratory Measure of
   Cheating: Evidence from Czech Juvenile Detention Centers." Economics Letters 191 (June).
Cipriani, Marco, Paola Giuliano, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. "Like Mother like Son?
   Experimental Evidence on the Transmission of Values from Parents to Children." Journal of
   Economic Behavior & Organization 90: 100­111.
Cobo­Reyes, Ramon, Jose J. Dominguez, Fernando García­Quero, Brit Grosskopf, Juan A.
   Lacomba, Francisco Lagos, Tracy Xiao Liu, and Graeme Pearce. 2020. "The Development of
   Social Preferences." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179 (November): 653­
   66.



                                                                                           94
Cohn, Alain, and Michel André Maréchal. 2018. "Laboratory Measure of Cheating Predicts
   School Misconduct." The Economic Journal 128 (615): 2743­54.
Corbit, John, Katherine McAuliffe, Tara C. Callaghan, Peter R. Blake, and Felix Warneken.
   2017. "Children's Collaboration Induces Fairness Rather than Generosity." Cognition 168:
   344­56.
Cotton, Christopher, Frank McIntyre, and Joseph Price. 2013. "Gender Differences in Repeated
   Competition: Evidence from School Math Contests." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 86: 52­66.
Cowell, Jason M., Anya Samek, John A. List, and Jean Decety. 2015. "The Curious Relation
   between Theory of Mind and Sharing in Preschool Age Children." Plos One 10 (2).
Cox, James, John A. List, Michael Price, Vjollca Sadiraj, and Anya Samek. 2016. "Moral Costs
   and Rational Choice: Theory and Experimental Evidence." Experimental Economics.
Czermak, Simon, Francesco Feri, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2016. "How
   Strategic Are Children and Adolescents? Experimental Evidence from Normal-Form
   Games." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 128: 265­85.
Cárdenas, Juan-Camilo, Anna Dreber, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2015.
   "Cooperativeness and Competitiveness in Children." Journal of Behavioral and
   Experimental Economics 59: 32­41.
Cárdenas, Juan-Camilo, Anna Dreber, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2012. "Gender
   Differences in Competitiveness and Risk Taking: Comparing Children in Colombia and
   Sweden." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83 (1): 11­23.
Cárdenas, Juan-Camilo, Anna Dreber, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2014. "Gender and
   Cooperation in Children: Experiments in Colombia and Sweden." PLoS ONE 9 (3).
Deckers, Thomas, Armin Falk, Fabian Kosse, and Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch. 2015. "How
   Does Socio-Economic Status Shape a Child's Personality?" IZA Discussion Paper Series, no.
   8977.
Detlefsen, Lena, Andreas Friedl, Katharina Lima De Miranda, Ulrich Schmidt, and Matthias
   Sutter. 2018. "Are Economic Preferences Shaped by the Family Context? The Impact of
   Birth Order and Siblings' Sex Composition on Economic Preferences." SSRN Electronic
   Journal.
Dreber, Anna, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2013. "Gender and Competition in
   Adolescence: Task Matters." Experimental Economics 17 (1): 154­72.
Ebersbach, Mirjam, Dörthe Malkus, and Andreas Ernst. 2019. "Factors That Affect Primary
   School Children's Sustainable Behavior in a Resource Dilemma." Journal of Experimental
   Child Psychology 184 (August): 18­33.
Eckel, Catherine C., Philip J. Grossman, Cathleen A. Johnson, Angela C.M. De Oliveira,
   Christian Rojas, and Rick K. Wilson. 2010. "(Im)Patience Among Adolescents: A
   Methodological Note." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Eckel, Catherine C., Philip J. Grossman, Cathleen A. Johnson, Angela C.M. De Oliveira,
   Christian Rojas, and Rick K. Wilson. 2011. "Social Norms of Sharing in High School: Teen
   Giving in the Dictator Game." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 80 (3): 603­
   12.
Eckel, Catherine C., Philip J. Grossman, Cathleen A. Johnson, Angela C.M. De Oliveira,
   Christian Rojas, and Rick K. Wilson. 2012. "School Environment and Risk Preferences:
   Experimental Evidence." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 45 (3): 265­92.



                                                                                         95
Fairley, Kim, and Alan G. Sanfey. 2020. "The Role of Demographics on Adolescents'
    Preferences for Risk, Ambiguity, and Prudence." Journal of Economic Behavior &
    Organization 179 (November): 784­96.
Falk, Armin, Fabian Kosse, Pia Pinger, Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch, and Thomas Deckers. 2019.
    "Socio-Economic Status and Inequalities in Children's IQ and Economic Preferences."
    Rationality and Competition Working Papers, no. 166 (July).
Fan, Chinn-Ping. 2000. "Teaching Children Cooperation -- An Application of Experimental
    Game Theory." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 41 (3): 191­209.
Fe, Eduardo, David Gill, and Victoria L. Prowse. 2020. "Cognitive Skills, Strategic
    Sophistication, and Life Outcomes." IZA Institute of Labor Economics Discussion Paper, no.
    13901 (November).
Fehr, Ernst, Helen Bernhard, and Bettina Rockenbach. 2008. "Egalitarianism in Young
    Children." Nature 454 (7208): 1079­83.
Fehr, Ernst, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2013. "The Development of
    Egalitarianism, Altruism, Spite and Parochialism in Childhood and Adolescence." European
    Economic Review 64: 369­83.
Felfer, Christina, Martin G. Kocher, Helmut Rainer, Judith Saurer, and Thomas Siedler. 2018.
    "More Opportunity, More Cooperation? The Behavioral Effects of Birthright Citizenship on
    Immigrant Youth."
Garon, Nancy, Brittany Johnson, and Ashley Steeves. 2011. "Sharing with Others and Delaying
    for the Future in Preschoolers." Cognitive Development 26 (4): 383­96.
Garon, Nancy M., Julie Longard, Susan E. Bryson, and Chris Moore. 2012. "Making Decisions
    about Now and Later: Development of Future-Oriented Self-Control." Cognitive
    Development 27 (3): 314­22.
Geng, Sen, Yujia Peng, Jason Shachat, and Huizhen Zhong. 2015. "Adolescents, Cognitive
    Ability, and Minimax Play." Economics Letters 128: 54­58.
Glätzle-Rützler, Daniela, Manuela Oberauer, Matthias Sutter, and Levent Yilmaz. 2016. "How
    Children and Adults Play Experimental Games with Equilibria in Mixed Strategies."
Glätzle-Rützler, Daniela, Matthias Sutter, and Achim Zeileis. 2015. "No Myopic Loss Aversion
    in Adolescents? ­ An Experimental Note." Journal of Economic Behavior &
    Organization 111: 169­76.
Goeree, Jacob K., Margaret A. McConell, Tiffany Mitchell, Tracey Tromp, and Leeat Yariv.
    2010. "The 1/d Law of Giving." American Economic Association 2 (1): 183­203.
Goldvicht-Bacon, Efrat, and Gil Diesendruck. 2016. "Children's Capacity to Use Cultural Focal
    Points in Coordination Problems." Cognition 149: 95­103.
Gonzalez, Gorana, Peter R. Blake, Yarrow Dunham, and Katherine McAuliffe. 2020. "Ingroup
    Bias Does Not Influence Inequity Aversion in Children." Developmental Psychology 56 (6):
    1080­91.
Gruen, Rinatte L., Shiba M. Esfand, and Melissa M. Kibbe. 2020. "Altruistic Self-Regulation in
    Young Children." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 189 (January).
Grueneisen, Sebastian, Emily Wyman, and Michael Tomasello. 2014. "`I Know You Don't
    Know I Know...' Children Use Second-Order False-Belief Reasoning for Peer
    Coordination." Child Development 86 (1): 287­93.
Grueneisen, Sebastian, Emily Wyman, and Michael Tomasello. 2014. "Children Use Salience to
    Solve Coordination Problems." Developmental Science 18 (3): 495­501.




                                                                                           96
Grueneisen, Sebastian, and Michael Tomasello. 2019. "Children Use Rules to Coordinate in a
   Social Dilemma." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 179 (December): 362­74.
Guerini, Rossella, Lily FitzGibbon, and Giorgio Coricelli. 2020. "The Role of Agency in Regret
   and Relief in 3- to 10-Year-Old Children." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
   179 (November): 797­806.
Guinote, Ana, Ioanna Cotzia, Sanpreet Sandhu, and Pramila Siwa. 2015. "Social Status
   Modulates Prosocial Behavior and Egalitarianism in Preschool Children and
   Adults." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (3): 731­36.
Gummerum, Michaela, Monika Keller, Masanori Takezawa, and Jutta Mata. 2008. "To Give or
   Not to Give: Children's and Adolescents' Sharing and Moral Negotiations in Economic
   Decision Situations." Child Development 79 (3): 562­76.
Gummerum, Michaela, Yaniv Hanoch, Monika Keller, Katie Parsons, and Alegra Hummel.
   2010. "Preschoolers' Allocations in the Dictator Game: The Role of Moral
   Emotions." Journal of Economic Psychology 31 (1): 25­34.
Hamann, Katharina, Felix Warneken, Julia R. Greenberg, and Michael Tomasello. 2011.
   "Collaboration Encourages Equal Sharing in Children but Not in Chimpanzees." Nature 476
   (7360): 328­31.
Hamann, Katharina, Johanna Bender, and Michael Tomasello. 2014. "Meritocratic Sharing Is
   Based on Collaboration in 3-Year-Olds." Developmental Psychology 50 (1): 121­28.
Hao, Jian. 2017. "Do Children with Better Inhibitory Control Donate More? Differentiating
   between Early and Middle Childhood and Cool and Hot Inhibitory Control." Frontiers in
   Psychology 8.
Harbaugh, William T. 2000. "Children's Altruism in Public Good and Dictator
   Experiments." Economic Inquiry 38 (1): 95­109.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, and Lise Vesterlund. 2001. "Are Adults Better Behaved
   than Children? Age, Experience, and the Endowment Effect." Economics Letters 70 (2):
   175­81.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, and Timothy R. Berry. 2001. "GARP for Kids: On the
   Development of Rational Choice Behavior." American Economic Review 91 (5): 1539­45.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, and Lise Vesterlund. 2002. "Risk Attitudes of Children
   and Adults: Choices over Small and Large Probability Gains and Losses." Experimental
   Economics 5 (1): 53­84.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, and Steven G. Liday. 2003. "Bargaining by
   Children." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, Steven G. Liday, and Lise Vesterlund. 2003. "Trust in
   Children." Trust and Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental Research,
   302­22.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate S. Krause, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. "Learning to
   Bargain." Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (1): 127­42.
Heinrich, Timo, and Jason Shachat. 2018. "The Development of Risk Aversion and Prudence in
   Chinese Children and Adolescents."
Hermes, Henning, Florian Hett, Mario Mechtel, Felix Schmidt, Daniel Schunk, and Valentin
   Wagner. 2020. "Do Children Cooperate Conditionally? Adapting the Strategy Method for
   First-Graders." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179 (November): 638­52.
Herrmann, Esther, Jan M. Engelmann, and Michael Tomasello. 2019. "Children Engage in
   Competitive Altruism." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 179 (March): 176­89.



                                                                                            97
Herrmann, Esther, Lou M. Haux, Henriette Zeidler, and Jan M. Engelmann. 2019. "Human
   Children but Not Chimpanzees Make Irrational Decisions Driven by Social Comparison."
   Proceedings of the Royal Society B 286 (1894).
Hoffmann, Robert, and Jin-Yee Tee. 2006. "Adolescent­Adult Interactions and Culture in the
   Ultimatum Game." Journal of Economic Psychology 27 (1): 98­116.
House, Bailey, Joseph Henrich, Barbara Sarnecka, and Joan B. Silk. 2013. "The Development of
   Contingent Reciprocity in Children." Evolution and Human Behavior 34 (2): 86­93.
Houser, Daniel, and Daniel Schunk. 2009. "Social Environments with Competitive Pressure:
   Gender Effects in the Decisions of German Schoolchildren." Journal of Economic
   Psychology 30 (4): 634­41.
Houser, Daniel, Natalia Montinari, and Marco Piovesan. 2012. "Private and Public Decisions in
   Social Dilemmas: Evidence from Children's Behavior." PLoS ONE 7 (8).
Hu, Yang, Jichang Ma, Ziyan Luan, Judith Semon Dubas, and Juzhe Xi. 2019. "Adolescent
   Indirect Reciprocity: Evidence from Incentivized Economic Paradigms." Journal of
   Adolescence 74 (July): 221­28
Hu, Yu, and Yi Zhu. 2018. "Exploring an Age Difference in Preschool Children's
   Competitiveness Following a Competition." Frontiers in Psychology 9.
Huppert, Elizabeth, Alex Shaw, and Jean Decety. 2020. "The Effect of Hunger on Children's
   Sharing Behavior and Fairness Preferences." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 192
   (April).
Häger, Kirsten, Bastian Oud, and Daniel Schunk. 2012. "Egalitarian Envy: Cross-Cultural
   Variation in the Development of Envy in Children." Jena Economic Research Papers, no.
   059.
Jennings, Amanda Brooke. 2016. "Are You More Economic than a First Grader?: A Mixed
   Methods Approach in a Common Pool Resources Experiment."
Jennings, Amanda Brooke. 2019. "I'll Share with Her, but Not with You: A Mixed Methods
   Approach to Investigating Children's Naïve Theories about Resource Allocation Decisions."
   International Review of Economics Education 32 (September).
John, Katrin, and Stephan L. Thomsen. 2015. "School-Track Environment or Endowment: What
   Determines Different Other-Regarding Behavior across Peer Groups?" Games and Economic
   Behavior 94: 122­41.
John, Katrin, and Stephan L. Thomsen. 2017. "Gender Differences in the Development of Other-
   Regarding Preferences."
Kajanus, Anni, Katherine McAuliffe, Felix Warneken, and Peter R. Blake. 2019. "Children's
   Fairness in Two Chinese Schools: A Combined Ethnographic and Experimental Study."
   Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 177 (January): 282­96.
Kramer, Julia, Silvia Lübbecke, and Nina Lucia Stephan. 2019. "Do Children Stop Cheating
   When Someone Else Reaps the Benefits? A Lab in the Field Experiment." Universität
   Paderborn Working Papers, no. 2018-05 (January).
Khachatryan, Karen, Anna Dreber, Emma Von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. 2015. "Gender and
   Preferences at a Young Age: Evidence from Armenia." Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 118: 318­32.
Khadjavi, Menusch, and Andreas Nicklisch. 2018. "Parents' Ambitions and Children's
   Competitiveness." Journal of Economic Psychology 67: 87­102.




                                                                                          98
Kogut, Tehila. 2012. "Knowing What I Should, Doing What I Want: From Selfishness to
    Inequity Aversion in Young Children's Sharing Behavior." Journal of Economic
    Psychology 33 (1): 226­36.
Kogut, Tehila, Paul Slovic, and Daniel Västfjäll. 2015. "The Effect of Recipient Identifiability
    and Neediness on Childrens Sharing Behavior." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 29
    (4): 353­62.
Kogut, Tehila, and Paul Slovic. 2016. "The Development of Scope Insensitivity in Sharing
    Behavior." Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 42 (12):
    1972­81.
Kosse, Fabian, and Friedhelm Pfeiffer. 2012. "Impatience among Preschool Children and Their
    Mothers." Economics Letters 115 (3): 493­95.
Kosse, Fabian, Thomas Deckers, Pia Pinger, Hannah Schildberg-Hörisch, and Armin Falk. 2019.
    "The Formation of Prosociality: Causal Evidence on the Role of Social
    Environment." Journal of Political Economy.
Kramer, Julia Lucia, Silvia Lucia Lübbecke, and Nina Lucia Stephan. 2019. "Do Children Stop
    Cheating When Someone Else Reaps the Benefits? A Lab in the Field
    Experiment." Paderborn University, Faculty of Business Administration and Economics, no.
    33.
Kudashvili, Nikoloz, and Philipp Lergetporer. 2019. "Do Minorities Misrepresent Their
    Ethnicity to Avoid Discrimination?" SSRN Electronic Journal, no. 7861 (September).
Laury, Susan K., Daniel J. Lee, and Kurt E. Schnier. 2019. "Will Girls Be Girls? Risk Taking
    and Competition In An All Girls' School." Economic Inquiry 57 (3): 1408­20.
Lemmon, Karen, and Chris Moore. 2007. "The Development of Prudence in the Face of Varying
    Future Rewards." Developmental Science 10 (4): 502­11.
Lergetporer, Philipp, Silvia Angerer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2014. "Third-
    Party Punishment Increases Cooperation in Children through (Misaligned) Expectations and
    Conditional Cooperation." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (19): 6916­
    21.
Levin, Irwin P., and Stephanie S. Hart. 2003. "Risk Preferences in Young Children: Early
    Evidence of Individual Differences in Reaction to Potential Gains and Losses." Journal of
    Behavioral Decision Making 16 (5): 397­413.
Li, Rosa, Rachel C. Roberts, Scott A. Huettel, and Elizabeth M. Brannon. 2017. "Five-Year-
    Olds Do Not Show Ambiguity Aversion in a Risk and Ambiguity Task with Physical
    Objects." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 159: 319­26.
Lima de Miranda, Katharina. 2019. "Mindfulness, Preferences and Well-Being: Mindfulness
    Predicts Adolescents' Field Behavior." Kiel Working Paper, no. 1227.
List, John A., and Daniel L. Millimet. 2008. "The Market: Catalyst for Rationality and Filter of
    Irrationality." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1).
List, Annika J., John A. List, and Anya Samek. 2017. "Discrimination among Pre-School
    Children: Field Experimental Evidence." Economics Letters 157: 159­62.
List, John A., and Anya C. Samak. 2013. "Exploring the Origins of Charitable Acts: Evidence
    from an Artefactual Field Experiment with Young Children." Economics Letters 118 (3):
    431­34.
Liu, Buyun, et al. 2016. "Altruistic Sharing Behavior in Children: Role of Theory of Mind and
    Inhibitory Control." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 141: 222­28.




                                                                                              99
Liu, Elaine M., and Sharon Xuejing Zuo. 2019. "Measuring the Impact of Interaction between
   Children of a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Culture on Gender Differences in Risk Aversion."
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 (14): 6713­19.
Liu, Shari, Gorana Gonzalez, and Felix Warneken. 2019. "Worth the Wait: Children Trade off
   Delay and Reward in Self and OtherBenefiting Decisions." Developmental Science 22 (1).
Lombardi, Elisabetta, Cinzia Di Dio, Ilaria Castelli, Davide Massaro, and Antonella Marchetti.
   2017. "Prospective Thinking and Decision Making in Primary School Age
   Children." Heliyon 3 (6).
Lukas, Moritz, and Markus Noeth. 2020. "Trust, Trustworthiness, and Age: Experimental
   Evidence." SSRN Electronic Journal, August.
Lukas, Moritz, and Markus Noeth. 2020. "What Induces Children to Save (More)?" SSRN
   Electronic Journal, September.
Luo, Jun, Yefeng Chen, Haoran He, and Guanlin Gao. 2019. "Hukou Identity and Fairness in the
   Ultimatum Game." Theory and Decision, 6, 87 (3): 389­420.
Lührmann, Melanie, Konstanting Lucks, and Joachim K. Winter. 2017. "Peer Effects in Risky
   Choices among Adolescents."
Lührmann, Melanie, Marta Serra-Garcia, and Joachim Winter. 2018. "The Impact of Financial
   Education on Adolescents' Intertemporal Choices." American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy 10 (3): 309­32.
Maggian, Valeria, and Marie Claire Villeval. 2015. "Social Preferences and Lying Aversion in
   Children." Experimental Economics 19 (3): 663­85.
Maggioni, Mario A., and Domenico Rossignoli. 2020. "Clever Little Lies: Math Performance
   and Cheating in Primary Schools in Congo." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
   172 (April): 380­400.
Majolo, Bonaventura, and Laëtitia Maréchal. 2017. "Between-Group Competition Elicits within-
   Group Cooperation in Children." Scientific Reports 7 (1).
Marchetti, Antonella, Francesca Baglio, Ilaria Castelli, Ludovica Griffanti, Raffaello Nemni,
   Federica Rossetto, Annalisa Valle, Michela Zanette, and Davide Massaro. 2019. "Social
   Decision Making in Adolescents and Young Adults: Evidence From the Ultimatum Game
   and Cognitive Biases." Psychological Reports 122 (1): 135­54.
Maria Giovanna, Devetag, Sibilla Di Guida, and Natalia Montinari. 2013. "Theory of Mind in
   the Social Sciences: An Experiment On Strategic Thinking in Children," 67­92.
Martinsson, Peter, Katarina Nordblom, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Matthias Sutter. 2011.
   "Social Preferences during Childhood and the Role of Gender and Age -- An Experiment in
   Austria and Sweden." Economics Letters 110 (3): 248­51.
McAuliffe, Katherine, Peter R. Blake, Grace Kim, Richard W. Wrangham, and Felix Warneken.
   2013. "Social Influences on Inequity Aversion in Children." PLoS ONE 8 (12).
McAuliffe, Katherine, Peter R. Blake, and Felix Warneken. 2014. "Children Reject Inequity out
   of Spite." Biology Letters 10 (12): 20140743.
McAuliffe, Katherine, and Yarrow Dunham. 2017. "Fairness Overrides Group Bias in
   Children's Second-Party Punishment." Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 146
   (4): 485­94.
McAuliffe, Katherine, Peter R. Blake, and Felix Warneken. 2020. "Costly Fairness in Children
   Is Influenced by Who Is Watching." Developmental Psychology 56 (4): 773­82.
McGuigan, Nicola, Ruth Fisher, and Rory Glasgow. 2016. "The Influence of Receiver Status on
   Donor Prosociality in 6- to 11-Year-Old Children." Child Development 87 (3): 855­69.



                                                                                           100
Meuwese, Rosa, Eveline A. Crone, Mark De Rooij, and Berna Gürolu. 2014. "Development of
   Equity Preferences in Boys and Girls Across Adolescence." Child Development 86 (1): 145­
   58.
Molino, José Alberto, Alfredo Ferrer, José Ignacio Giménez, Carlos Gracia-Lazaro, Yamir
   Moreno, and Angel Sanchez. 2016. "The Effect of Kinship on Intergenerational Cooperation:
   A Lab Experiment with Three Generations."
Moreira, Bruno, Raul Matsushita, and Sergio Da Silva. 2010. "Risk Seeking Behavior of
   Preschool Children in a Gambling Task." Journal of Economic Psychology 31 (5): 794­801.
Munro, Alistair, and Yuki Tanaka. 2014. "Risky Rotten Kids: an Experiment on amongst
   Adolescents in Rural Uganda." National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies, no. 14-01.
Ongley, Sophia F., and Tina Malti. 2014. "The Role of Moral Emotions in the Development of
   Children's Sharing Behavior." Developmental Psychology 50 (4): 1148­59.
Ouazad, Amine, and Lionel Page. 2013. "Students Perceptions of Teacher Biases: Experimental
   Economics in Schools." Journal of Public Economics 105: 116­30.
Page, Lionel, Dipanwita Sarkar, and Juliana Silva-Goncalves. 2017. "The Older the Bolder:
   Does Relative Age among Peers Influence Children's Preference for Competition?" Journal
   of Economic Psychology 63: 43­81.
Pappert, Anna-Theresa, Amanda Williams, and Chris Moore. 2016. "The Influence of
   Competition on Resource Allocation in Preschool Children." Social Development 26 (2):
   367­81.
Paulsen, David J., Michael L. Platt, Scott A. Huettel, and Elizabeth M. Brannon. 2011.
   "Decision-Making Under Risk in Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults." Frontiers in
   Psychology 2.
Paulus, Markus, and Chris Moore. 2016. "Preschoolers' Generosity Increases with
   Understanding of the Affective Benefits of Sharing." Developmental Science 20 (3).
Peters, H. Elizabeth, A. Sinan Unur, Jeremy Clark, and William D. Schulze. 2004. "Free-Riding
   and the Provision of Public Goods in the Family: A Laboratory Experiment." International
   Economic Review 45 (1): 283­99.
Posid, Tasha, Allyse Fazio, and Sara Cordes. 2015. "Being Sticker Rich: Numerical Context
   Influences Children's Sharing Behavior." PLoS One 10 (11).
Prétôt, Laurent, Gorana Gonzalez, and Katherine McAuliffe. 2020. "Children Avoid Inefficient
   but Fair Partners in a Cooperative Game." Scientific Reports 10 (10511).
Ramenzoni, Veronica C, and Maria Luz Gonzalez-Gadea. 2020. "Parental Behavior Models
   Prosocial Behavior in Face-to-Face Interactions with Their School-Age Children." Working
   Paper.
Rao, Gautam. 2019. "Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination, and
   Diversity in Delhi Schools." American Economic Review 109 (3): 774­809.
Rao, Uma, Tanuj Sidhartha, Karen R. Harker, Anup S. Bidesi, Li-Ann Chen, and Monique
   Ernst. 2011. "Relationship Between Adolescent Risk Preferences on a Laboratory Task and
   Behavioral Measures of Risk-Taking." Journal of Adolescent Health 48 (2): 151­58.
Reiter, Andrea M., Shinsuke Suzuki, John P. O'Doherty, Shu-Chen Li, and Ben Eppinger. 2019.
   "Risk Contagion by Peers Affects Learning and Decision-Making in Adolescents." Journal
   of Experimental Psychology: General 148 (9): 1494­1504.
Rosenbaum, Gail, Vinod Venkatraman, Laurence Steinberg, and Jason M. Chein. 2020. "Do
   Adolescents Always Take More Risks than Adults? A within-Subjects Developmental Study
   of Context Effects on Decision Making and Processing." Working Title.



                                                                                         101
Ruggeri, Azzurra, Shenghua Luan, Monika Keller, and Michaela Gummerum. 2017. "The
    Influence of Adult and Peer Role Models on Children' and Adolescents' Sharing
    Decisions." Child Development 89 (5): 1589­98.
Sabato, Hagit, and Tehila Kogut. 2020. "The Development of Prosociality among Christian Arab
    Children in Israel: The Role of Children's Household Religiosity and of the Recipient's
    Neediness." Developmental Psychology 56 (8): 1509­17.
Salgado, Mauricio, Alejandra Vásquez, and Alejandra Yáñez. 2019. "Do Young People Adapt
    Their Prosocial Behaviour to That of Their Peers? An Experimental Exploration."
    Sociological Research Online 24 (3): 332­52.
Sally, David, and Elisabeth Hill. 2006. "The Development of Interpersonal Strategy: Autism,
    Theory-of-Mind, Cooperation and Fairness." Journal of Economic Psychology 27 (1): 73­97.
Samek, Anya C. 2013. "Is There a Gender Gap in Preschoolers' Competitiveness? An
    Experiment in the U.S." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 92: 22­31.
Samek, Anya, Andre Gray, Ashlesha Datar, and Nancy Nicosia. "Adolescent Time and Risk
    Preferences: Measurement, Determinants and Field Consequences." CESR-Schaeffer
    Working Paper (2019).
Samek, Anya, Jason M. Cowell, Alexander W. Cappelen, Yawei Cheng, Carlos Contreras-
   Ibáñez, Natalia Gomez-Sicard, Maria L. Gonzalez-Gadea, et al. 2020. "The Development of
   Social Comparisons and Sharing Behavior across 12 Countries." Journal of Experimental
   Child Psychology 192 (April).
Schug, Joanna, Haruto Takagishi, Catalina Benech, and Hiroyuki Okada. 2016. "The
    Development of Theory of Mind and Positive and Negative Reciprocity in Preschool
    Children." Frontiers in Psychology 7.
Sebastián-Enesco, Carla, María Victoria Hernández-Lloreda, and Fernando Colmenares. 2013.
    "Two and a Half-Year-Old Children Are Prosocial Even When Their Partners Are
    Not." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 116 (2): 186­98.
Shaw, Alex, Natalia Montinari, Marco Piovesan, Kristina R. Olson, Francesca Gino, and
    Michael I. Norton. 2014. "Children Develop a Veil of Fairness." Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: General 143 (1): 363­75.
Silva, Phiética Raíssa Rodrigues Da, Natalia Andrea Cracciun Boccardi, Natalia Bezerra Dutra,
    Wallisen Tadashi Hattori, Maria Emília Yamamoto, and Anuska Irene Alencar. 2016.
    "Stickers versus Wafers: The Value of Resource in a Public Goods Game with
    Children." Estudos De Psicologia 21.
Slovic, Paul. 1966. "Risk-Taking in Children: Age and Sex Differences." Child Development 37
    (1): 169.
Smith, Craig E., Peter R. Blake, and Paul L. Harris. 2013. "I Should but I Won't: Why Young
    Children Endorse Norms of Fair Sharing but Do Not Follow Them." PLoS ONE 8 (3).
Sparks, Erin, Meghan G. Schinkel, and Chris Moore. 2017. "Affiliation Affects Generosity in
    Young Children: The Roles of Minimal Group Membership and Shared Interests." Journal of
    Experimental Child Psychology 159: 242­62.
Sutter, Matthias. 2007. "Outcomes versus Intentions: On the Nature of Fair Behavior and Its
    Development with Age." Journal of Economic Psychology 28 (1): 69­78.
Sutter, Matthias, and Martin G. Kocher. 2007. "Trust and Trustworthiness across Different Age
    Groups." Games and Economic Behavior 59 (2): 364­82.
Sutter, Matthias, and Daniela Glätzle-Rützler. 2010. "Gender Differences in Competition
    Emerge Early in Life."



                                                                                         102
Sutter, Matthias, Martin G. Kocher, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Stefan T. Trautmann. 2013.
   "Impatience and Uncertainty: Experimental Decisions Predict Adolescents Field
   Behavior." American Economic Review 103 (1): 510­31.
Sutter, Matthias, Levent Yilmaz, and Manuela Oberauer. 2015. "Delay of Gratification and the
   Role of Defaults--An Experiment with Kindergarten Children." Economics Letters 137: 21­
   24.
Sutter, Matthias, and Daniela Glätzle-Rützler. 2015. "Gender Differences in the Willingness to
   Compete Emerge Early in Life and Persist." Management Science 61 (10): 2339­54.
Sutter, Matthias, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Loukas Balafoutas, and Simon Czermak. 2016.
   "Cancelling out Early Age Gender Differences in Competition: an Analysis of Policy S
Sutter, Matthias, Anna Untertrifaller, and Claudia Zoller. 2018. "Busy Little Bees­An
   Experiment on Diligence and Endogenous Time Scheduling in Early Childhood."
Sutter, Matthias, Silvia Angerer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Philipp Lergetporer. 2018.
   "Language Group Differences in Time Preferences: Evidence from Primary School Children
   in a Bilingual City." European Economic Review 106: 21­34.
Sutter, Matthias, Francesco Feri, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Martin G. Kocher, Peter Martinsson,
   and Katarina Nordblom. 2018. "Social Preferences in Childhood and Adolescence. A Large-
   Scale Experiment to Estimate Primary and Secondary Motivations." Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 146: 16­30.
Sutter, Matthias, Michael Weyland, Anna Untertrifaller, and Manuel Froitzheim. 2020.
   "Financial Literacy and Economic Preferences ­ an Intervention Study in Schools."
   Discussion Papers of the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods, no. 17
   (August).
Sánchez-Amaro, Alejandro, Shona Duguid, Josep Call, and Michael Tomasello. 2020. "Do 7-
   Year-Old Children Understand Social Leverage?" Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
   199 (November).
Takagishi, Haruto, Shinya Kameshima, Joanna Schug, Michiko Koizumi, and Toshio
   Yamagishi. 2010. "Theory of Mind Enhances Preference for Fairness." Journal of
   Experimental Child Psychology 105 (1-2): 130­37.
Takezawa, Masanori, Michaela Gummerum, and Monika Keller. 2006. "A Stage for the Rational
   Tail of the Emotional Dog: Roles of Moral Reasoning in Group Decision Making." Journal
   of Economic Psychology 27 (1): 117­39.
Tobol, Yossef, and Gideon Yaniv. 2019. "Parents' Marital Status, Psychological Counseling and
   Dishonest Kindergarten Children: An Experimental Study." Journal of Economic Behavior
   & Organization 167 (November): 33­38.
Tsoi, Lily, and Katherine McAuliffe. 2019. "Individual Differences in Theory of Mind Predict
   Inequity Aversion in Children." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 46 (4): 559­71.
Tungodden, Jonas. 2019. "When Parents Decide: Gender Differences in Competitiveness."
   Arbeidsnotat Working Paper, no. 2328 (June).
Tymula, Anieszka, et al. 2012. "Adolescents Risk-Taking Behavior Is Driven by Tolerance to
   Ambiguity." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (42): 17135­40.
Unur, A. Sinan, Elizabeth Peters, Kent D. Messer, and William D. Schulze. 2013. "Incentive
   Effects of Parents' Transfers to Children: An Artefactual Field Experiment." The B.E.
   Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 13 (1): 73­106.
Vaish, Amrisha, Esther Herrmann, Christiane Markmann, and Michael Tomasello. 2016.
   "Preschoolers Value Those Who Sanction Non-Cooperators." Cognition 153: 43­51.



                                                                                          103
Vogelsang, Martina, Keith Jensen, Sebastian Kirschner, Claudio Tennie, and Michael
   Tomasello. 2014. "Preschoolers Are Sensitive to Free Riding in a Public Goods
   Game." Frontiers in Psychology 5.
Wan, Yingjia, Hong Fu, and Michael K. Tanenhaus. 2018. "Effects of Coordination and Gender
   on Prosocial Behavior in 4-Year-Old Chinese Children." Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 26
   (2): 685­92.
Warneken, Felix, Carla Sebastián-Enesco, Natalie E. Benjamin, and Kerrie A. Pieloch. 2019.
   "Pay to Play: Children's Emerging Ability to Use Acts of Generosity for Selfish Ends."
   Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 188 (December).
Weidenholzer, Elke. 2012. "Minimum Effort Game Experiment with Children."
Weltzien, Sandra, Lauren E. Marsh, and Bruce Hood. 2018. "Thinking of Me: Self-Focus
   Reduces Sharing and Helping in Seven- to Eight-Year-Olds." Plos One 13 (1).
Wyman, Emily, Hannes Rakoczy, and Mike Tomasello. 2013. "Non-Verbal Communication
   Enables Children's Coordination in a ``Stag Hunt'' Game." European Journal of
   Developmental Psychology 10 (5): 597­610.
Yazdi, Haleh, Gail D. Heyman, and David Barner. 2020. "Children Are Sensitive to Reputation
   When Giving to Both Ingroup and Outgroup Members." Journal of Experimental Child
   Psychology 194 (June).
Yun, Kyongsik, Dongil Chung, Bosun Jang, Jin Ho Kim, and Jaeseung Jeong. 2011.
   "Mathematically Gifted Adolescents Have Deficiencies in Social Valuation and
   Mentalization." PLoS ONE 6 (4).
Zhang, Jane. 2011. "Do Girls in China Compete Just As Much As Boys?Evidence from an
   Experiment That Predicts Educational Choice." Technical Report.
Zhang, Shanshan, Matthew Gomies, Narek Bejanyan, Zhou Fang, Jason Justo, Li-Hsin Lin,
   Rainita Narender, and Joshua Tasoff. 2020. "Trick for a Treat: The Effect of Costume,
   Identity, and Peers on Norm Violations." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 179
   (October): 460­74.
Zhang, Wenjie, Songmei Xiang, Hongmei Dai, Mengmeng Ren, Yuqi Shen, Wei Fan, and
   Yiping Zhong. 2019. "The Impact of Self-Relevance on Preschool Children's Sharing."
   Frontiers in Psychology 10 (1028).
Zhao, Li, Gail D. Heyman, Lulu Chen, Wenjin Sun, Rui Zhang, and Kang Lee. 2019. "Cheating
   in the Name of Others: Offering Prosocial Justifications Promotes Unethical Behavior in
   Young Children." Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 177 (January): 187­96.
Zhu, Yi, Xian Guan, and Yansong Li. 2015. "The Effects of Intergroup Competition on
   Prosocial Behaviors in Young Children: a Comparison of 2.5-3.5 Year-Olds with 5.5-6.5
   Year-Olds." Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 9 (December).
Zhu, Yi, Jiajie Wang, Xiaofeng Lv, and Yansong Li. 2016. "Once Failed, Twice Shy: How
   Group-Based Competition Influences Risk Preference in Young Children." Journal of
   Experimental Psychology: General 145 (4): 397­401.




                                                                                       104
