                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
           EVIDENCE FROM CATHOLIC SAINT DAY FESTIVALS IN MEXICO

                                       Eduardo Montero
                                         Dean Yang

                                      Working Paper 28821
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28821


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2021, Revised July 2021




We thank Hoyt Bleakley, Mark Dincecco, Marcel Fafchamps, Edgar Franco, Etienne
LeRossignol, Adan Silverio Murillo, Nathan Nunn, Andrei Shleifer, Yuan Tian, Felipe Valencia
Caicedo, Marlous van Waijenburg, and seminar participants at Cornell University, University of
Michigan, NBER, ASREC, RIDGE, Nottingham University, PUC-Chile, and the Vancouver
School of Economics for excellent comments and feedback. We thank Israel Diego, Patricia
Freitag, Kyle Murphy, Patricia Padilla, Erik Tiersten-Nyman, and Hang Yu for outstanding
research assistance. We thank Jennifer Alix-Garcia and Emily Sellers for generously sharing data.
We are grateful for financial support from several University of Michigan MITRE Faculty
Research Grants. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eduardo Montero and Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Religious Festivals and Economic Development: Evidence from Catholic Saint Day Festivals
in Mexico
Eduardo Montero and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28821
May 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. N36,O1,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

What are the long-run economic impacts of religious festivals? We study Catholic patron saint
day festivals in Mexico. For causal identification, we exploit cross-locality variation in festival
dates and in the timing of agricultural seasons. We estimate the impact of "agriculturally-
coinciding" festivals (those coinciding with peak planting or harvest months) on long-run
economic development of localities. Agriculturally-coinciding festivals lead to lower household
income and worse development outcomes overall. These negative effects are likely due to
lowered agricultural productivity, which inhibits structural transformation out of agriculture.
Agriculturally-coinciding festivals may nonetheless persist because they also lead to higher
religiosity and social capital.


Eduardo Montero
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th St
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
emontero@uchicago.edu

Dean Yang
University of Michigan
Department of Economics and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
735 S. State Street, Room 3316
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
deanyang@umich.edu




A appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28821
1. Introduction

Religious festivals are prominent features of social life worldwide, and often
account for substantial expenditures in even the poorest societies (Banerjee and
Duflo, 2011). What impacts do religious festivals have on long-run economic de-
velopment? Religious festivals may promote economic development, for example
if they foster the development of social capital, enhance voluntary public good
provision, or raise levels of trust in society (Putnam, 2000, McCleary and Barro,
2006). On the other hand, devoting substantial resources and time to religious
festivals may be detrimental to long-run economic growth if such devotion crowds
out growth-stimulating investments (McCleary and Barro, 2019).
   Well-identified causal estimates of the long-run impacts of religious practices
are difficult to obtain. Religious festivals are not generally assigned exogenously
across geographic areas. The timing and features of religious festivals could be
directly affected by economic development itself, or by other omitted variables
that also affect development. Festival characteristics could be chosen (or could
evolve endogenously) to maximize positive effects or minimize negative effects
on economic development. Additionally, religious festivals often affect an entire
country at once, making it difficult to exploit within-country variation in festival
characteristics. These challenges have led to an absence of causal evidence on how
religious festivals impact long-run economic development.
   In this paper, we make progress on a piece of the puzzle of religion's im-
pact on society by studying religious festivals that were introduced by European
conquerors. Many developing countries had religious festivals imposed on them
by colonial powers, replacing endogenously-developed local religious traditions
(Henrich, 2020). We investigate a particular religious practice in Mexico: patron
saint day festivals. In Mexico and many other Roman Catholic countries, towns
and cities celebrate the "patron saint day" of a particular saint or other holy figure
that has been historically associated with the town. Hundreds of such celebrated
figures have their saint day festivals that are spread throughout the calendar year,
on dates set by the Catholic hierarchy in the Vatican.1 These saint day festivals
are usually local public holidays, and involve substantial financial expenditures
by local households and governments. Patron saints were typically established by
   1 For
       example, towns whose patron saint is St. Arcadius (in Spanish, Arcadio) have their festival
on January 12, while for St. Fructus (Fructuoso) the date is October 25.



                                                1
Spanish colonizers, centuries ago, and remained set thereafter.
   In recent decades, anthropologists have highlighted potential negative impacts
of Catholic saint day festivals on development. Harris (1964) argued that these
festivals involved "enormous economic burdens" and "irrational uneconomic"
behaviors that impeded development in Latin America, and Greenberg (1981, pg.
153-158) notes that the consequences of festivals for development depended on
the exact timing of festival expenditures vis-a-vis the agricultural calendar.
   To examine how religious festivals affect economic development, we take ad-
vantage of two features of the setting. First, festival dates vary greatly across
localities, and were determined in the early history of towns following Spanish
conquest. Second, the intra-annual timing of the main agricultural planting and
harvest times varies tremendously across localities. This means that, for some
municipalities, the saint day festival coincides with the planting or harvest season,
whereas in other municipalities there is no such coincidence.
   We exploit this variation in festival timing, comparing municipalities where
the festival coincides with the planting or harvest season to municipalities where
they do not coincide, to examine impacts on economic development and social
outcomes. We hypothesize that festivals that coincide with the planting or har-
vest seasons ("agriculturally-coinciding", or just "coinciding" festivals) negatively
affect long-run development outcomes. During the planting and harvest seasons,
households need to undertake investments and expenditures for agriculture. If
households are liquidity-constrained, festival expenditures in these key time pe-
riods may crowd out agricultural investments. In the planting season, festival
expenditures reduce funds available for investment in agriculture (e.g., in land
preparation, fertilizer, and seeds). Festivals occurring during harvest times reduce
households' total harvest income by requiring them to sell crops during peak
harvest times, when crop prices are low (Burke et al., 2019). Harvest festivals
therefore reduce the realized value of harvested crops, as well as savings and
investment for the next planting season. Coinciding festivals thereby lead to lower
agricultural productivity. Lower agricultural productivity impedes the structural
transformation of the economy from agriculture to modern sectors.
   To conduct our analysis, we assembled a new dataset of patron saint day
festival dates for Mexican municipalities. We combine these data with data on
locally-specific optimal planting and harvest dates to determine whether festivals
occur during local planting or harvest periods. We then use numerous data


                                         2
sources from the Mexican government to explore municipality-level development
outcomes in the present day.
   The main identification assumption of our cross-sectional analysis is that the
coincidence of a locality's festival date and the timing of its agricultural seasons is
exogenous. This is a different and more plausible assumption than assuming
festival dates are exogenous.     We show that the history of saint day festival
determination in Mexico is consistent with our identification assumption. We also
present a number of empirical tests to confirm that this assumption is plausible,
particularly after controlling for key fixed effects and exploiting only cross-town
variation within Mexican states. First, we demonstrate that municipalities in
Mexico show no tendency to have festivals occur away from planting or harvest
periods. This helps rule out an important endogeneity concern, that municipalities
intentionally choose the timing of festivals to avoid planting or harvest times. If
this were occurring differentially for municipalities with certain characteristics, it
would raise concerns about selection bias. Second, we show that the propensity to
have a festival coincide with planting or harvest is not associated with geographic
and historical characteristics that may affect development. These tests provide
evidence that the coincidence between a town's festival date and the timing of
its agricultural season is plausibly exogenous, and can be used to examine the
impacts of agriculturally-coinciding festivals on economic development.
   We first investigate the impact of agriculturally-coinciding festivals on devel-
opment outcomes in the long run. We find that municipalities with agriculturally-
coinciding festivals have lower household income, and also score worse on an
index of economic development constructed from Mexican Census outcomes. The
impacts are large in magnitude: in the long run, coinciding festivals lead to
roughly 20% lower household income, and lower the economic development index
by 0.13 standard deviations.
   In additional analyses, we explore mechanisms behind our results. Consistent
with our conceptual framework, we find that the long-run negative impacts of
coinciding festivals across Mexican municipalities occur due to negative impacts
in agriculture. Locations with coinciding festivals are less productive in agri-
culture. They have also experienced less structural transformation: they have
higher shares of the labor force in agriculture, and lower shares in modern sec-
tors. These findings are consistent with the economic growth literature, which
has highlighted improvements in agricultural productivity and the subsequent


                                          3
transition from agriculture towards the modern sectors as central aspects of the
economic development process (Caselli, 2005, Herrendorf et al., 2014).
   How could a religious custom with such negative economic effects persist?
First, it is possible that communities would not notice the year-to-year negative
effects of coinciding festivals. The long-run negative effect on mean income ­
roughly 20% ­ has emerged over the course of centuries since Spanish conquest.
Such a long-run effect on income can accumulate over time from small differences
in annual growth rates. For example, if the annual economic growth rate in
communities with coinciding festivals is just 0.1% lower, compounded over 200
years, this would lead to roughly 20% lower mean income in localities with
coinciding festivals.2
   Furthermore, even if communities come to realize that coinciding festivals have
negative economic effects, they may continue to persist for another reason: they
lead to higher religiosity and social capital. We use detailed survey data from
the Americasbarometer from 2008 to 2018 and examine a variety of measures of
religiosity and social capital. We find that municipalities with coinciding festivals
have higher religious group participation and a higher propensity to say that reli-
gion is important in one's life. Higher religiosity may lead to greater adherence to
religious customs and traditions, including the celebration and timing of festivals,
explaining why coinciding festivals are not changed even if they have negative
development consequences. There may thus exist a self-reinforcing cycle in which
coinciding festivals reduce development, but raise religiosity, and the increased
religiosity helps coinciding festivals persist.
   We also find that areas with coinciding festivals have lower income inequality.
Lower income inequality may be a consequence of the negative development
impact of coinciding festivals. This equity-efficiency trade-off is consistent with
Mexican localities being on the initial development stage (left-hand side) of the
Kuznets curve (e.g. Kuznets, 1955).
   This paper contributes to the literature on religion and economic development
(see Iyer, 2016 and McCleary and Barro, 2006, 2019 for reviews), which is part
of a broader literature on culture and development (see reviews by Guiso et al.,
2006 and Nunn, 2012). Prior work has found a negative correlation between reli-
   2 Related research has found that religious and other holidays persist in spite of negative short-

run reductions in economic growth of 0.1% or more per year (e.g. Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott,
2015, Wagner, 2021).



                                                 4
gious behavior and economic growth in cross-country comparisons (McCleary and
Barro, 2006), and that individuals' religious beliefs are associated with attitudes
conducive to economic growth (Guiso et al., 2003).3 Our work is part of a more
recent literature studying the impact of specific religious practices, with a strong
focus on identifying causal effects. Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2015) exploit
exogenous differences in the length of Ramadan fasting across countries and time
due to the rotating Islamic calendar, finding that longer Ramadan fasting has
short-run negative impacts on economic growth in Muslim countries.4 Bryan et al.
(2021) study the impacts of randomly-assigned Christian values education in the
Philippines. Relative to this more recent body of work, our paper is distinct in that
we examine: 1) impacts of religious festivals using plausibly exogenous historical
and geographic variation, and 2) long-run (rather than short-run) impacts on
economic development.
   Second, we contribute to the large social science literature on the impacts of
religious practices on religiosity and social capital. Prior research has argued
that religious practices have social capital benefits (e.g. Putnam, 2000, Deaton
and Stone, 2003, Lim and Putnam, 2010). Clingingsmith et al. (2009) estimate
the impact of the Muslim Hajj pilgrimage by examining visa lottery applicants in
Pakistan, and find that pilgrimage increases religiosity and cultural values. These
social capital benefits of religion are often cited as a potential reason for their per-
sistence despite their effects on economic growth (Bentzen, 2019). Campante and
Yanagizawa-Drott (2015) find that longer Ramadan fasting has positive impacts on
subjective well-being despite negative effects on economic growth. We contribute
to this literature with evidence that a religious practice with negative economic
effects, agriculturally-coinciding festivals, may nonetheless persist because of its
positive impacts on religiosity.


2. Conceptual Framework

We first consider conceptually how festival timing might affect long-run devel-
opment. The overall argument is as follows. Some festivals occur in periods
   3 Alesina et al. (2020) study differences in inter-generational mobility within geographic regions

across religious groups in Africa. Waldinger (2017) and Valencia Caicedo (2019) link present-day
outcomes in Latin America to prior Catholic missionary activity.
   4 Stifel et al. (2011) study impacts of work-day taboos on Malagasy agriculture. Beam and

Shrestha (2020) examine how perceived fortuitousness of Zodiac years affects Malaysian fertility.


                                                 5
that have other high-return and time-sensitive investment opportunities: agricul-
tural planting and harvest periods. Festivals require expenditures, and because
of liquidity constraints, an "agriculturally-coinciding" (or simply "coinciding")
festival crowds out agricultural investments. Because festival timing is persistent,
coinciding festivals lead to long-run reductions in agricultural productivity. Per-
sistently lower agricultural productivity hinders the structural transformation out
of agriculture. Despite negative economic consequences, coinciding festivals could
persist if they also lead to higher religiosity. This could occur via two mechanisms.
First, coinciding festivals may be a costlier signal of religious devotion, so areas
with coinciding festivals could develop higher religiosity. Second, lower develop-
ment also slows the secularization process, leading to higher religiosity. Increased
religiosity can lead to resistance to changing religious traditions, including the
celebration and timing of religious festivals. This can constitute a self-reinforcing
cycle in which coinciding festivals persist due to higher religiosity, in spite of their
negative economic consequences. Areas with coinciding festivals end up with
lower levels of economic development in the long run.

2.1. Planting and Harvest Investment Opportunities

Agricultural production has distinct planting and harvest seasons, which are
locally-specific: they vary across localities due to climatic and geographic vari-
ation. In these key seasons, households have the opportunity to undertake high-
return investments, but face liquidity constraints that may limit their ability to
take advantage of them (Karlan and Morduch, 2010).
   In the planting season, there are high returns to investing in agricultural inputs
such as fertilizer and seeds, as well as devoting intensive labor time to planting
activities. Investments in the planting season are realized later, in the harvest
season. Households in the same locality harvest simultaneously, shifting local
crop supply outwards. Markets are incompletely spatially integrated, so high
local harvest-period supply leads to lower local crop prices.5 There is therefore
a high-return harvest-period investment opportunity: delaying sale of harvested
crops until later months when prices are higher. Households can take advantage
of this investment opportunity by storing harvested crops, using savings or credit
for household consumption during peak harvest months. Savings or credit con-
   5 Gibson (1964) documents that this intra-annual maize price variation ­ with dramatic price

declines at harvest time ­ was prominent in colonial Mexico.


                                              6
straints may limit the ability to take advantage of this harvest-period investment
opportunity (Burke et al., 2019, Augenblick et al., 2021).

2.2. Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals

Religious festivals are costly, but yield religious and possibly material benefits.
Prior research has emphasized that costly signals of religious devotion can screen
out less-devoted community members, raising religious participation rates among
the remainder (Iannaccone, 1992) and improving productive cooperation among
adherents (Levy and Razin, 2014). Contributing to and participating in religious
festivals can be seen as just such a costly signal of religiosity.
   Festivals' timing on the calendar varies across localities.                      Agriculturally-
coinciding festivals can be particularly costly, as they affect liquidity-constrained
households' ability to make agricultural investments. The realized value of agri-
cultural income is lower as a result, and fewer resources are available to save and
invest in the next planting season.6

2.3. Impact on Structural Transformation and Long-Run Economic Growth

Persistently lower agricultural productivity in places with coinciding festivals
could lead to worse long-run development outcomes. A long-running literature
in development economics has argued that agricultural productivity growth can
lead to overall economic growth by facilitating the structural transformation of
the economy towards modern (manufacturing and services) sectors (Schultz, 1953,
Johnston and Mellor, 1961, Timmer, 1998, Johnson, 2000). Recent theoretical work
has formalized this point in two-sector growth models with an agricultural and
a modern or non-agricultural sector (Caselli and Coleman, 2001, Caselli, 2005,
Gollin et al., 2002, 2007, Restuccia et al., 2008). When there are subsistence con-
straints (a minimum agricultural or food consumption requirement), demand for
agricultural goods is income-inelastic, and the economy is closed to trade (so that
domestic agricultural production is necessary), agricultural productivity needs
to rise before labor moves from agriculture to the modern sectors. Agricultural
productivity growth leads to overall economic growth and a structural transfor-
mation out of agriculture. Recent empirical studies have examined this question,
  6 Harvest   festivals may also lead to higher temptation spending (Duflo et al., 2011).




                                                   7
with some finding causal evidence that increases in agricultural productivity lead
to structural transformation and economic growth.7

2.4. Religiosity and the Persistence of Coinciding Festivals

Our empirical analyses will show that communities do not appear to avoid festival
celebration dates that coincide with planting and harvest seasons. Why don't
communities simply celebrate their saints on different dates, or switch to saints
whose festival dates are not agriculturally-coinciding?
   Coinciding festivals may raise religiosity, and the increased religiosity may
lead to persistence of coinciding festivals. Prior research suggests two channels
through which coinciding festivals may raise religiosity. First, agriculturally-
coinciding festivals have particularly high economic costs, making them partic-
ularly effective signals of religious commitment, leading localities with coinciding
festivals to have higher religiosity. In club goods models of religion (Iannaccone,
1992), costly religious signals can raise religious participation by inducing substi-
tution towards religious from non-religious activities, and also by screening out
less-devoted community members. Second, lower economic development may
itself increase religiosity (Durkheim, 1912). Empirical studies have found that
higher income levels across societies are associated with lower religiosity (Lip-
ford and Tollison, 2003, Paldam and Gundlach, 2013), and that higher education
contributes to secularization (Hungerman, 2014, Becker et al., 2017).
   Whatever the mechanism through which coinciding festivals lead to higher
religiosity, the increased religiosity may increase adherence to religious traditions
such as saint day festivals. There may then be a self-reinforcing cycle: coinciding
festivals reduce development and raise religiosity, and the increased religiosity
promotes their persistence.


3. Saint Day Festivals in Mexico

3.1. Cultural and Economic Significance of Saint Day Festivals

Patron saint day festivals are yearly celebrations that occur in Catholic countries,
especially those influenced by Spanish culture.8 Such festivals are dedicated to
   7 See, among others, Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), Nunn and Qian (2011), Gollin et al. (2018),

Bustos et al. (2020).
   8 We use the terms "patron saint day festival" or "saint day festival" in this paper. This is

synonymous with "patron saint day fiesta" and "patron saint fiesta".


                                               8
a holy figure considered the protector of a given locality. Hundreds of such
holy figures have their festivals throughout the year, on dates set by Catholic
leadership in the Vatican. Saint day festivals are typically local public holidays,
and involve substantial financial expenditures by local governments as well as
households (Lastra et al., 2009).
   In Mexico, saint day festivals acquired major economic and cultural significance
following Spanish conquest. As part of efforts to convert local populations to
Catholicism, saint day festivals became "one of the most important activities of
the municipal governments" (Tanck de Estrada, 2005, pg. 31). Gibson (1964)
calculated that villages in the Valley of Mexico spent three-fourths of their annual
municipal income on religious festivals.9 Historically, festivals typically lasted at
least three days, involving processions, masses, sermons, music, dancing, markets,
fireworks, bull runs, and feasting (Tanck de Estrada, 2005).
   By the 1790s, patron saint day festivals had become so large that the colonial
government imposed limits on municipal government festival spending, calling
the "excesses" of the festivals "superfluous and vicious" (Tanck de Estrada and
Marichal, 2010, pg. 352). These laws led to the development of the mayordomia (or
cargo) social system, where a rotating set of households assumed responsibility for
organizing and financing the saint day festival (Beezley and Meyer, 2010, Lastra
et al., 2009, Monaghan, 1990, Dewalt, 1975).
   Becoming a mayordomo (festival steward) brought great respect from the com-
munity, but involved significant expenditures, "in many cases to [the mayordomos']
own financial detriment" (Beezley and Meyer, 2010, pg. 159). Mayordomos had
little flexibility on the required expenditure amounts because festival expenses
were "fixed by custom and agreement" and "varied hardly at all from year to
year" (Gibson, 1964, pg. 130). The financial strain for mayordomos was particularly
high during years with poor harvests, as income "depended on the agricultural
year and the market price of the produce" (Gibson, 1964, pg. 130). Brandes (1981,
pg. 212) notes that the "invariably high" financial outlays for mayordomos were
often so large "that villagers were forced to sell parcels of land in order to meet
ritual responsibilities".
   Even in modern times, mayordomia households spend considerable amounts:
Monaghan (1990, pg. 760) found that, in 1985, the mayordomia of the Virgen del
  9 The festivals became particularly popular because they naturally commingled indigenous and

Spanish religious elements (Lastra et al., 2009).


                                              9
Rosario in Santiago Nuyoó distributed "204,937 pesos worth of foodstuff" alone
($46,425 in 2020 dollars). Greenberg (1981, pg. 149-152) finds that in Santiago
Yaitepec, Oaxaca, in 1973, mayordomos spent an average of 4,566 pesos ($2,211 in
2020 dollars). The food expenses alone would have been enough "to provide [the
village] 13.5 days worth of food per capita annually" (Greenberg, 1981, pg. 149).
   Anthropological accounts of Mexican saint day festivals have focused on under-
standing the puzzling persistence of the system. Dewalt (1979, pg. 201) noted that
"poor peasants spend considerable time and money sponsoring fiestas to honor
the saints", constituting "what appears to be economically irrational behavior".10
They have proposed at least two main reasons for the persistence and importance
of the mayordomia system (Chance and Taylor, 1985). First, serving as a mayordomo
was a costly signal of religiosity and wealth to the community (Monaghan, 1990,
Chance and Taylor, 1985). In the view of some anthropologists, serving as a
mayordomo was a form of "conspicuous consumption" that allowed households
to gain community respect (Dewalt, 1979). Second, due to the rotating nature
of the mayordomia system, anthropologists argued that the system also served an
important redistributive role within the community (Greenberg, 1981, Monaghan,
1990, Rosales Martínez et al., 2020). (The view that serving as a mayordomo is a
costly signal of religiosity, helping explain the system's persistence, concords with
economics research on religious signaling discussed above.)
   Saint day festivals continue to be significant in Mexican life today (Lastra et al.,
2009, Rosales Martínez et al., 2020). In a wide array of localities, festivals continue
to be elaborate and costly, following a "rigorous protocol... there must be vigils
(velaciones), masses, ritual blessings and cleansings (limpias), processions, dances
or dance dramas, music, fireworks, ritual meals, and the ritual handling of special
objects and flowers" organized by the mayordomos and involve "the participation
of men, women, and children of all ages" (Lastra et al., 2009, pg. 2).

3.2. Exogeneity of Saint Day Festival Timing

In Mexico, patron saints were typically established at the time of a town's found-
ing or conquest by Spanish colonizers starting in the 1500s. Because the timing
of saint day festivals (relative to agricultural seasons) is central to our analysis,
  10 Likewise,Chance and Taylor (1985, pg. 7) note that "a salient feature of modern fiesta systems
in [central Mexico] is that the offices of the ritual celebrations are considered to be cargos, a great
economic burden."



                                                  10
we must consider how localities came to celebrate particular saint days. The
origins of Mexican festival celebrations are often not cataloged in much detail.
We collect here a set of historical accounts of different places, keeping in mind
whether localities appear to have chosen the timing of saint day festivals with an
eye towards avoiding the planting and harvest seasons. Evidence of such timing
considerations would raise concerns about selection bias in our estimates.
   In our review of the historical literature on saint day festivals in Mexico (e.g.,
Nutini, 1968, Nutini, 1976, Ragon, 2002), we have found little evidence that such
timing considerations come into play. The most important focus appears to be on
choosing the saint itself, with typically little mention of the festival date. Once a
locality has chosen a saint, in nearly all cases it celebrates its saint day festival on
the date specified by the Vatican.11
   Reasons given for the choice of particular saints are typically orthogonal to
calendar timing. Saints were often chosen based on similarities with local indige-
nous gods, to facilitate conversions to Catholicism (Nutini, 1968). For example,
the village of San Juan Tianguismanalco was originally associated with the cult of
the Aztec god Tezcatlipoca. The village was assigned the patron saint Saint John
the Apostle given that this saint and Tezcatlipoca both represented youth (Nutini,
1976). In other cases, localities were assigned a patron saint based on salient
characteristics of their community (Ragon, 2002).
   One category of explanation for the choice of saints does involve consideration
of the date of the festival celebration. In some localities, Spanish conquerors chose
saints whose festival date coincided with key dates in the Spanish conquest of
or arrival in the locality. Many cities in Mexico take their saints on the basis of
the saint whose feast was celebrated on the day the Spanish established or first
visited the town (Ragon, 2002). For instance, the patron saint of Zacatecas was
chosen to be the Virgin Mary because her feast day occurred on the arrival date
there of conquistador Juan of Tolosa. Importantly, the reason for the preference for
certain festival dates has to do with historical events at the time of conquest, with
no obvious relationship with the timing of agricultural seasons.
  11 Insome cases, we found in our data collection that a municipality celebrated a saint day festival
on a date different from the official Vatican-prescribed date (fewer than 15% of municipalities).
These dates typically diverge by only a few days from the official date (on average seven days).
To rule out endogeneity of festival dates, in our analyses we use official Vatican-prescribed festival
dates, not a locality's potentially endogenously-chosen festival date.




                                                 11
   Interestingly, some oral histories describe saint names being chosen at random
(e.g., names physically pulled out of a bowl). Supposedly, random selection would
allow saints to "choose" the locality, and that this would enhance the supernatural
protection provided (Ragon, 2002).
   Even if we believe that the choice of saints in the early history of towns (and the
resulting coincidence of festival timing with agricultural seasons) is plausibly ex-
ogenous, one might worry that localities would seek to change their festival dates,
once the consequences of their timing revealed themselves. There are indeed cases
when communities changed their patron saints, but such cases appear to be rare.12
Patron saint celebrations are key components of a local community's history and
culture. Perhaps unsurprisingly then, the few reported cases when communities
changed their patron saint were motivated by a major negative shock, such as a
flood, fire, or earthquake, and the switch was to a saint thought to protect against
natural disasters (Ragon, 2002).13
   Qualitative evidence on the exogeneity of festival dates is provided by Atkinson
and Fowler (2014), who study festival timing and voter turnout. Atkinson and
Fowler (2014) surveyed Catholic officials in Mexico about how their particular
parish chose their patron saint. They found that "no respondent indicated that the
time of year for the fiesta was considered in this decision. Rather, patron saints
resulted from idiosyncratic events" and that in many cases "Spanish colonizers
chose the patron saint of the community for arbitrary reasons" (Atkinson and
Fowler, 2014, pg. 47). This survey evidence from Atkinson and Fowler (2014)
provides additional evidence that the saint day festival date of a particular town
is exogenous to local characteristics.14
   In sum, we find no evidence in historical accounts of any saint day that was
set (or changed) to avoid or coincide with important periods in the agricultural
calendar. It is key that the focus is typically on the choice of the saint (based
on a diversity of rationales), and that the festival date then follows the religious
calendar set by the Vatican. In other cases where early Spanish conquerors sought
  12 Smith (1977) describes such changes in a town in neighboring Guatemala (ch. 12, footnote 1).
  13 However,  in most cases following shocks, towns would often add additional patron saints to
worship rather than replace the original saint (Ragon, 2002).
  14 Atkinson and Fowler (2014, pg. 47) provide the translated account for one parish on how their

patron saint was chosen: "The people of God were consulted with the approval of the bishop. Here
in Tamaulipas, there is great devotion to Our Lady of Refuge because we were officially put under
the patronage of Our Lady of Refuge by the Spanish royalty during colonial times."



                                               12
to implement a specific festival date, the choice was based on coincidence with
initial dates of conquest or settlement, rather than anything to do with agricultural
seasons.


4. Data

4.1. Data on Saint Day Festivals

We assembled a dataset of saint day festival dates for Mexican municipalities from
a variety of sources. First, we determined the patron saint for each municipal-
ity. An online data source, the Encyclopedia of Municipalities in Mexico (INAFED,
1988), provided information on the patron saint for 77.85% of municipalities. For
the remaining municipalities, we (i) directly contacted municipalities by phone
(13.97% of municipalities) and (ii) conducted online searches, requiring at least
two sources for each municipality (7.49%). In the phone calls, we focused on
contacting municipal government officials, local churches, or schools. Overall, we
were able to determine a patron saint for 99.3% of municipalities in Mexico.15
Appendix A.1 provides further detail, including source information.
   Once we had determined the patron saint for (nearly all) municipalities, we
then sought to ascertain the official (Vatican-prescribed) festival celebration date
for that saint. We focus on the official timing rather than the date each mu-
nicipality actually celebrates their festival, as the latter might be endogenous
to local conditions and outcomes.16 For nearly all municipalities (95.58%), we
used Roman Catholic Church documents to determine the official saint day.17
For saints that were not included in Catholic Church documents, we used other
sources to determine the saint day (3.43% of municipalities). This sub-sample of
saints is comprised of two types of saints: (i) saints celebrated in other countries
on specified official dates but that are not mentioned in Vatican documentation
  15 For two municipalities, officials reported that they do not celebrate a patron saint. For the other
16 municipalities, we were unsuccessful in determining a patron saint.
  16 As mentioned previously, most municipalities in our sample (86.23%) celebrate their saint day

festival on exactly the date officially prescribed by the Vatican or other Roman Catholic authority
outside of Mexico. Among those that do deviate from the official date, the mean number of days of
divergence from the official date is seven.
  17 In some cases, municipalities reported celebrating a saint that is derived from a Vatican-

recognized saint and celebrated on the same festival date, but the saint is referred to in the
municipality by a different, local name. In these cases, we identified the relevant Vatican-recognized
saint, and used the Vatican-prescribed festival date for that saint. We explain this process, the saints
and municipalities affected, and the sources we used in detail in Appendix A.1.4.


                                                  13
(1.75%);18 and (ii) "local" saints: saints not recognized or celebrated outside of
that municipality in Mexico (1.68%). For our main analysis, we exclude this
second subcategory ("local" saints) as the timing of their festivals is potentially
endogenous; however, we show that our results are robust to their inclusion.19 In
Appendix A.1, we provide more information on the saint day dataset construction
and the sources we used.
   Overall, we are able to determine the patron saint and the festival date for
95.12% of municipalities in Mexico. The festival date is missing for 0.69% of
municipalities for which we were unable to determine the patron saint from
any source. The festival date is also missing for 4.19% of municipalities that
celebrate "moving festivals" that do not have a fixed calendar date.20 Our primary
sample for analysis in this paper excludes municipalities with missing festival
dates, but our results are robust to various ways of treating these missing-date
municipalities.21 Figure 1 provides a map of patron saint day festivals across
Mexico (including "local" saints).

4.2. Data on the New Spain Region of Mexico

Our primary analyses focus on a relatively homogeneous sample of municipalities
in the former "New Spain" (Nueva España) region of Mexico. Municipalities in this
region are nearly all suitable for growing maize, which simplifies the analysis by
allowing us to focus on maize planting and harvest periods. Maize has been
the primary staple crop in the region since pre-colonial times (Gibson, 1964). In
other parts of Mexico outside of New Spain, there is more heterogeneity in both
agricultural suitability and suitability for maize. Thus, the choice of primary crop
outside New Spain could possibly reflect endogenous choices to focus on certain
  18 For instance, the Cristo Burgos festival originated in Burgos, Spain, and is celebrated there on

September 14. The festival then spread to Mexico and other Catholic countries. One municipality
in Mexico celebrates Cristo Burgos, and we assign it the festival date of September 14.
  19 In Appendix Table D7, we show that municipalities with local saints are similar on geographic

characteristics to municipalities where the saint is non-local. Additionally, Appendix Table D10
shows the main results are robust to the inclusion of local saints in the sample.
  20 For example, the Sagrado Corazón de Jesús festival is celebrated on the Friday following the

second Sunday of Pentecost ­ the seventh Sunday after Easter. Easter varies in timing year to year.
  21 In Appendix Table D6, we show that municipalities with missing dates have similar geographic

characteristics to other municipalities. We also show the main results are very similar when we
classify municipalities with missing festival dates either as having coinciding or non-coinciding
festivals (see Tables D8 and D9).




                                                 14
                  Figure 1: Saint Day Festival Months - All of Mexico



                                                                                   Festival Month
                                                                                       1
                                                                                       2
                                                                                       3
                                                                                       4
                                                                                       5
                                                                                       6
                                                                                       7
                                                                                       8
                                                                                       9
                                                                                       10
                                                                                       11
                                                                                       12




                                                                                        Festival Date
                                                                                        Could Not Be
                                                                                        Determined


                                                                                   Borders
                                                                                       Country




            Notes: The map presents the month that each municipality in Mexico celebrates its
            respective Catholic patron saint day festival. Municipalities where we were unable
            to determine the festival date are shaded in dark grey. See Appendix A.1 for more
            information on the construction of the festival date dataset.




non-maize crops in periods closer to the present day.22 By focusing on an area
that has been primarily maize-growing since pre-colonial times, we can sidestep
concerns that a locality's primary crop may be endogeneous to the economic
development process.
   New Spain is also distinct from other parts of Mexico on other dimensions
relevant for our study. It was the first part of Mexico to be conquered and settled
by the Spanish, and was the main administrative unit during early colonial history.
The area thus has the longest history of colonial influence in Mexico, which may
make Catholic religious traditions like saint day festivals comparatively more im-
portant in this region. The historical accounts we cite above about the importance
of festivals and the mayordomia system all refer to localities in New Spain. Today,
saint day festivals remain more important in the former New Spain than in the
rest of Mexico (Lastra et al., 2009). Municipalities in New Spain are also distinctive
in being much smaller in land area and more densely populated compared to
municipalities in the rest of the country.23 Town-based community celebrations
   22 The difference in agricultural suitability and in primary crops derives from differences in

climate: New Spain is largely temperate and subtropical, while the north is mostly semi-arid and
arid desert, while the southeast is tropical (Ricketts et al., 1999).
   23 New Spain municipalities have mean land area of 336.1 square kilometers, compared with

non-New Spain municipalities' mean of 2,385.9 square kilometers. Mean population density is 308.6
persons per square kilometer in New Spain municipalities vs. 98.0 persons per square kilometer
in non-New Spain municipalities. Municipalities in New Spain comprise 60% of the Mexican
population (authors' calculations from the 2010 Mexican Census).


                                                   15
such as saint day festivals may have more impact in the more compact, denser
populations of New Spain.
   Figure 2 presents a map of the borders of the New Spain region in Mexico.
We use the definition of New Spain as of 1786, as in Map 8 of Gerhard (1993).
Figure B1 presents a map of festival months across New Spain municipalities.24

           Figure 2: Administrative Borders and New Spain Region of Mexico




                                                                                   Borders
                                                                                       Country
                                                                                       New Spain
                                                                                       States
                                                                                       Municipalities




          Notes: Administrative borders of Mexico in shades of gray: country, state, and municipality
          borders. In black: border of the New Spain region in 1786 (Gerhard, 1993).




4.3. Data on Crop Planting and Harvest Dates (FAO)

We focus on the planting and harvest cycle for maize, as maize is and has histor-
ically been the most important crop in New Spain. Maize is native to the area,
and remains the crop with the highest potential caloric yield in the region, based
on Caloric Suitability Index (CSI) measures (Galor and Ozak, 2016).25 Figure B2
presents a map of the optimal maize planting month in New Spain according to
the GAEZ estimates, while Figure B3 displays a corresponding map of the length
  24 In Section 6, we show that our results are robust to considering the sample of all Mexican
municipalities for which we have festival dates.
  25 The CSI measures the potential caloric yield per hectare per year under rain-fed agriculture and

low level of inputs for a variety of crops. For 77.54% of New Spain municipalities, maize is the
highest caloric-yielding (max CSI) crop. Other New Spain municipalities have the following max
CSI crops: wetland rice (9.23% of municipalities), foxtail millet (5.70%), and wheat (7.52%). Foxtail
millet, wetland rice, and wheat are not native to the Americas pre-1500 CE.




                                                      16
of the maize growth cycle.26 The maps highlight the large amount of spatial
variation in the optimal maize planting and harvest dates.27
   We obtained data on the optimal local planting and harvest dates for maize
from the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agricul-
ture Organization (FAO). These data provide estimates of maize growth cycles
at the grid-cell level (5'×5', approximately 100 km2 ) under rain-fed or irrigated
agriculture, and under three alternative levels of inputs (low, medium, and high).
The estimates incorporate the effect of moisture and temperature on the growth of
the crop, the disease environment, as well as climate-related pest, "workability",
and disease constraints. In our analyses, we use estimates of maize planting and
harvest dates based on agro-climatic growth cycles under rain-fed agriculture and
low levels of inputs. We use these restrictions to reduce potential concerns that
the irrigation method and level of agricultural inputs reflect endogenous choices
that could be potentially correlated with economic development.
   For each municipality, we take the average optimal planting date across grid
cells in a municipality as the optimal planting date. We then construct the optimal
harvest date in each municipality by taking the average optimal planting date and
adding the average number of days until harvest across grid cells within each
municipality.28 Some municipalities are not suitable for maize, and we exclude
these municipalities from the main analysis as we are not able to determine
optimal planting and harvest dates for these municipalities.29
   We then use the data on festival dates across Mexican municipalities detailed in
Section 4.1 to construct a measure of the coincidence of timing of a municipality's
saint day festival with its planting and harvest periods. Figure 3 presents a
map of New Spain municipalities and whether they have agriculturally-coinciding
  26 In some regions of Mexico, maize production is split into two seasons: a primary season
that accounts for approximately 75 percent of total production (usually with planting occur-
ring spring/summer), and a shorter secondary season (usually with planting occurring in the
fall/winter) (USDA, 2017). The FAO GAEZ planting and harvest cycle estimates are for the primary
season for each grid cell (Fischer et al., 2012). We focus on this primary maize season because it
accounts for the majority of production.
  27 Appendix Figures B8 and B9 present the equivalent maps for maize planting dates and maize

growth cycle lengths for all of Mexico.
  28 We have confirmed empirically that these statistics derived from GAEZ data do predict the

timing of actual agricultural activity. Using data on the timing of maize harvesting from the
Servicio de Información Agroalimentaria y Pesquera (SIAP), we show in Appendix Figure C1 that our
constructed optimal harvest month strongly predicts observed maize harvest timing across Mexico.
  29 This maize suitability restriction affects 0.53% of municipalities in the New Spain region of

Mexico, and 2.07% of municipalities in Mexico as a whole.


                                               17
festivals. We define agriculturally coinciding as an indicator variable equal to 1
if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either within 0 to 30 days before
the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest
date.30
   Figure 3: Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals - New Spain Region of Mexico




       Notes: Coinciding Festival is equal to "Yes" if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs
       either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal
       maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data, and "No" otherwise for each
       municipality in the New Spain region of Mexico. Municipalities where we were unable to
       determine the festival date or are unsuitable for maize are shaded in dark grey.




4.4. Data Sources for Development Outcomes

Our primary outcome variables (household income and an index of economic
development) are at the municipality level, and come from the 2010 Censo de
Población y Vivienda (Population Census henceforth) from Mexico's National Insti-
tute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI). This census interviewed over 106 million
households across Mexico about their economic well-being, labor supply, asset
ownership, and education. We also use municipality-level data on agricultural
production from the Servicio de Información Agroalimentaria y Pesquera (SIAP) in
our analysis of maize productivity. See Appendix A for further details.
  30 Figure B4 presents a map of the number of days between the saint day festival date and the
optimal maize planting date and Figure B5 presents a map of the days between the saint day festival
date and optimal maize harvest date in New Spain. Figures B10 and B11 present the equivalent
maps for the distance between the saint day festival and maize planting and maize harvest dates
for all of Mexico.




                                                    18
4.5. Data on Additional Covariates

We assemble a set of municipality characteristics to use in balance tests and as
control variables. We obtain temperature and precipitation data from the Global
Climate Database (Hijmans et al., 2005) and land suitability measures from the
Atlas of the Biosphere (Ramankutty et al., 2002). We combine these datasets with
the administrative shapefile of municipality boundaries from INEGI to construct
municipality-level covariates. Additionally, we use the municipality shapefile to
construct municipality land area and municipality-centroid latitude and longi-
tude. See Appendix A for further detail.
   We obtain historical measures of population density and climate from Sellers
and Alix-Garcia (2018), which contains various data on the colonial governorships
of New Spain, including records from Spanish administrators on the number of
individuals paying tribute to the Spanish Crown.31 Drought severity data in the
early colonial era are from the North American Drought Atlas (Cook and Krusic,
2004). Drought severity is an important predictor of the dramatic decline in
tributary population during the early colonial era and subsequent development
(Sellers and Alix-Garcia, 2018). Population data for 1900 (used in Section 7.2) are
from INEGI's Historical Archive of Localities.


5. Empirical Strategy

We estimate the effects of agriculturally-coinciding festivals using the following
regression equation:

             ym = s(m) +  Festival Coincides with Planting or Harvestm + Xm B +           m        (1)

where m indexes municipalities; ym is our outcome of interest; s(m) is a function
mapping municipalities to Mexican states; s(m) represent state fixed effects to ac-
count for all time-invariant differences across states, such as geography or cultural
factors that do not vary over time;32 Festival Coincides with Planting or Harvestm is
an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in municipality m occurs
0 to 30 days before the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the
  31 There are no other proxies for population for the colonial era. See Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018)
on how the tributary data are converted to population measures.
  32 Across Mexico, there are 32 states. In the New Spain region of Mexico, there are 13 different

states. Section 6.3.1 shows the results using the full sample of Mexican municipalities.



                                                  19
optimal maize harvest date;33 Xm is a vector of controls that includes fixed effects
for the planting calendar month, fixed effects for the harvest calendar month,34
fixed effects for the festival calendar week, and controls for geographic, climatic,
and historical characteristics for municipality m; and                   m   is the error term of
municipality     m.35
     The coefficient of interest is  , the effect of having festivals coincide with plant-
ing or harvest. We hypothesize that  < 0 when examining long-run economic
development outcomes.
     The main identifying assumption is that E [        m | Festival   Coincides with Planting or Harvestm ] =
E[   m]   = 0. That is, whether a municipality's saint day festival is agriculturally-
coinciding is exogenous to features of the municipality that could also affect
economic development. Below, we provide empirical tests supporting the validity
of this identifying assumption.
     First, note that the measures we use for both festival dates and crop growth
cycles are meant to increase confidence that the independent variable of interest
is exogenous. For festival dates, instead of using the date when the municipality
actually celebrates the saint, we use the official celebration date defined in the Ro-
man Catholic Church's calendar for a municipality's patron saint (see Section 4.1).
Second, for agricultural seasons, we use estimates from the FAO GAEZ data based
on geographic and climate characteristics rather than the dates when households
in a municipality perform planting and harvesting, which might be endogenous
to levels of economic development. Using these measures for festivals and agri-
cultural seasons increases confidence that the coincidence between festivals and
the agricultural season is plausibly exogenous to other important municipality
characteristics that might affect development.
  33 We also show results separately for festivals that coincide with planting and festivals that

coincide with harvest in Section 6.2. When we show results separately, we include p-values for
testing differences across coefficients for festivals that coincide with planting and festivals that
coincide with harvest; in all cases, we fail to reject the null hypotheses that the coefficients are
the same. Additionally, we explore the sensitivity of the results to the definition of the 30-day
windows in Appendix C and show that the results are robust to various windows prior to planting
and following harvest.
  34 There are 22 planting and calendar month fixed effects (11 for planting and 11 for harvest; one

calendar month in each set is the excluded category.)
  35 For municipality-level outcomes, we present robust standard errors. For individual-level out-

comes, we cluster standard errors at the municipality level. We also show that our results are
robust to spatial autocorrelation; we present our main results with Conley (1999) standard errors
in Table D11. The Conley (1999) standard errors are very similar to the robust standard errors,
suggesting that festival timing across Mexico is not considerably spatially correlated.


                                                20
   One concern with estimating equation (1) is that perhaps saint day festivals
were originally selected (or subsequently changed) to avoid the agricultural season
in some municipalities, but not in others.36 This strategic assignment would imply
that it would be less likely that municipalities have festivals that coincide with
planting or harvest months compared to other time periods.
   To test whether this is the case, we construct a dataset at the municipality-date
level, with 365 observations per municipality (one for each calendar date). The
dependent variable, Festival Datemt , is an indicator equal to one if municipality
m's festival occurs on date t, and is zero otherwise. We then test whether munici-
palities are less likely to have festival days that coincide with planting and harvest
months in the data by estimating the following regression equation:

         Festival Datemtsw =  Planting or Harvest Monthmt + s + w + ws +               mt       (2)

where m indexes municipalities, t indexes calendar dates, s indexes states, and
w indexes weeks of the year; Planting or Harvest Monthmt is an indicator equal to
one if calendar date t is either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting
date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for municipality m; s
represent state fixed effects; w represent week-of-the-year fixed effects to account
for time-invariant differences across calendar weeks in the propensity to have saint
days according to the Roman Catholic Church calendar; ws are week-by-state
fixed effects to allow festival calendar week effects to vary by state; and             mt   is the
error term of municipality m for date t. We cluster standard errors by municipality.
If saint day festivals were strategically chosen taking into account agricultural
planting and harvest times, then we would expect that  = 0. However, if the
saint day festivals were determined without taking into account the timing of the
agricultural season, then we would expect that  = 0.
   Table 1 presents the results from estimating equation (2). (Coefficients are
multiplied by 100 to improve visibility.) Columns 1-2 present results examining
whether the festival date coincides with either the planting or harvest month,
while columns 3-4 show results separately for coinciding with planting and co-
inciding with harvest. Coefficient estimates are consistently small in magnitude
and are not statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels.
  36 For instance,in more populous municipalities, perhaps patron saints whose festival dates would
coincide with agricultural periods were avoided. This would imply that municipalities that happen
to have agriculturally-coinciding festivals may be less developed today due to omitted variables
(e.g. less populous to begin with) rather than the festival directly.


                                                21
Results are not sensitive to inclusion of week-by-state fixed effects. Across all
columns, there is no evidence that festivals are more or less likely to coincide
with planting or harvest months. Instead, the estimates suggest that festival dates
occur throughout the calendar in a way that is consistent with festival days not
being assigned strategically to avoid or coincide with planting and harvest. This
evidence supports the assumption that, conditional on calendar week fixed effects,
the agricultural-coincidence of festival dates is exogenous.37

          Table 1: Relationship Between Festival, Planting, and Harvest Months

                                                                               Dependent Variable:
                                                                                    Festival Date
                                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)


                    Maize Planting or Harvest Month            -0.020          -0.013
                                                               (0.017)         (0.018)
                    Maize Planting Month                                                      -0.020          -0.009
                                                                                              (0.020)         (0.022)
                    Maize Harvest Month                                                       -0.021          -0.018
                                                                                              (0.028)         (0.028)


                    Calendar Week Fixed Effects                    Y               N              Y               N
                    Week by State Fixed Effects                    N               Y              N               Y

                    Observations                                581,445         581,445        581,445        581,445
                    Clusters                                     1,593           1,593          1,593          1,593
                    Mean Dep. Var.                               0.274           0.274          0.274          0.274
                   Notes: Observations are at the municipality-calendar date level for municipalities in the New Spain
                 region of Mexico for which we have festival data. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality
                 level. For ease of interpretation, we multiply all regression coefficients by 100. Maize Planting or
                 Harvest Month is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a date falls within 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal
                 maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using
                 FAO GAEZ data. Maize Planting Month is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a date falls within
                 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data.
                 Maize Harvest Month is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a date falls within 0 to 30 days after the
                 optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. Calendar Week Fixed Effects are
                 indicator variables equal to 1 if the festival for a municipality occurs in a given 7-day period (52 fixed
                 effects). Week by State Fixed Effects are interaction terms between calendar week and Mexican state
                 fixed effects. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



   A second concern with equation (1) is that if festivals were determined in
some way dependent on characteristics that might matter for economic develop-
ment ­ such as geography and climate ­ then municipalities with agriculturally-
coinciding festivals might differ from others. If this were the case, then the
estimates from equation (1) for our independent variable of interest would not be
causal and would instead be capturing impacts of these other differences between
municipalities.
  37 InAppendix Table D1, we conduct a similar analysis for municipalities in all of Mexico. Results
are very similar, and lead to the same conclusion: there is little evidence that festivals tend to be
more or less likely in planting or harvest months, after conditioning on calendar week fixed effects.



                                                                    22
   To examine whether this is the case, we estimate equation (1) and have the
outcome ym be a series of geographic, climatic, and historical characteristics that
might affect development. Figure 4 presents the estimates for this exercise. The
estimates suggest that, conditional on fixed effects for state, planting month,
harvest month, and festival week, municipalities that happen to have festivals
coincide with planting or harvest are generally not significantly different from
municipalities where this is not the case for a number of characteristics that
are potentially important for economic development.38 These findings provide
additional support for taking the coincidence of festival dates with planting or
harvest seasons as exogenous.


6. Results

6.1. Impacts of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals

We now present regression estimates of the impact of agriculturally-coinciding
festivals on long-run economic development. We use data from the 2010 Popu-
lation Census as outcome variables in estimating equation (1). To discipline the
analysis and avoid data mining and specification search concerns for multiple
outcomes, we focus on two main outcomes. The first is simply the log of mean
household income in the municipality. The second is an index we construct using
all questions in the census related to economic development. Log household
income is one component of the index, but other components are a wide range
of municipality characteristics related to employment, educational attainment (by
gender and for various age groups), and asset ownership. The index is the first
principal component of these variables. Further detail is in Appendix A.
   Table 2 presents the estimates for equation (1) for log household income (Panel
A) and for the index of economic development (Panel B) as the dependent vari-
ables. Column (1) does not include state fixed effects, while columns (2)-(5) do.
Columns (3) and (4) include additional geographic and historical controls, respec-
tively. Column (5) includes planting-month, harvest-month, and festival-week
  38 We  present the estimates in table form in Table D2. Note that we do find that municipalities
with coinciding festivals are more likely to be suitable for maize and less likely to have experienced
drought in 1545 (both statistically significant at the 10% level). To the extent that these differences
should improve the long-run development prospects of places with agriculturally-coinciding festi-
vals, this would suggest that our estimates may be lower bounds of the true effects of coinciding
festivals. In subsequent regression tables we show how our estimates are sensitive to the inclusion
of these and other controls. Results are always robust to their inclusion or exclusion.


                                                  23
              Figure 4: Municipality Characteristics and Coinciding Festivals

               Average Rainfall

          Average Temperature

                Land Suitability

               Maize Suitability

                           Area

                       Latitude

                     Longitude                                                                            Coinciding
                                                                                                          Festival
       Log(Dist. to Mexico City)

                      Elevation

                          Slope

             Has Colonial Data

                Drought in 1545

              Log(Pop. in 1570)

                                         -0.04             0.00              0.04             0.08
                                                      Standardized Effect

  Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census for New Spain region of Mexico. Colonial drought
  and population density data are from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). The figure presents the estimated
  standardized coefficients and respective 95% confidence intervals from estimating equation (1) on various
  municipality characteristics (denoted on the y-axis), conditional on state fixed effects, planting-month and
  harvest-month fixed effects, and festival-week fixed effects. Coinciding Festival is an indicator variable equal
  to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either within 0-30 days prior to the optimal maize
  planting date or 0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data,
  and 0 otherwise. Note that we do not have colonial characteristics for all observations in our sample;
  therefore, we also show results for Has Colonial Characteristics, an indicator equal to 1 if a municipality is
  not missing colonial characteristics.




fixed effects to account for potential direct (time-invariant) impacts of having
planting or harvest occur at different points in the calendar, or for having a festival
occur in a particular calendar week. The estimates presented in Table 2 show
that having an agriculturally-coinciding festival is associated with significantly
lower levels of economic development. Point estimates are not highly sensitive
to the set of control variables and fixed effects included in the regression. In
the most inclusive specification, column 5, such festivals lead to roughly 20%
lower household income, and 0.13-standard-deviations lower index of economic
development.
   While these negative effects are large, it would have been difficult for com-
munities to recognize that agriculturally-coinciding festivals were hindering their
economic development. Because these festivals have been celebrated for centuries,
the current differences in income have likely compounded over time from small


                                                        24
but persistent differences in annual growth rates. If annual economic growth in
localities with coinciding festivals were just 0.1% lower on average, this difference
would probably not be noticeable to residents from one year to the next.39 But
an annual growth difference of this size would compound over 200 years to 20%
lower income in municipalities with coinciding festivals.
   To explore what index sub-components are driving impacts on the overall
index of economic development, we present estimated effects for each individual
index component in Figure 5. For the vast majority of the sub-components, the
coefficient on coinciding festivals is negative and statistically significantly differ-
ent from zero. Having a coinciding festival is associated with lower household
income, literacy, employment, and education. The results in Figure 5 reveal that
the negative impacts of agriculturally-coinciding festivals are evident on a range
of measures of development, beyond income levels.
   We also examine whether impacts are similar for festivals that coincide with
planting and festivals that coincide with harvest. Table D4 presents the results
of estimating equation (1) with separate indicators for festivals coinciding with
planting and festivals coinciding with harvest.              Both planting-coinciding and
harvest-coinciding festivals are associated with worse development outcomes. For
both types of coinciding festivals, estimated effects are similar to the results from
Table 2 in both magnitudes and statistical significance levels.40 Table D4 also
shows p-values from testing the null hypothesis that the coefficients for the two
types of coinciding festivals are the same. In all regressions, we fail to reject
the null hypotheses that the effect of planting-coinciding and harvest-coinciding
festivals are identical. Given this evidence that the effects of the two types of
coinciding festivals are similar, in the remainder of this paper we estimate the
impact of festivals coinciding with either planting or harvest (as in equation (1)).

6.2. Impacts by Festival Timing Relative to Planting & Harvest

A key hypothesis in Section 2 is that agriculturally-coinciding festivals have their
negative effects by tightening liquidity constraints in periods when other high-
return but time-sensitive investments are available. If so, then the negative impacts
of coinciding festivals should be largest in the months closest to harvest and
  39 For comparison, Wagner (2021) estimates that one extra holiday per year causes a decrease of

0.1% in economic growth.
  40 The exceptions are coefficients on planting-coincidence in Panel B. These coefficients remain

large in magnitude but are relatively less precisely estimated.


                                               25
Table 2: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Development Outcomes

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                                   Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)


      Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest          -0.275 -0.204             -0.251 -0.255 -0.206
                                                                 (0.099) (0.080)           (0.071) (0.070) (0.077)


      State Fixed Effects                                            N            Y            Y            Y             Y
      Geography Controls                                             N            N            Y            Y             Y
      Colonial Controls                                              N            N            N            Y             Y
      Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                   N            N            N            N             Y
      Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y
      Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y

      Observations                                                 1,593        1,593        1,593         1,593        1,593
      Adjusted R2                                                  0.004        0.347        0.538         0.543        0.567
      Mean Dep. Var.                                               3.234        3.234        3.234         3.234        3.234
      SD Dep. Var.                                                 1.330        1.330        1.330         1.330        1.330

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                           Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)


      Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest          -0.695       -0.422       -0.593 -0.613 -0.537
                                                                 (0.300)      (0.240)      (0.209) (0.208) (0.224)


      State Fixed Effects                                            N            Y            Y            Y             Y
      Geography Controls                                             N            N            Y            Y             Y
      Colonial Controls                                              N            N            N            Y             Y
      Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                   N            N            N            N             Y
      Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y
      Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y

      Observations                                                 1,593        1,593        1,593         1,593       1,593
      Adjusted R2                                                  0.002        0.348        0.566         0.572       0.597
      Mean Dep. Var.                                              -0.589        -0.589       -0.589       -0.589       -0.589
      SD Dep. Var.                                                 4.039        4.039        4.039         4.039       4.039
    Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of
   Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic Development is the first principal component
   index of a number of development outcomes in the census for a municipality (see Appendix A). Festival Coincides with
   Maize Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30
   days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using
   FAO GAEZ data. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area,
   centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability
   for the municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data
   from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set
   to zero, and we control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics.
   Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize for
   each municipality according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar week of the
   municipality's saint day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 26
Figure 5: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Development Outcomes:
                                              Estimates for Economic Development Index Components
                                 Log Household Income

                           Index: Economic Development

                                          Log Population

                                      % Econ. Active: All

                                  % Econ. Active: Women

                                     % Econ. Active: Men

                                        % Employed: All

                                   % Literate: Aged 8-14

                                   % Literate: Over 14 yrs

                                  Years of Education: All

                                 Years of Education: Men

                              Years of Education: Women

                                   % in School: Aged 3-5

                                  % in School: Aged 6-11

                                 % in School: Aged 12-14

                                 % in School: Aged 15-17
  Dependent Variables




                                 % in School: Aged 18-24

                                  % With Some Schooling

                          % Completed Primary Education

                        % Completed Secondary Education

                                    % Completed College

                             % >Some Primary Education

                           % >Some Secondary Education

                                         % Own Radio(s)

                                     % Own Television(s)

                                   % Own Refrigerator(s)

                              % Own Washing Machine(s)

                                           % Own Car(s)

                                     % Own Computer(s)

                                     % Own Telephone(s)

                                     % Own Cellphone(s)

                                     % With Paved Floor

                                        % With Dirt Floor

                                       % With Electricity

                                        % With Plumbing

                                           % With Toilets

                                          % With Internet

                                                             -0.15   -0.10   -0.05          0.00   0.05   0.10

                                                                             Standardized Effect

     Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census for New Spain region of Mexico. The figure
     presents the estimated standardized coefficients and respective 95% confidence intervals from estimating
     equation (1) on the sub-components of the Index of Economic Development. The dependent variables are
     denoted on the y-axis. We first show the estimates for log household income, then for the Index of Economic
     Development, followed by estimates for each of the individual sub-components of the index (note, log
     household income is also one of the index components). See Data Appendix for more information. The
     independent variable is Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest: an indicator variable equal to 1 if
     the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or
     0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. The regressions
     control for the full set of controls: State Fixed Effects, Geography Controls, Colonial Controls, Festival-Week Fixed
     Effects, and Planting- & Harvest-Month Fixed Effects.




                                                                                     27
planting, and closer to zero in months further away from these key periods. We
test this prediction by estimating the impacts of festivals in other months relative
to planting and harvest months. We estimate the following specification:
          3
 ym =           (i Festival: i Months from Plantingm + i Festival: i Months from Harvestm ) + s(m) + Xm B +   m   (3)
        i= -3

where our coefficients of interest are i and i , the effect of festivals occurring i
months from planting or harvest, respectively; and other variables are defined as
before in equation (1).
   Figure 6 presents these estimates of interest from estimating equation (3) on
log household income. The largest effects occur when festivals coincide exactly
with the period prior to the planting month or following the harvest month.
The planting-month and harvest-month effects are both statistically significantly
different from zero. Effects of festivals in other months adjacent to planting or
harvest are much closer to zero, and none are statistically significant. These results
are consistent with the hypothesis that festivals tighten liquidity constraints and
crowd out key investments in the planting and harvest periods.

6.3. Extensions & Robustness

In this section, we carry out two robustness tests. First, we show that the re-
sults are robust to expanding the sample to include all municipalities in Mexico.
Second, we conduct a randomization inference exercise assigning placebo festival
dates to show that results are not driven by observations with high leverage.

6.3.1. Expanding Sample to Include All Mexican Municipalities

For reasons detailed in Section 4.2, our main results limit the sample to municipal-
ities in the former New Spain region of Mexico. We now present our main results
in the sample of all municipalities.
   Table D5 presents coefficient estimates on the indicator for coinciding festivals
(from estimating equation (1)) in regressions for log household income and for
the index of economic development in the sample of all municipalities. The
results are very similar to the results presented in Table 2: coinciding festivals
are associated with lower household income and lower economic development
index values.41 Coefficients are negative in both panels, but slightly smaller in
  41 Appendix   Table D3 presents the equivalent balance table as in Table D2 for all of Mexico and
shows that coinciding festivals are not associated with differences in important geographic and
historical variables in this broader sample of all Mexican municipalities.


                                                         28
Figure 6: Impacts of Festival Coincidence with Other Months Relative to Planting
and Harvest




  Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census for the New Spain region of Mexico. The figure
  presents the estimated i and i coefficients and respective 95% confidence intervals from estimating
  equation (3). The outcome variable is Log Household Income. Festival Timing: Relative to Planting/Harvest is
  defined as the number of months before/after a municipality celebrates its festival relative to planting (top
  panel) and harvest (bottom panel) according to FAO GAEZ data. The regressions control for the full-set of
  controls: State Fixed Effects, Geography Controls, Colonial Controls, Festival-Week Fixed Effects, and Planting- &
  Harvest-Month Fixed Effects.




magnitude compared to Table 2. In regressions with the full set of controls, the
coefficient on coinciding festivals remains statistically significant at conventional
levels in Panel A, and at marginal statistical significance in Panel B. This reduction
in coefficient magnitudes is consistent with festivals having less impact outside of
New Spain for the reasons discussed in Section 4.2.

6.3.2. Randomization Inference Exercise

One potential concern with the main results in Table 2 is that they might be driven
by outliers or high-leverage observations. To provide potentially more robust
inference, we follow Young (2018) and conduct a randomization inference exercise,
randomly assigning whether or not a municipality's festival coincides with plant-
ing or harvest months. We conduct 10,000 simulations where we randomly assign
whether or not a festival coincides with planting or harvest for each municipality,
and estimate equation (1). Figure C2 presents the empirical cumulative distribu-
tion function of the estimated t-statistics for all the simulations, and denotes the
estimated t-statistics from our sample with vertical lines. The estimated t-statistics

                                                         29
in our sample for having a festival coincide with maize planting or harvest are
much larger and more negative than the majority of placebo festival assignments,
and that the randomization inference p-value is 0.0004. The results from this
randomization inference exercise suggest that our main results are unlikely to be
driven by outliers or high-leverage observations.


7. Mechanisms

The results so far establish that agriculturally-coinciding festivals lead to worse
economic development outcomes in the long run. We now explore mechanisms
behind this effect. We argue that these impacts emerge because festivals during
planting and harvest seasons crowd out high-return but time-sensitive agricul-
tural investment opportunities. While there may be offsetting improvements in
other outcomes (such as religiosity, social capital, and inequality) stemming from
festivals, the net effect of planting- or harvest-season festivals is to compromise
long-run growth.

7.1. Agricultural Productivity and Structural Transformation

One important implication of the conceptual framework of Section 2 is that the
agricultural sector in municipalities with coinciding festivals should be less pro-
ductive, because coinciding festivals persistently crowd out high-return agricul-
tural investments. We test whether municipalities with agriculturally-coinciding
festivals have lower maize yields, using data from the Servicio de Información
Agroalimentaria y Pesquera (SIAP). Column 1 of Table 3 presents the estimate of
the impact of coinciding festivals on maize yields. We find that municipalities
with coinciding festivals have lower agricultural productivity: coinciding festivals
lead to a 0.07 standard deviation decrease in maize yields.
   We turn to examining the impact of festivals on municipality-level measures of
structural transformation. Two-sector growth models of structural transformation
would predict that lower agricultural productivity (due to having agriculturally-
coinciding festivals) would lead to less structural transformation of the economy
out of agriculture. (Herrendorf et al., 2014, Caselli, 2005).
   To examine the impact of festivals on industrial structure, we use microdata
from the 2010 Mexican Population Census to construct municipality-level mea-
sures of the share of workers in different industries (agriculture, manufacturing,


                                          30
and services). Columns 2 to 4 of Table 3 present estimates of the impact of
planting and harvest festivals on the structural transformation of the economy.
Municipalities with coinciding festivals have higher shares of workers in agri-
culture and a lower share of workers in services. This is consistent with the
prediction that the transition away from agriculture is hampered in areas with
agriculturally-coinciding festivals (due to having lower agricultural productivity).
By inhibiting the development of agriculture, coinciding festivals appear to slow
the structural transformation of localities out of agriculture and into the modern
economic sectors.
       Table 3: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Agricultural
                    Productivity and Structural Transformation

                                                                                        Dependent Variables:
                                                              Maize Yield     % in Agriculture      % in Manufacturing       % in Services
                                                                  (1)                (2)                     (3)                   (4)


    Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest          -0.409               0.028                 -0.004               -0.023
                                                               (0.219)             (0.015)                (0.008)              (0.013)


    State Fixed Effects                                            Y                  Y                       Y                     Y
    Geography Controls                                             Y                  Y                       Y                     Y
    Colonial Controls                                              Y                  Y                       Y                     Y
    Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                   Y                  Y                       Y                     Y
    Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                    Y                  Y                       Y                     Y
    Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                    Y                  Y                       Y                     Y

    Observations                                                 1,580              1,593                   1,593                 1,593
    Adjusted R2                                                  0.470              0.486                   0.233                 0.436
    Mean Dep. Var.                                               6.128              0.414                   0.114                 0.465
    Notes: Maize yield data are from the Servicio de Información Agroalimentaria y Pesquera (SIAP) for 2010, and other outcomes from the 2010
   Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality
   level. Maize Yield is the mean maize revenue yield in thousand of pesos per hectare for a municipality in 2010. % in Agriculture is the
   share of workers in a municipality who work in agriculture. % in Manufacturing is the share of workers in a municipality who work in
   manufacturing. % in Services is the share of workers in a municipality who work in the service industry. Festival Coincides with Maize
   Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the
   optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. Geography
   Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude,
   mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the municipality. Colonial Controls includes
   drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial controls,
   values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality
   is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month
   and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the
   calendar week of the municipality's saint day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




7.2. Development Over Time

Festivals coinciding with planting or harvest lead to worse development outcomes
in the present day. We now ask when this effect emerged. We use a historical
measure of economic development across municipalities of Mexico from Sellers
and Alix-Garcia (2018): population density, which is often used as a proxy for


                                                                        31
economic development, particularly in historical studies in which data on other
development outcomes are not available (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2002). We exam-
ine impacts on population density in 1570, 1650, 1900, and 2010, and plot the
coefficients representing the effect of coinciding festivals in Figure 7.

      Figure 7: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Population

                                                0.1




                                                0.0
                       Coefficient Estimates




                                               -0.1




                                               -0.2




                                               -0.3




                                                      1570   1650                  1900   2010
                                                               Log Population Density
                                                                       (Year)


      Notes: Data on log population density for 1570, 1650, and 1900 is from Sellers and Alix-Garcia
      (2018). Data on population density for 2010 is from the 2010 Mexico Population Census.
      The figure presents the estimated coefficients and respective 95% confidence intervals from
      estimating equation (1) for various measures of log population density across time. Obser-
      vations throughout are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico that have historical
      population density (1,395 municipalities in each year). The independent variable is Festival
      Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest, an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival
      in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to optimal maize planting month or 0 to 30
      days after the optimal maize harvest month for that municipality using FAO GAEZ data. The
      regressions control for the full set of controls: State Fixed Effects, Geography Controls, Colonial
      Controls, Festival-Week Fixed Effects, and Planting- & Harvest-Month Fixed Effects.



   We find that having agriculturally-coinciding festivals does not affect popula-
tion density in 1570 or 1650, but does lead to lower population density in 1900
and in 2010. The negative point estimate is larger in magnitude in 2010 than in
1900, but confidence intervals are large and we cannot reject that the effects on
population density are similar in 1900 and 2010. The results indicate that the
impacts of coinciding festivals on development emerged sometime after 1650, and
were already perceptible in the data by the end of the 19th century.42
  42 Smith (1977) describes how some festival celebrations have changed in recent decades due

to economic modernization. The pattern in Figure 7 suggests that what may matter for current
development outcomes is how festivals were celebrated prior to 1900, rather than how they are
celebrated today.




                                                                    32
8. Religiosity, Social Capital, and Income Inequality

We now explore how festivals coinciding with planting and harvest affect reli-
giosity, social capital, and income inequality. These are outcomes of independent
interest. In addition, impacts on these outcomes ­ particularly on religiosity ­
could help explain why coinciding festivals persist, notwithstanding their negative
impacts on economic development.
   To examine the impact of coinciding festivals on religiosity and social capital,
we use survey data from the Americasbarometer from 2008 to 2018. For reli-
giosity, we construct an index from three questions: the importance of religion
to an individual, church attendance, and religious group attendance. For the
importance of religion question, the survey asks how important religion is to a
respondent. The church attendance question asks how frequently an individual
goes to church. For religious group attendance, the survey asks respondents how
frequently an individual participates in religious group meetings. Our religiosity
index is the first principal component of these three religion questions.43 To
measure social capital, we construct an index from questions on the frequency
with which a respondent participates in four different types of group meetings:
community improvement groups, parental associations, municipal meetings, and
political associations.44 We define our index as the first principal component of
these four questions. Further detail is provided in Appendix A.
   Table 4 presents regression estimates of the impact of coinciding festivals on
the religiosity and social capital indices, while Figure C3 presents estimates of
the impacts of coinciding festivals on each of the individual components of the
religiosity and social capital indexes. We find that municipalities with coinciding
festivals have higher levels of religiosity and social capital (columns 1 and 2 of
Table 4, respectively). Additionally, we find that, broadly speaking, coinciding
festivals have positive effects on each of the religiosity index and social capital
index components (see Figure C3). Across all the components of the indices, the

  43 Note that these are the full set of religion questions in the LAPOP surveys; however, they were
not asked in every wave consistently. For waves without the full set of questions, we construct
our index using the subset of questions that were asked. (All survey waves have at least two out
of the three questions.) However, we show in Figure C3 that the results hold for each individual
component.
  44 These are the full set of groups that appear consistently in all waves we examine. In Figure C3,

we show the results for each individual component.



                                                 33
only one for which coinciding festivals do not have a positive effect is political
group participation.

    Table 4: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Religiosity, Social
                              Capital, and Inequality

                                                                                                Dependent Variables:
                                                                  Religiosity Index         Group Membership Index             IQR of Earned Incomes
                                                                          (1)                           (2)                               (3)


    Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest                   0.315                         0.240                           -0.289
                                                                       (0.162)                       (0.135)                          (0.103)


    State Fixed Effects                                                   Y                              Y                                Y
    Geography Controls                                                    Y                              Y                                Y
    Colonial Controls                                                     Y                              Y                                Y
    Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                          Y                              Y                                Y
    Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                           Y                              Y                                Y
    Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                           Y                              Y                                Y

    Observations                                                        4,796                          4,818                            1,593
    Clusters                                                             131                            131                             1593
    Adjusted R2                                                         0.129                          0.050                            0.555
    Mean Dep. Var.                                                      -0.187                         0.063                            2.168
    SD Dep. Var.                                                        1.266                          1.306                            1.833
  Notes: Data are from the Americas Barometer (LAPOP) data (religiosity and social capital) and from the 2010 Mexico Population Censuses from
 IPUMS (inequality). Observations are individuals in municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Standard errors are clustered at the
 municipality level. Religiosity Index is the first principal component of the following variables: Importance of Religion, Church Attendance, and Religious
 Group Attendance. Importance of Religion is a 1-4 categorical variable that measures how important religion is to a respondent, ranging from 1="Not
 Important at All" to 4="Very Important". Church Attendance is a 1-5 categorical variable that measures how frequently an individual goes to church,
 ranging from 1="Never" to 5="More than Once a Week". Religious Group Attendance is a 1-4 categorical variable that measures how frequently
 an individual participates in religious group meetings, ranging from 1="Never" to 4="Once a Week". Group Membership Index is the first principal
 component for the frequency with which a respondent participates in the following group meetings: community improvement, parental associations,
 municipal meetings, or political associations. IQR of Earned Incomes measures the inter-quartile range of individuals total income from their labor
 (from wages, a business, or a farm) in the previous month for individuals residing in a given municipality. Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or
 Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting
 date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. All regressions controls for respondent age, age
 squared, gender, and include survey-wave fixed effects. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability,
 the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the
 municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018).
 For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the
 municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month
 and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar week
 of the municipality's saint day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



   As discussed in Section 2, there are two reasons why coinciding festivals could
lead to with higher religiosity. Agriculturally-coinciding festivals, as higher-cost
signals of religious adherence, could have a direct, positive effect on religiosity.
In addition, there could be an indirect effect, as lower economic development
resulting from agriculturally-coinciding festivals slows the secularization process,
increasing religiosity. The resulting increase in religiosity could help explain why
agriculturally-coinciding festivals persist: more religious communities may have
stronger preferences to maintain their religious traditions, even in the face of
negative economic consequences.
   We also investigate the impact of agriculturally-coinciding festivals on income
inequality. There could be an impact of coinciding festivals on inequality, for

                                                                              34
two reasons. First, because coinciding festivals lead to higher religiosity and
social capital, these festivals might also lead to more redistribution and, therefore,
lower inequality. Second, as economic growth typically coincides with increases
in income inequality, we may also expect that agriculturally-coinciding festivals
may reduce inequality.
   We use microdata from the 2010 Mexican Population Census to construct
municipality-level measures of income inequality. We construct measures of the
inter-quartile range (IQR) of earned income for individuals in a municipality,
where earned income is defined as an individual's total income from their labor
(from wages, a business, or a farm) in the previous month.
   Column 3 of Table 4 presents regression estimates of the impact of coincid-
ing festivals on income inequality. We find that municipalities with coinciding
festivals have lower levels of income inequality. This finding that agriculturally-
coinciding festivals lead to both lower development and less inequality suggest an
equity-efficiency trade-off in this context (Kuznets, 1955).


9. Conclusion

Our findings contribute to the literature on the economics of religion, by shedding
light on the economic consequences of variation in an important and widespread
religious practice, festival celebrations. We also bring a new insight to the de-
velopment economics literature: festival celebrations can crowd out time-sensitive
agricultural investments, and over the long run lead to persistently lower agri-
cultural productivity and less transformation of the economy out of agriculture.
Because our study municipalities (nearly) all celebrate Catholic saint day festivals,
we cannot say whether coinciding festivals have positive or negative consequences
for development overall.     It is possible that non-coinciding festivals could be
good for development, and our finding that coinciding festivals have negative
consequences is relative to that positive baseline effect. We also cannot say what
impacts Catholic saint day festivals have had on development in Latin America
relative to other world regions.
   We refrain from speculating on the implications of our results for major eco-
nomic or social policies. That said, our findings do help explain the existence
of a specific institution observed in many Catholic countries: the practice by
employers of withholding a portion of annual compensation until December,


                                         35
when a "thirteenth salary" (often referred to as aguinaldo) is paid. Analogously,
"Christmas clubs" ­ no-interest commitment savings accounts to facilitate house-
hold savings for Christmas expenditures ­ were long popular in the United States
(Thaler and Shefrin, 1981). Christmas clubs and aguinaldo practices are typically
presented as a way to provide liquidity for Christmas celebration expenses. Future
research should explore whether aguinaldo-style practices reduce the crowd-out of
economic investments whose timings coincide with festival periods.
   As is the case for all empirical research, future studies should seek to determine
the external validity of these findings. The rest of the Catholic world provides
natural new contexts in which to conduct follow-on investigations, potentially
using analogous empirical strategies exploiting the coincidence of festival dates
with agricultural seasons. Researchers should also explore other contexts where
there may be exogenous variation in whether localities celebrate festivals at all, to
shed light on the extensive margin impacts of festivals. In addition, it would be
valuable to conduct household-level studies to provide detailed evidence on the
types of investments that are crowded out by coinciding festivals, and whether
the incidence of such crowding out varies with household characteristics. We
view these as promising directions for future research.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "Reversal of Fortune: Ge-
  ography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1231­1294.
Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou,
  "Religion and Educational Mobility in Africa," 2020. NBER Working Paper 28270.
Atkinson, Matthew D. and Anthony Fowler, "Social Capital and Voter Turnout: Evidence
  from Saint's Day Fiestas in Mexico," British Journal of Political Science, 2014, 44 (1), 41­59.
Augenblick, Ned, Kelsey Jack, Supreet Kaur, Felix Masiye, and Nicholas Swan-
  son, "Budget Neglect in Consumption Smoothing: A Field Experiment on Seasonal
  Hunger," 2021. Working Paper.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to
  Fight Global Poverty, New York, United States: Public Affairs, 2011.
Beam, Emily A. and Slesh A. Shrestha, "Superstition, Fertility, and Interethnic Spillovers:
  Evidence from Peninsular Malaysia," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2020,
  69 (1), 453­483.
Becker, Sascha O., Markus Nagler, and Ludger Woessmann, "Education and Religious
  Participation: City-level Evidence from Germany's Secularization Period 1890-1930,"
  Journal of Economic Growth, 2017, 22, 273­311.


                                               36
Beezley, William and Michael Meyer, The Oxford History of Mexico, Oxford, United
  Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Bentzen, Jeanet S., "Acts of God? Religiosity and Natural Disasters Across Subnational
  World Districts," The Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (622), 2295­2321.
Brandes, Stanley, "Cargos versus Cost Sharing in Mesoamerican Fiestas, with Special
  Reference to Tzintzuntzan," Journal of Anthropological Research, 1981, 37 (3), 209­225.
Bryan, Gharad, James J Choi, and Dean Karlan, "Randomizing Religion: the Impact of
  Protestant Evangelism on Economic Outcomes," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2021,
  136 (1), 293­380.
Burke, Marshall, Lauren Falcao Bergquist, and Edward Miguel, "Sell Low and Buy
  High: Arbitrage and Local Price Effects in Kenyan Markets," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 785­842.
Bustos, Paula, Gabriel Garber, and Jacopo Ponticelli, "Capital Accumulation and Struc-
  tural Transformation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (2), 1037­1094.
Campante, Filipe and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Does Religion Affect Economic Growth
  and Happiness? Evidence from Ramadan," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130
  (2), 615­658.
Caselli, Francesco, "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences," Handbook of
  Economic Growth, 2005, 1 (A), 679­741.
   and Wilbur John Coleman, "The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional Con-
  vergence: A Reinterpretation," Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109 (3), 584­616.
Chance, John K. and William B. Taylor, "Cofradías and Cargos: An Historical Perspective
  on the Mesoamerican Civil-Religious Hierarchy," American Ethnologist, 1985, 12 (1), 1­
  26.
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer, "Estimating the Impact
  of The Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam's Global Gathering," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1133­1170.
Conley, Timothy, "GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence," Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 1999, 92, 1­45.
Cook, Edward and Paul Krusic, The North American Drought Atlas, New York, United
  States: Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and National Science Foundation, 2004.
Deaton, Angus and Arthur A. Stone, "Two Happiness Puzzles," AmericanEconomic Review
  Papers & Proceedings, 2003, 103, 91­97.
Dewalt, Billie, "Changes in the Cargo Systems of MesoAmerica," Anthropological Quar-
  terly, 1975, 48 (2), 87­105.
  , "Reviewed Work: The Fiesta System and Economic Change," American Ethnologist,
  1979, 6 (1), 201­204.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson, "Nudging Farmers to Use
 Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya," American Economic Review,
 2011, 101 (6), 2350­2390.
Durkheim, Émile, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life: A Study in Religious Sociology,
 New York, United States: Macmillan, 1912.
Fischer, Gunther, Freddy Nachtergaele, Sylvia Prieler, Edmar Teixeira, Géza Tóth,
  Harrij van Velthuizen, Luc Verelst, and David Wiberg, "Global Agro-ecological Zones:


                                            37
  Model Documentation," 2012. GAEZ ver 3.0 Model Documentation, Food and Agricul-
  ture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, "Agricultural Productivity Growth, Rural Eco-
  nomic Diversity, and Economic Reforms: India, 1970-2000," Economic Development and
  Cultural Change, 2004, 52 (3), 509­542.
Galor, Oded and Omer Ozak, "The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference," American
  Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3064­3103.
Gerhard, Peter, A Guide to the Historical Geography of New Spain, Revised Edition, Norman,
  United States: University of Oklahoma Press, 1993.
Gibson, Charles, The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule: A History of the Indians of the Valley of
  Mexico, 1519-1810, Stanford, United States: Stanford University Press, 1964.
Gollin, Douglas, Casper Worm Hansen, and Asger Wingender, "Two Blades of Grass:
 The Impact of the Green Revolution," 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 24744.
  , Stephen Parente, and Richard Rogerson, "The Role of Agriculture in Development,"
  American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2002, 92 (2), 160­164.
  , , and , "The Food Problem and the Evolution of International Income Levels,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (4), 1230­1255.
Greenberg, James, Santiago's Sword: Chatino Peasant Religion and Economics, Berkeley,
  United States: University of California Press, 1981.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "People's Opium? Religion and
 Economic Attitudes," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003, 50, 225­282.
  , , and , "Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?," Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 2006, 20, 23­48.
Harris, Marvin, Patterns of Race in the Americas, New York, United States: Walker and
  Company, 1964.
Henrich, Joseph, The WEIRDest People in the World: How the West Became Psychologically
  Peculiar and Particularly Prosperous, New York, United States: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
  2020.
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi., "Growth and Structural
  Transformation," in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic
  Growth, 1 ed., Vol. 2 2014, chapter 6, pp. 855­941.
Hijmans, R.J., S.E. Cameron, J.L. Parra, P.G. Jones, and A. Jarvis, "Very High Resolution
  Interpolated Climate Surfaces for Global Land Areas," International Journal of Climatol-
  ogy, 2005, 25, 1965­1978.
Hungerman, Daniel, "The Effect of Education on Religion: Evidence from Compulsory
 Schooling Laws," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2014, 104 (C), 52­63.
Iannaccone, Laurence, "Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes,
  and Other Collectives," Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (2), 271­291.
INAFED, Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal, "Enciclope-
  dia de los Municipios y Delegaciones de México," 1988.
Iyer, Sriya, "The New Economics of Religion," Journal of Economic Literature, 2016, 54 (2),
  395­441.
Johnson, D. Gale, "Population, Food, and Knowledge," American Economic Review, 2000,
  90 (1), 1­14.


                                            38
Johnston, Bruce F. and John W. Mellor, "The Role of Agriculture in Economic Develop-
  ment," American Economic Review, 1961, 51 (4), 566­593.
Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Morduch, "Access to Finance," Handbook of Development
  Economics, 2010, 5 (1), 4703­4784.
Kuznets, Simon, "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," American Economic Review,
  1955, 45 (1), 1­28.
Lastra, Yolanda, Dina Sherzer, and Joel Sherzer, Adoring the Saints: Fiestas in Central
  Mexico, Austin, United States: University of Texas Press, 2009.
Levy, Gilat and Ronny Razin, "Rituals or Good Works: Social Signaling in Religious
  Organizations," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (5), 1317­1360.
Lim, Chaeyoon and Robert D. Putnam, "Religion, Social Networks, and Life Satisfac-
  tion," American Sociological Review, 2010, 75, 905­933.
Lipford, Jody W. and Robert D. Tollison, "Religious Participation and Income," Journal
  of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2003, 51 (2), 249­260.
McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro, "Religion and Economy," Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 2006, 20 (2), 760­781.
   and , The Wealth of Religions: The Political Economy of Believing and Belonging, Prince-
  ton, United States: Princeton University Press, 2019.
Monaghan, John, "Reciprocity, Redistribution, and the Transaction of Value in the
 Mesoamerican Fiesta," American Ethnologist, 1990, 17 (4), 758­774.
Nunn, Nathan, "Culture and the Historical Process," Economic History of Developing Re-
 gions, 2012, 27, 108­126.
   and Nancy Qian, "The Potato's Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evi-
  dence From A Historical Experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2),
  593­650.
Nutini, Hugo G., San Bernardino Contla: Marriage and Family Structure in a Tlaxcalan
 Municipio 1968.
  , "Syncretism and Acculturation: The Historical Development of the Cult of the Patron
  Saint in Tlaxcala, Mexico (1519-1670)," Ethnology, 1976, 15 (3), 301­321.
Paldam, Martin and Erich Gundlach, "The Religious Transition: A Long-run Perspec-
  tive," Public Choice, 2013, 156 (1), 105­123.
Putnam, Robert D., Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community, New
  York, United States: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
Ragon, Pierre, "Los Santos Patronos De Las Ciudades Del Mexico Central (Siglos XVI y
  XVII)," Historia Mexicana, 2002, 52 (2), 361­389.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney, "The
  Global Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible
  Climate Change," Global Ecology and Biogeography, 2002, 11, 377­392.
Restuccia, Diego, Dennis Tao Yang, and Xiaodong Zhu, "Agriculture and Aggregate
  Productivity: A Quantitative Cross-country Analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2008, 55 (2), 234­250.
Ricketts, Taylor H., Eric Dinerstein, David M. Olson, Colby J. Loucks, William Eich-
  baum, Dominick A. DellaSala, Kevin Kavanagh, Prashant Hedao, Patrick Hurley,
  Karen Carney, Robin Abell, and Steven Walters, Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America,


                                           39
  Washington DC, United States: Island Press, 1999.
Rosales Martínez, G., H. Navarro Garza, D. Flores Sánchez, J.F. Núñez Espinoza, M.A.
  Jiménez Velázquez, and L.Y. Peña Avelino, "Solidaridad en la Modernidad de las
  Fiestas Patronales del Distrito de Tlaxiaco," Textual, 2020, 75 (1), 217­241.
Schultz, Theodore W., Economic Organization of Agriculture, New York, United States:
  McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1953.
Sellers, Emily A. and Jennifer Alix-Garcia, "Labor Scarcity, Land Tenure, and Historical
  Legacy: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Development Economics, 2018, 135, 504­516.
Smith, Waldemar, The Fiesta System and Economic Change, New York, United States:
  Columbia University Press, 1977.
Stifel, David, Marcel Faschamps, and Bart Minten, "Taboos, Agriculture and Poverty,"
  Journal of Development Studies, 2011, 47 (10), 1455­1481.
Tanck de Estrada, Dorothy, Atlas Illustrado de los Pueblos de Indios: Nueva España, 1800,
  Mexico City, Mexico: El Colegio de México, 2005.
Tanck de Estrada, Dorothy and Carlos Marichal, "¿Reino o Colonia?: Nueva España,
  1750-1804," in Dorothy Tanck de Estrada and Carlos Marichal, eds., Nueva Historia
  General de México, Mexico City, Mexico: El Colegio de México, 2010, pp. 307­354.
Thaler, Richard and H. M. Shefrin, "An Economic Theory of Self-Control," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1981, 89 (2), 392­406.
Timmer, C. Peter, "The Agricultural Transformation," Handbook of Development Economics,
  1998, 1, 276­328.
USDA, United States Department of Agriculture, "Commodity Intelligence Report:
  Mexico Corn: Adequate Reservoir Levels Benefitting Winter Corn," 2017. Foreign
  Agricultural Service Commodity Intelligence Report.
Valencia Caicedo, Felipe, "The Mission: Economic Persistence, Human Capital Transmis-
  sion and Culture in South America," The Quarterly Journal of Economicsl, 2019, 134 (1),
  507­556.
Wagner, Rodrigo, "Shutting Down Part of the Economy: The Causal Effect of Public
 Holidays on Growth," 2021. Working Paper.
Waldinger, Maria, "The Long-Run Effects of Missionary Orders in Mexico," Journal of
 Development Economics, 2017, 127 (1), 355­378.
Young, Alwyn, "Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insignificance
  of Seemingly Significant Experimental Results," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018,
  134 (2), 557­598.




                                            40
                    Online Appendix for

    Religious Festivals and Economic Development:
Evidence from Catholic Saint-Day Celebrations in Mexico


          Eduardo Montero                  Dean Yang
         University of Chicago       University of Michigan


                            22 July 2021




                                 1
Contents
Appendix A Data Appendix                                                          3
  A.1 Patron Saint and Festival Date Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       A.1.1 Official Patron Saint Celebration Dates . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
       A.1.2 Determining Patron Saints for Municipalities in Mexico: . . .        3
       A.1.3 Coding Patron Saint Dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
       A.1.4 Information on "Renamed" Patron Saints . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
  A.2 Geographic Data and Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  A.3 Mexico Census Data and Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9
  A.4 Americasbarometer (LAPOP) Data and Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . .          12

Appendix B Additional Maps                                                        13
  B.1 Additional Maps ­ New Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
  B.2 Additional Maps ­ All of Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18

Appendix C Additional Figures                                                     20

Appendix D Additional Tables                                                      25

Appendix References                                                               35




                                        2
Appendix A. Data Appendix


A.1. Patron Saint and Festival Date Data
As discussed in the main text, in our empirical analyses we assign patron saint
celebration dates as prescribed by the Vatican (or, in a minority of cases, official
religious sources outside of Mexico) so as to reduce concerns about the endogene-
ity of festival dates. In this section, we describe the sources we used to determine:
1) official patron saint celebration dates, and 2) the patron saint celebrated by each
municipality.

A.1.1. Official Patron Saint Celebration Dates
   1.   a. We use three main sources to determine official patron saint celebration
           dates. 94.83% of municipalities have saints that are sourced using one
           of these three sources (in order of the frequency with which we used
           the source):
             i. The General Roman Calendar (Calendarium Romanum) (Catholic
                Church, 1969):
                  - Catholic Church (1969). Calendarium Romanum (1969)
            ii. The Roman Martyrology (Martirologio Romano) (Catholic Church,
                1956):
                  - Catholic Church (1956). Martirologio Romano (1956)
           iii. The Book of Saints (Watkins, 2015):
                  - Watkins, Basil. The Book of Saints: A Comprehensive Biographical
                    Dictionary, Bloomsbury Publishing Plc (2015)
        b. In a small number of cases an official patron saint celebration date was
           not found in the sources above. In these cases, we use a variety of
           online religious sources cited below. We ensured that we had least two
           online sources per saint. Only 3.44% of municipalities have saints that
           are sourced using online sources.

A.1.2. Determining Patron Saints for Municipalities in Mexico:
   1. We use three primary sources to identify the patron saint of each municipal-
      ity:

        a. Encyclopedia: We use the online Encyclopedia of Municipali-
           ties (INAFED, 1988, available at http://www.inafed.gob.mx/work/
           enciclopedia/) to determine the patron saint for approximately 1,900
           of the municipalities in Mexico.

                                           3
       b. Direct Phone Calls to Municipalities: We called approximately 300
          municipalities to determine their patron saint. When calling munici-
          palities, we first attempted to contact municipality government offices,
          followed by local churches and schools. To verify the accuracy of the
          information given to use over the phone, we also provide additional
          sources in the form of online links for over half of the "called" munici-
          palities.
        c. Additional Online Sources: In cases where we could not contact any-
           one with phone calls, and we did not find any information in the Ency-
           clopedia, we used online sources such as news articles and government
           websites. We required at least two web sources before determining the
           saint. We use websites as sources for 180 municipalities.

A.1.3. Coding Patron Saint Dates
     We used the following guidelines when coding patron saint dates:

        i. We use a missing value code, 98, to indicate that the festival is a
           "moving festival", one for which the official date differs from year to
           year. 4.19% of municipalities in Mexico have moving festivals, and are
           considered missing from our dataset for analysis.
       ii. In cases where the festival is not moving but spans a few days we
           use the first date of the festival. For example, "Día de los Muertos"
           is a two-day festival from November 1-2. We use November 1st as the
           official date. We assume that any diversion of resources, time, etc. due
           to a festival would have already happened by the first date of the range.
       iii. In some cases, our research indicates that a municipality celebrates a
            particular Vatican-recognized saint, but has renamed it for the purpose
            of calling this saint their patron saint. In these cases, we consider the
            original Vatican-recognized saint as the municipality's saint, and use
            the Vatican-prescribe official celebration date (as usual). We detail these
            cases and the sources used to determine these "renamed" saints below
            in Section A.1.4.
       iv. In some cases, municipalities in Mexico celebrate a "local" saint: a
           saint that is not recognized or celebrated outside of that municipality
           in Mexico. Because these saints might be endogenously selected, we
           provide a variable that codes whether or not a saint is a "local saint".
           The variable "local_saint" has three possible values: 0,1,2. A saint is
           coded as "0" if the official celebration date of a saint is set outside of
           Mexico. A saint is coded as "1" if the saint is found to be specific
           to Mexico, and thus not have an official celebration date that is set
           outside of Mexico (1.67% of municipalities in Mexico). A "2" indicates

                                          4
          the saint has indeterminate origins (1.71% of municipalities in Mexico).
          (Our main analyses do not include municipalities with "local" saints,
          but we show robustness of our results to including them. When we
          include municipalities with local saints in our robustness analyses, we
          use celebration dates actually used by municipalities, since "official"
          Vatican-prescribed celebration dates do not exist for such saints.)
       v. We use another missing value code, 99, to indicate a municipality where
          a saint was found in the encyclopedia or via phone calls but we were
          unable to find credible sources corroborating an official date or saint.
          This occurred in four municipalities across all of Mexico.
      vi. We also use the missing value code 99 to represent municipalities for
          which we were unable to determine any Saint. In one municipality, this
          was because the municipality does not celebrate a patron saint. For the
          remaining 20 missing saint days, we were unable to determine a patron
          with credible online sources or phone calls.

A.1.4. Information on "Renamed" Patron Saints
     Below, we detail the specific "renamed" saints that our research indicates are
     simply venerations of another official Vatican-recognized saint, the munici-
     pality code where they occur, and the sources used to determine this.

        · Acatlan in Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (clave: 30002) celebrates
          la Virgen de los Remedios which is the same saint as la Natividad de
          Maria (Díaz 2018), (VistasGallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura
          2021).
        · Agualeguas in Nuevo Leon celebrates la Virgen de Agualeguas (clave:
          19002) which is the same saint as la Virgen de la Concepcion (Nuevo
          Leon, n.d), (Nuevo Leon Turismo, n.d)
        · Apizaco in Tlaxcala (clave: 29005) celebrates la Virgen de la Misericor-
          dia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI Prensa
          2020), (Aleteia 2019).
        · Atlacomulco in Mexico (clave: 15014) celebrates el Senor del Huerto
          which is the same saint as Lunes Santo (Turismo Ejea, n.d).
        · Atlamajalcingo del Monte in Guerrero (clave: 12009) celebrates la Vir-
          gen de Misericordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mer-
          cedes (ACI Prensa 2020), (Aleteia 2019).
        · Bustamante in Nuevo Leon (clave: 19008) celebrates Santo Cristo (el
          Senor de Tlaxcala) which is the same saint as el Transfiguracion del
          Senor (Lemus 2016), (Pueblos Mágicos, n.d), (Villarreal 2006).


                                        5
· Canitas de Felipe Pescador in Zacatecas (clave: 32006) celebrates la
  Virgen de San Juan which is the same saint as la Asuncion de Maria
  (Holy Family Catholic Church, n.d), (Library of Congress, n.d), (IMER
  1970).
· Charcas in San Luis Potosi (clave: 24015) celebrates la Virgen de las
  Charcas which is the same saint as Natividad de Maria (Eichmann-
  Oehrli 2004), (De la Rosa, 2020).
· Compostela in Nayarit (clave: 18004) celebrates la Virgen de la Miseri-
  cordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI Prensa
  2020), (Aleteia 2019).
· Cunduacan in Tabasco (clave: 27006) celebrates el Senor de la Salud
  which is the same saint as Cristo de la Salud (Valdemoro Turismo 2020).
· Emiliano Zapata in Hidalgo (clave: 13021) celebrates la Virgen de San
  Juan de los Lagos which is the same saint as la Asuncion de Maria
  (Holy Family Catholic Church, n.d), (Library of Congress, n.d), (IMER
  1970).
· Espita in Yucatan (clave: 31032) celebrates el Nino Jesus which is the
  same saint as Nino de Atocha (Rodriguez 2018), (Sistema de Informa-
  ción Cultural de Costa Rica 2021), (Divino Nino Jesus Catholic Mission
  2021)
· Huamantla in Tlaxcala (clave: 29013) celebrates la Virgen de la Caridad
  which is the same saint as Natividad de Maria (ZENIT 2014), (Ruiz
  Scaperlanda, 2007), (Lamas 2004).
· Huatlatlauca in Puebla (clave: 21070) celebrates Nuestra Senora de los
  Reyes which is the same saint as Asuncion de Maria (Catedral de Sevilla
  2020), (Real Hermandad de Nuestra Senora de los Reyes, n.d), (Catedral
  de Sevilla 2020), (A.VRyS, n.d).
· Huiramba in Michoacan de Ocampo (clave: 16039) celebrates el Nino
  Jesus which is the same saint as Nino de Atocha (Rodriguez 2018),
  (Sistema de Información Cultural de Costa Rica 2021), (Divino Nino
  Jesus Catholic Mission 2021).
· Izamal in Yucatan (clave: 31040) celebrates la Virgen de Izamal which is
  the same saint as Virgen de la Concepcion (SSVM, n.d), (Yucatan Today
  2019), (Pueblos Mágicos, n.d).
· Jonuta in Tabasco (clave: 27011) celebrates el Senor de la Salud which
  is the same saint as Cristo de la Salud (Valdemoro Turismo 2020).
· La Concordia in Chiapas (clave: 7020) celebrates la Virgen de la Miseri-
  cordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI Prensa
  2020), (Aleteia 2019).


                                6
· Los Reyes de Juarez in Puebla (clave: 21118) celebrates Nuestra Senora
  de los Reyes which is the same saint as Asuncion de Maria (Catedral de
  Sevilla 2020), (Real Hermandad de Nuestra Senora de los Reyes, n.d),
  (Catedral de Sevilla 2020), (A.VRyS, n.d).
· Monterrey in Nuevo Leon (clave: 19039) celebrates la Virgen del Roble
  which is the same saint as la Virgen de la Esperanza (Díaz 2017), (de
  Cos 2018).
· Nacajuca in Tabasco (clave: 27013) celebrates la Virgen de los Remedios
  which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (Díaz 2018), (Vistas-
  Gallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura 2021).
· Naucalpan de Juarez in Mexico (clave: 15057) celebrates la Virgen de
  los Remedios which is the same saint as La Natividad de Maria (Díaz
  2018), (VistasGallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura 2021).
· Ocotlan in Jalisco (clave: 14063) celebrates la Virgen de la Misericordia
  which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI Prensa 2020),
  (Aleteia 2019).
· Oteapan in Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (clave: 30120) celebrates
  el Senor de la Salud which is the same saint as Cristo de la Salud
  (Valdemoro Turismo 2020).
· Patzcuaro in Michoacan de Ocampo (clave: 16066) celebrates la Virgen
  de la Salud which is the same saint as Virgen de la Concepcion (Roman
  Catholic Diocese of Chalan Kanoa 2018), (Pátzcuaro Info 2020).
· Reyes Etla in Oaxaca (clave: 20077) celebrates Nuestra Senora de los
  Reyes which is the same saint as la Asuncion de Maria (Catedral de
  Sevilla 2020), (Real Hermandad de Nuestra Senora de los Reyes, n.d),
  (Catedral de Sevilla 2020), (A.VRyS, n.d).
· Sabanilla in Chiapas (clave: 7076) celebrates la Virgen de la Misericordia
  which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI Prensa 2020),
  (Aleteia 2019).
· San Juan Juquila Mixes in Oaxaca (clave: 20200) celebrates la Virgen de
  Juquila which is the same saint as la Virgen de la Concepcion (St. Mary
  Parish 2018), (Ramirez 2019), (Jiménez 2020).
· San Juan del Rio in Durango (clave: 10028) celebrates la Virgen de los
  Remedios which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (Díaz 2018),
  (VistasGallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura 2021).
· San Pedro Cholula in Puebla (clave: 21140) celebrates la Virgen de los
  Remedios which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (Díaz 2018),
  (VistasGallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura 2021).



                                 7
       · Soyalo in Chiapas (clave: 7085) celebrates la Virgen de la Caridad
         which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (ZENIT 2014), (Ruiz
         Scaperlanda, 2007), (Lamas 2004).
       · Tamazula de Gordiano in Jalisco (clave: 14085) celebrates la Virgen
         del Sagrario which is the same saint as la Asuncion de Maria (Revista
         Catedral 1970), (Catedral Primada, n.d).
       · Tamiahua in Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (clave: 30151) celebrates
         La Virgen de la Misericordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las
         Mercedes (ACI Prensa 2020), (Aleteia 2019).
       · Tepatitlan de Morelos in Jalisco (clave: 14093) celebrates la Virgen de la
         Misericordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI
         Prensa 2020), (Aleteia 2019).
       · Tepic in Nayarit (clave: 18017) celebrates la Virgen en su Santuario
         which is the same saint as la Virgen de Guadalupe (Nayarit en Linea
         2013) , (Shrine of Our Lady of Guadalupe, 2021), (Nayarit Enamora,
         n.d) (NNC 2016), (Presa 2019).
       · Tlalnepantla de Baz in Mexico (clave: 15104) celebrates la Virgen de la
         Misericordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI
         Prensa 2020), (Aleteia 2019).
       · Tonanitla in Mexico (clave: 15125) celebrates la Virgen de los Remedios
         which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (Díaz 2018), (Vistas-
         Gallery, n.d), (Sistema de Información Cultura 2021).
       · Tototlan in Jalisco (clave: 14105) celebrates el Senor de la Salud which
         is the same saint as Cristo de la Salud (Valdemoro Turismo 2020).
       · Union de San Antonio in Jalisco (clave: 14109) celebrates la Virgen de la
         Misericordia which is the same saint as la Virgen de las Mercedes (ACI
         Prensa 2020), (Aleteia 2019).
       · Villa Union in Coahuila de Zaragoza (clave: 5037) celebrates el Nino
         de los Peyotes which is the same saint as Dulce Nombre de Jesus
         (Telepaisa, n.d), (ACI Prensa 2021).
       · Zacatecas in Zacatecas (clave: 32056) celebrates la Virgen del Patrocinio
         which is the same saint as la Natividad de Maria (EcuRed, n.d), (Man-
         resa Ignacio Abadal 1800).
       · Zihuateutla in Puebla (clave: 21213) celebrates Manuelito which is the
         same saint as Corpus Cristi (El Caminante 2019), (Presidencia Munici-
         pal de Zihuateutla, n.d).

A.2. Geographic Data and Variables
  · Precipitation and Temperature: Precipitation and temperature data are
    provided by the Global Climate Database created by Hijmans et al. (2005)

                                        8
     and available at http://www.worldclim.org/. These data provide monthly
     average rainfall in millimeters. We calculate the average rainfall for each
     month in each municipality and average this over the twelve months to
     obtain our yearly precipitation measure in millimeters of rainfall per year.
     Similarly, we calculate the average temperature for each month in each
     municipality and average this over the twelve months to obtain our yearly
     temperature measure in centigrades.

  · Land Suitability: Land suitability is the soil component of the land quality
    index created by the Atlas of the Biosphere available at http://www.sage.
    wisc.edu/iamdata/ used in Michalopoulos (2012) and Ramankutty et al.
    (2002). These data use soil characteristics (namely soil carbon density and
    the acidity or alkalinity of soil) and combines them using the best functional
    form to match known actual cropland area and interpolates this measure to
    be available for most of the world at the 0.5 degree in latitude by longitude
    level. This measure is normalized to be between 0 and 1, where higher
    values indicate higher soil suitability for agriculture.

  · Elevation and Slope: The elevation and slope data are provided by the
    Global Climate Database created by Hijmans et al. (2005) and available at
    http://www.worldclim.org/. These data provide elevation information in
    meters at the 30 arc-second resolution (approximately at the 1 km2 level
    near the equator). The elevation measure is constructed using NASAs SRTM
    satellite images (http://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/).

A.3. Mexico Census Data and Indexes
  · Population Census: We use municipality-level data from the 2010 Censo
    de Población y Vivienda produced by the National Institute of Statistics and
    Geography (INEGI) of Mexico. For more information on this census, see IN-
    EGI documentation at https://www.inegi.org.mx/programas/ccpv/2010/.
    This census interviewed over 106 million households across Mexico about
    their economic well-being, labor supply, asset ownership, and education.
    We construct an index of economic development using all questions in the
    census related to economic development within a municipality. We construct
    the index as the first principal component of these measures of development.
    Figure 5 presents the components of this index. The index includes all
    questions on educational attainment, workforce participation, literacy, asset
    and ownership. We list each index component and its definition below:

       ­ Log Population: This measures the log of the number of inhabitants
         for each municipality in 2010.



                                       9
          ­ Log Household Income: To construct a measure of household income,
            we use the IPUMS 10% sample and take the log of each adult respon-
            dent's household income.45 We then construct the average for each
            municipality.
          ­ % Economically Active: Share of a municipality's population that is
            "economically active", defined by INEGI as: in a given reference week
            (e.g. previous week), an individual over 12 years of age performed any
            work (including informal work), had a job but did not work, or were
            actively looking for work.
          ­ % Economically Active - Men: Share of a municipality's population of
            men over 12 years of age that is economically active.
          ­ % Economically Active - Women: Share of a municipality's population
            of women over 12 years of age that is economically active.
          ­ % Employed: Share of a municipality's population that is "economi-
            cally occupied", defined by INEGI as: in a given reference week, an
            individual over 12 years of age performed any work (including informal
            work) or had a job but did not work.
          ­ % Literate - Aged 8-14: Share of a municipality's population of indi-
            viduals aged between 8 and 14 years that know how to read and write.
          ­ % Literate - Aged over 14 Years: Share of a municipality's population
            of individuals aged over 14 years that know how to read and write.
          ­ Average Years of Education - All: Average years of education for a
            municipality's population aged over 15 years.
          ­ Average Years of Education - Men: Average years of education for a
            municipality's population of men aged over 15 years.
          ­ Average Years of Education - Women: Average years of education for
            a municipality's population of women aged over 15 years.
          ­ % in School - Aged 3-5: Share of a municipality's population of chil-
            dren between the ages of 3 and 5 that attend at least some school in a
            year.
          ­ % in School - Aged 6-11: Share of a municipality's population of
            children between the ages of 6 and 11 that attend at least some school
            in a year.
          ­ % in School - Aged 12-14: Share of a municipality's population of
            individuals between the ages of 12 and 14 that attend at least some
            school in a year.
  45 The INEGI municipality-level extract does not include this, but we were able to construct this

using the IPUMS extract.



                                                10
­ % in School - Aged 15-17: Share of a municipality's population of
  individuals between the ages of 15 and 17 that attend at least some
  school in a year.
­ % in School - Aged 18-24: Share of a municipality's population of
  individuals between the ages of 18 and 24 that attend at least some
  school in a year.
­ % with Some Schooling: Share of a municipality's population over 15
  years of age that has attended at least some schooling in their lifetime.
­ % Completed Primary Education: Share of a municipality's population
  over 15 years of age that has completed primary education (6 years).
­ % Completed Secondary Education: Share of a municipality's popu-
  lation over 15 years of age that has completed secondary education. (3
  additional years)
­ % Completed College: Share of a municipality's population over 18
  years of age that has completed any form of post-secondary schooling.
­ % with At Least Some Primary Education: Share of a municipality's
  population over 15 years of age that has at least attended and completed
  some primary education (>0 years of schooling).
­ % with At Least Some Secondary Education: Share of a municipality's
  population over 15 years of age that has at least attended and completed
  some secondary education (>6 years of schooling).
­ % Own Radio(s): Share of a municipality's households that own at
  least one radio.
­ % Own Television(s): Share of a municipality's households that own
  at least one television.
­ % Own Refrigerator(s): Share of a municipality's households that own
  at least one refrigerator.
­ % Own Washing Machine(s): Share of a municipality's households
  that own at least one washing machine.
­ % Own Car(s): Share of a municipality's households that own at least
  one car.
­ % Own Computer(s): Share of a municipality's households that own
  at least one computer.
­ % Own Telephone(s): Share of a municipality's households that own
  at least one telephone (landline).
­ % Own Cellphone(s): Share of a municipality's households that own
  at least one cellphone.
­ % with Paved Floor: Share of a municipality's households that have
  non-dirt floors in their households (e.g. cement, wood, tiled, or other).

                                11
            ­ % with Electricity: Share of a municipality's households that have
              access to electric-powered light at their home.
            ­ % with Plumbing: Share of a municipality's households that have
              water accessed through plumbing from the government ("public net-
              work") in their home.
            ­ % with Toilets: Share of a municipality's households that have toilets
              at their home.
            ­ % with Internet: Share of a municipality's households that have access
              to the internet at their home.

A.4. Americasbarometer (LAPOP) Data and Indexes
  · Data: we use survey data from the Americasbarometer from 2004 to 2018. To
    examine differences in religiosity, we construct an index from three questions
    related to religiosity: the importance of religion to an individual, church
    attendance, and religious group attendance. We construct our index as
    the first principal component of these questions; we describe each ques-
    tion/component below.

            ­ Importance of Religion: is a 1-4 categorical variable that measures how
              important religion is to a respondent, ranging from 1="Not Important
              at All" to 4="Very Important".
            ­ Church Attendance: is a 1-4 categorical variable that measures how
              frequently an individual goes to church, where 1="Never", 2="Once or
              Twice a Year", 3="Once or Twice a Month", and 4="Once a Week".
            ­ Religious Group Attendance: is a 1-4 categorical variable that mea-
              sures how frequently an individual participates in religious group
              meetings, ranging from 1="Never" to 4="Once a Week".

     To examine differences in social capital, we construct an index using ques-
     tions related to the frequency of attending various group meetings. We in-
     clude questions on the following groups: community improvement groups,
     parent associations, municipal meetings, or political associations.46 Each
     group meeting question is a 1-4 categorical variable that measures how fre-
     quently an individual goes to meetings for each group ­ where 1="Never",
     2="Once or Twice a Year", 3="Once or Twice a Month", and 4="Once a
     Week" ­ except for municipal meetings, which is an indicator variable equal
     to 1 if the respondent attends municipal meetings. We construct our index
     as the first principal component of these questions.


 46 These   are the groups listed in each wave of the data.


                                                  12
Appendix B. Additional Maps

B.1. Additional Maps ­ New Spain

      Figure B1: Saint Day Festival Months - New Spain Region of Mexico




     Notes: The map presents the month that each municipality in the New Spain
     region of Mexico celebrates its respective Catholic patron saint day festival.
     Municipalities where we were unable to determine the festival date are
     shaded in dark grey. Additionally, the map presents the border for the New
     Spain region of colonial Mexico as defined by Gerhard (1993) in black and
     the modern borders of States and Municipalities in gray. See Appendix A.1
     for more information on the construction of the festival date dataset.




                                          13
Figure B2: Optimal Maize Planting Date (FAO data) - New Spain Region of Mexico




     Notes: Optimal maize planting month according to FAO GAEZ data in the
     New Spain region of Mexico.




Figure B3: Maize Growth Cycle Length (FAO data) - New Spain Region of Mexico




     Notes: Length (in days) of the optimal maize growth cycle according to FAO
     GAEZ data in the New Spain region of Mexico.




                                        14
Figure B4: Days Between Festival and Optimal Planting Date - New Spain Region
of Mexico




     Notes: Difference (in days) between the patron saint day festival date and the
     optimal maize planting date (from FAO GAEZ data) for each municipality
     in the New Spain region of Mexico. (Negative values correspond to festivals
     that occur before planting; positive values correspond to festivals that occur
     after planting.) Municipalities where we were unable to determine the
     festival date are shaded in dark grey.




                                          15
Figure B5: Days Between Festival and Optimal Harvest Date - New Spain Region
of Mexico




     Notes: Difference (in days) between the patron saint day festival date and the
     optimal maize harvest date (from FAO GAEZ data) for each municipality in
     the New Spain region of Mexico. (Negative values correspond to festivals
     that occur before harvest; positive values correspond to festivals that occur
     after harvest.) Municipalities where we were unable to determine the festival
     date are shaded in dark grey.


Figure B6: Coincidence of Festivals and Optimal Planting Month
New Spain Region of Mexico




     Notes: The map presents whether the month that each municipality in the
     New Spain region of Mexico celebrates its respective patron saint day festival
     falls 0-30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date according to FAO
     GAEZ data. Municipalities where we were unable to determine the festival
     date are shaded in dark grey.



                                          16
Figure B7: Coincidence of Festivals and Optimal Harvest Month
New Spain Region of Mexico




     Notes: The map presents whether the month that each municipality in the
     New Spain region of Mexico celebrates its respective patron saint day festival
     falls 0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest date according to FAO GAEZ
     data. Municipalities where we were unable to determine the festival date
     are shaded in dark grey.




                                          17
B.2. Additional Maps ­ All of Mexico

             Figure B8: Optimal Maize Planting Date (FAO data)




         Notes: Optimal maize planting month according to FAO GAEZ data
         for each municipality in Mexico.



               Figure B9: Maize Growth Cycle Date (FAO data)




         Notes: Length (in days) of the optimal maize growth cycle according
         to FAO GAEZ data for each municipality in Mexico.




                                         18
Figure B10: Coincidence of Festivals and Optimal Planting Month




  Notes: The map presents whether the date that each municipality in
  Mexico celebrates its respective patron saint day festival falls 0-30
  days prior to the optimal maize planting date according to FAO
  GAEZ data. Municipalities where we were unable to determine the
  festival date or are unsuitable for maize are shaded in dark grey.




Figure B11: Coincidence of Festivals and Optimal Harvest Month




  Notes: The map presents whether the date that each municipality
  in Mexico celebrates its respective patron saint day festival falls
  0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest date according to FAO
  GAEZ data. Municipalities where we were unable to determine the
  festival date or are unsuitable for maize are shaded in dark grey.




                                   19
                Figure B12: Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals




        Notes: Coinciding Festival is equal to "Yes" if the saint day festival in
        a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize
        planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date
        for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data and "No" otherwise for
        each municipality in Mexico. Municipalities where we were unable
        to determine the festival date or are unsuitable for maize are shaded
        in dark grey.



Appendix C. Additional Figures




                                           20
                  Figure C1: Validating Crop Calendar Data:
Relationship Between Predicted Maize Harvest Timing and Actual Maize Harvest




                      a. New Spain Region                                                                       b. All of Mexico


     Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the share of a state's total maize
   harvest that occurs on a given month and the share of municipalities in a state that
   have their maize harvest on a given month according to the FAO GAEZ data. The
   unit of observation is a state-month pair. State harvest Data are from the Servicio de
    Información Agroalimentaria y Pesquera (SIAP) for 2015. The bottom-right of each
 figure presents the estimated bivariate coefficient, t-statistic, and R2 . Standard errors
                               are clustered at the state level.


          Figure C2: Randomization Inference Exercise ­ Placebo Festivals

                                                          1.00




                                                          0.75
                                 Cumulative Probability




                                                          0.50




                                                          0.25




                                                          0.00

                                                                 -4      -2             0                2                 4
                                                                      Randomization Inference t-Statistics
                                                                                      Randomization Inference p-value: 0.0004


 Notes: The figure presents the cumulative distribution function for the estimated t-statistics for the ran-
 domization inference exercise. Specifically, we conduct 10,000 simulations where we randomly assign
 whether or not a festival coincides with planting or harvest for each municipality and estimate our
 main specification, and then plot the cumulative distribution function for the estimated t-statistics. The
 dependent variable is Log Household Income. All regressions include state fixed effects, Geography Controls,
 Colonial Controls, Festival-Week Fixed Effects, and Planting- & Harvest-Month Fixed Effects. Observations are
 municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Additionally, the figure presents the estimated t-statistic
 for our sample, and reports the randomization inference p-value on the bottom right of the figure.




                                                                                  21
   Figure C3: Impact of Coinciding Festivals on Religiosity and Social Capital:
       Estimates for Religiosity Index and Group Membership Index Components
                                                                                   Religiosity                                                                   Group Membership

                                          0.15                                                                                  0.15
                    Standardized Effect
                                                                                                                                0.10
                                          0.10

                                                                                                                                0.05
                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                0.00
                                          0.00
                                                                                                                               -0.05
                                                             x




                                                                              n




                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                 ce




                                                                                                                                              x



                                                                                                                                                            ps



                                                                                                                                                                          ps




                                                                                                                                                                                           s



                                                                                                                                                                                                         gs
                                                                                                                                                                                       up
                                                         de




                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                            io




                                                                                             io




                                                                                                              an




                                                                                                                                                                                                      tin
                                                                                                                                                            u



                                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                            ig




                                                                                           at
                                                        In




                                                                                                                                         In



                                                                                                                                                         ro



                                                                                                                                                                        ro



                                                                                                                                                                                     ro
                                                                                                            nd




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                          ip
                                                                       el




                                                                                                                                                     tG




                                                                                                                                                                     G



                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                   ty




                                                                                                                                        p
                                                                        R




                                                                                          ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                           tte




                                                                                                                                        i




                                                                                                                                                                    n



                                                                                                                                                                                  al
                                                   si




                                                                                                                                     sh
                                                                                        rt




                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                     of




                                                                                                                                                                 tio
                                                                                                       A




                                                                                                                                                                                               al
                                                                                                                                                                                ic
                                                 io




                                                                                     Pa




                                                                                                                                    r



                                                                                                                                                  em
                                                                  ce




                                                                                                                                                                               lit



                                                                                                                                                                                             ip
                                                                                                                                 be




                                                                                                                                                                ia
                                                                                                       h
                                              ig




                                                                                                     rc
                                                                                   up




                                                                                                                                                                           Po
                                                                an




                                                                                                                                                                                           ic
                                                                                                                                                              oc
                                           el




                                                                                                                                               ov
                                                                                                                               em




                                                                                                                                                                                         un
                                                                                                  hu
                                                              rt




                                                                                                                                                            ss
                                          R




                                                                                 ro




                                                                                                                                             pr
                                                                                                                           M
                                                             po




                                                                                                                                                         lA




                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                 C
                                                                              sG




                                                                                                                                         Im
                                                        Im




                                                                                                                          up




                                                                                                                                                       ta
                                                                            ou




                                                                                                                                       ity




                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                      ro
                                                                       gi




                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                    un
                                                                                                                      G
                                                                        l




                                                                                                                                                  Pa
                                                                     Re




                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                               om
                                                                                                                           C
                                                                                                                 Dependent Variables

  Notes: Data are from the Americas Barometer (LAPOP) data for New Spain region of Mexico. The figure presents the estimated coefficients
  and respective 95% confidence intervals from estimating equation (1) on the sub-components of the Religiosity Index and the Group Membership
  Index. The dependent variables are denoted on the x-axis. We first show the estimates for each index, followed by estimates for each of the
  individual sub-components of the index. (See Data Appendix for more information.) The independent variable is Festival Coincides with Maize
  Planting or Harvest: an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal
  maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. The regressions control
  for respondent age, age squared, gender, and for the following set of controls: Survey-Wave Fixed Effects, State Fixed Effects, Geography Controls,
  Colonial Controls, Festival-Week Fixed Effects, and Planting- & Harvest-Month Fixed Effects.




Sensitivity to 30-Day Window Used to Define Coinciding with Planting or Har-
vest Months
We vary the 30-day window (relative to planting and harvest) used to estimate our
main specification and examine when the negative impacts of festivals seem to
arise. Specifically, in equation (1), we focus on the periods when having a festival
coincide with planting/harvest may lead to lower long-run development: periods
when festival expenditures crowding out of investments during low liquidity
times. We defined these periods are being 0-30 day prior to planting and 0-30
after harvest. However, there are many other 30-day windows one could use to
define these overlap periods. Thus, we conduct an exercise to explore the timing
of the main impacts by varying the 30-day window across time and estimating our
main impacts. To conduct this exercise we estimate the following specification:

ym = s(m) + i Festival: i ± 15 days from Plantingm + i Festival: i ± 15 from Harvestm + Xm B + m
                                                                                              (a1)
where our coefficients of interest are i and j , the effect of festivals occurring
i ± 15 days from planting or harvest for various values of i; and other variables
are defined as before in equation (1). In other words, equation (a1) estimates
our main specification but instead uses various rolling 30-day windows relative to
planting and harvest.



                                                                                                                      22
   Figure C4 presents the coefficient plot for the estimates of interest from es-
timating equation (a1) on the index of economic development used in Table 2.
The estimates suggest an interesting time dimension to the impacts of festivals
on development. First, the negative estimated effects of festivals coinciding with
planting appear for various rolling windows prior to planting but converge toward
zero following planting. Second, we observe the opposite timing for harvest
festivals: the negative estimated effects of festivals coinciding with harvest only
begin to appear following harvest (and are statistically insignificant and close to
zero prior to harvest). Additionally, the estimates show that the main results
are not particularly sensitive to the specific 30-day window we consider. These
results are consistent with the hypotheses that the timing of festivals is important
for understanding their development consequences, and that festivals can crowd
out investments and decrease development when they occur in times of when
time-sensitive investment opportunities exist.




                                        23
Figure C4: Impacts of Festival Timing Relative to Planting and Harvest Dates




   Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census for the New Spain region of Mexico.
   The figure presents the estimated i (top panel) and i (bottom panel) coefficients and respec-
   tive 95% confidence intervals from estimating equation (a1) for i  -60,60 days. The outcome
   variable is Log Household Income. Festival : i ± 15 days from Planting (top panel) is an indicator
   variable equal to 1 if the festival occurs i ± 15 from the optimal planting date according to FAO
   GAEZ data (where negative values of i means that the festival occurs prior to planting); Festival
   : i ± 15 days from Harvest (bottom panel) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the festival occurs
   i ± 15 from the optimal harvest date according to FAO GAEZ data (where negative values of
   i means that the festival occurs prior to harvest). The regressions control for the full-set of
   controls: State Fixed Effects, Geography Controls, Colonial Controls, Festival-Week Fixed Effects, and
   Planting- & Harvest-Month Fixed Effects.




                                                    24
Appendix D. Additional Tables


    Table D1: Relationship Between Festival, Planting, and Harvest Months
                                All of Mexico

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                                               Festival Date
                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)


               Maize Planting or Harvest Month              0.001           0.003
                                                           (0.015)         (0.016)
               Maize Planting Month                                                        0.003           0.014
                                                                                          (0.019)         (0.021)
               Maize Harvest Month                                                       -0.001          -0.009
                                                                                         (0.023)         (0.024)


               Calendar Date Fixed Effects                    Y               N              Y               N
               Date by State Fixed Effects                    N               Y              N               Y

               Observations                                831,105         831,105        831,105        831,105
               Clusters                                     2,277           2,277          2,277          2,277
               Mean Dep. Var.                               0.274           0.274          0.274          0.274
             Notes: Observations are at the municipality-month level for municipalities in Mexico for which we
            have festival data. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. For ease of interpretation,
            all coefficients are multiplied by 100. Maize Planting or Harvest Month is an indicator variable equal
            to 1 if a date falls within 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after
            the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data.Maize Planting Month is an
            indicator variable equal to 1 if a date falls within 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date
            for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. Maize Harvest Month is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a
            date falls within 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ
            data. Calendar Week Fixed Effects are indicator variables equal to 1 if the festival for a municipality
            occurs in a given 7-day period (52 fixed effects). Week by State Fixed Effects are interaction terms
            between calendar week and Mexican state fixed effects. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               25
                                  Table D2: Municipality Characteristics and Coinciding Festivals

                                                         Non-Coinciding                               Coinciding                     Regression Estimates:
                                                            Festival                                   Festival                       Coinciding Festival

                                                 Obs.         Mean            SE          Obs.          Mean             SE          Coef.             SE
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)

   Geographic Characteristics:
      Precipitation                              1385         95.43         (1.23)         184          98.06          (3.66)        -2.59           (3.53)
      Temperature                                1385         19.07         (0.11)         184          19.67          (0.27)        -0.09           (0.18)
      Land Suitability                           1385         86.40         (0.34)         184          84.48          (1.28)        -0.97           (0.96)
      Maize Suitability                          1385         34.10         (0.58)         184          34.59          (1.64)         2.79           (1.55)
      Area                                       1385        328.32         (13.35)        184          341.79        (40.68)        -3.38           (36.68)
      Longitude                                  1385         -98.28        (0.05)         184          -98.19         (0.15)        -0.06           (0.06)
      Latitude                                   1385         18.64         (0.04)         184          18.78          (0.13)         0.06           (0.06)
      Log(Dist. to Mexico City)                  1385          5.45         (0.02)         184           5.54          (0.04)        -0.02           (0.02)
      Slope                                      1385         10.41         (0.17)         184           9.58          (0.47)        -0.53           (0.47)
      Elevation                                  1385         1569          (21.00)        184         1459.18        (57.58)        35.69           (36.55)
   Colonial Characteristics:
      Has Colonial Characteristics (%)           1385         86.28         (0.92)         184          82.61          (2.80)         0.18           (2.92)
      Drought in 1545 (%)                        1195         99.67         (0.17)         152          98.03          (1.13)        -1.54           (0.91)
      Log(Pop. Density in 1570)                  1195          0.53         (0.03)         152           0.40          (0.08)         0.04           (0.06)
 Notes: Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Coinciding Festival is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in
a municipality occurs either within 0-30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality
using FAO GAEZ data, and 0 otherwise. The value displayed for regression estimates is the coefficient estimate for Coinciding Festival, conditional on
state fixed effects, planting-month and harvest-month fixed effects, and festival week fixed effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses.
See Data Appendix for more information on variables. Note that we do not have colonial characteristics for all observations in our sample; therefore, we
also show results for Has Colonial Characteristics, an indicator equal to 1 if a municipality is not missing colonial characteristics. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                                               26
                                  Table D3: Municipality Characteristics and Coinciding Festivals:
                                                          All of Mexico

                                                        Non-Coinciding                               Coinciding                    Regression Estimates:
                                                           Festival                                   Festival                      Coinciding Festival

                                               Obs.         Mean             SE          Obs.         Mean             SE          Coef.            SE
                                                (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)            (8)

   Geographic Characteristics:
     Precipitation                             1746          89.55         (1.08)        273          85.85          (2.87)        -3.70           (2.55)
     Temperature                               1746          19.58         (0.10)        273          20.23          (0.22)        -0.17           (0.17)
     Land Suitability                          1746          81.04         (0.55)        273          75.25          (1.74)        -0.27           (0.90)
     Maize Suitability                         1746          32.24         (0.50)        273          30.99          (1.24)         1.75           (1.11)
     Area                                      1746         620.73        (31.81)        273         973.90         (114.66)       90.65          (90.08)
     Longitude                                 1746         -98.58         (0.09)        273          -99.22         (0.29)        -0.05           (0.06)
     Latitude                                  1746          19.60         (0.06)        273          20.59          (0.22)         0.10          (0.05)
     Log(Dist. to Mexico City)                 1746          5.71          (0.02)        273           5.96          (0.05)        -0.02           (0.02)
     Slope                                     1746          9.33          (0.16)        273           8.28          (0.38)        -0.58           (0.35)
     Elevation                                 1746        1429.96        (20.10)        273         1258.70        (50.72)        45.66          (33.07)
   Colonial Characteristics:
     Has Colonial Characteristics (%)          1746          78.47         (0.98)        273          73.26          (2.68)        -0.45           (2.15)
     Drought in 1545 (%)                       1370          98.18         (0.36)        200          97.50          (1.11)         0.40           (1.16)
     Log(Pop. Density in 1570)                 1370          0.32          (0.03)        200           0.02          (0.08)         0.04           (0.05)
  Notes: Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Coinciding Festival is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in
a municipality occurs either within 0-30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality
using FAO GAEZ data, and 0 otherwise. The value displayed for regressions estimates is the coefficient estimate for Coinciding Festival, conditional on state
fixed effects, planting-month and harvest-month fixed effects, and festival week fixed effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Robust
standard errors are presented in parentheses. See Data Appendix for more information on variables. Festival: Coincides is an indicator variable equal to 1 if
the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either within 0-30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0-30 days after the optimal maize harvest
date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data, and 0 otherwise. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                             27
Table D4: Development Outcomes and Planting- and Harvest-Coinciding
                            Festivals

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                                         Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)


    Festival: 0-30 Days Prior to Maize Planting        -0.368        -0.152      -0.268        -0.291 -0.268
                                                       (0.149)       (0.126)     (0.112)       (0.110) (0.128)
    Festival: 0-30 Days After Maize Harvest            -0.217        -0.237      -0.241 -0.233 -0.171
                                                       (0.125)       (0.097)     (0.086) (0.086) (0.095)


    State Fixed Effects                                    N            Y            Y             Y            Y
    Geography Controls                                     N            N            Y             Y            Y
    Colonial Controls                                      N            N            N             Y            Y
    Planting-Month Fixed Effects                           N            N            N             N            Y
    Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                            N            N            N             N            Y
    Festival-Week Fixed Effects                            N            N            N             N            Y

    Observations                                         1,593         1,593        1,593        1,593        1,593
    Adjusted R2                                          0.004         0.347        0.537        0.543        0.566
    Mean Dep. Var.                                       3.234         3.234        3.234        3.234        3.234
    SD Dep. Var.                                         1.330         1.330        1.330        1.330        1.330
    P-Value: Difference                                  0.422         0.577        0.844        0.666        0.542

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                                  Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)


    Festival: 0-30 Days Prior to Maize Planting        -0.775        -0.035      -0.361        -0.443       -0.496
                                                       (0.459)       (0.391)     (0.356)       (0.353)      (0.388)
    Festival: 0-30 Days After Maize Harvest            -0.645        -0.663      -0.737 -0.718 -0.560
                                                       (0.376)       (0.284)     (0.243) (0.244) (0.267)


    State Fixed Effects                                    N            Y            Y             Y            Y
    Geography Controls                                     N            N            Y             Y            Y
    Colonial Controls                                      N            N            N             Y            Y
    Planting-Month Fixed Effects                           N            N            N             N            Y
    Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                            N            N            N             N            Y
    Festival-Week Fixed Effects                            N            N            N             N            Y

    Observations                                          1,593       1,593         1,593       1,593         1,593
    Adjusted R2                                           0.002       0.348         0.566       0.571         0.597
    Mean Dep. Var.                                       -0.589       -0.589       -0.589       -0.589        -0.589
    SD Dep. Var.                                          4.039       4.039         4.039       4.039         4.039
    P-Value: Difference                                   0.820       0.177         0.370       0.511         0.891
  Notes: Data is from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region
 of Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic Development is the first principal
 component index for a number of development outcomes in the census for a municipality (see Data Appendix).
 Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a
 municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal
 maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean
 precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean
 slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought
 intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial
 controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we control for an indicator variable
 equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects
 includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according
 to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar date of the municipality's saint day
 festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                                                           28
 Table D5: Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Development
                               Outcomes:
                              All of Mexico

                                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                                                 Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest           -0.009        -0.099       -0.138        -0.140       -0.110
                                                               (0.080)       (0.063)      (0.056)       (0.056)      (0.060)


   State Fixed Effects                                             N             Y            Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                              N             N            Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                               N             N            N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                    N             N            N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N            N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                     N             N            N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   2,277        2,277        2,277         2,277         2,277
   Adjusted R2                                                   -0.000        0.351        0.518         0.522         0.534
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 3.379        3.379        3.379         3.379         3.379
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   1.316        1.316        1.316         1.316         1.316

                                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                                          Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest             0.103       -0.231       -0.348        -0.353       -0.283
                                                                (0.249)      (0.194)      (0.171)       (0.171)      (0.181)


   State Fixed Effects                                             N             Y            Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                              N             N            Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                               N             N            N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                    N             N            N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N            N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                     N             N            N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   2,277       2,277         2,277          2,277       2,277
   Adjusted R2                                                   -0.000       0.379         0.557          0.560       0.573
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                -0.084       -0.084        -0.084        -0.084       -0.084
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   4.052       4.052         4.052          4.052       4.052
 Notes: Data is from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in Mexico. Robust standard
errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic Development is the first principal component index for a number
of development outcomes in the census for a municipality (see Data Appendix). Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or
Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the
optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ
data. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area, centroid
latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the
municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers
and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we
control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest
Month Fixed Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize for each municipality
according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar date of the municipality's saint
day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               29
                                    Table D6: Municipality Characteristics and Undetermined Festival Date

                                                           Festival Date                                Festival Date                       Regression Estimates:
                                                            Determined                                  Undetermined                      Festival Date Undetermined

                                                Obs.          Mean              SE           Obs.          Mean              SE           Coef.               SE
                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)            (7)               (8)

   Geographic Characteristics:
      Precipitation                             1569           95.74          (1.17)          46          101.68           (7.93)         -2.59              (3.53)
      Temperature                               1569           19.14          (0.10)          46           20.10           (0.61)         -0.09              (0.18)
      Land Suitability                          1569           86.17          (0.34)          46           80.83           (2.53)         -0.97              (0.96)
      Maize Suitability                         1569           34.16          (0.55)          46           36.85           (2.96)          2.79             (1.55)
      Area                                      1569          329.90         (12.71)          46          416.61          (81.26)         -3.38             (36.68)
      Longitude                                 1569          -98.27          (0.05)          46           -98.10          (0.28)         -0.06              (0.06)
      Latitude                                  1569           18.66          (0.04)          46           19.14           (0.23)          0.06              (0.06)
      Log(Dist. to Mexico City)                 1569           5.46           (0.02)          46            5.41           (0.10)         -0.02              (0.02)
      Slope                                     1569           10.32          (0.16)          46            8.71           (1.00)         -0.53              (0.47)
      Elevation                                 1569         1556.12         (19.74)          46          1314.65         (134.19)        35.69             (36.55)
   Colonial Characteristics:
      Has Colonial Characteristics (%)          1569           85.85          (0.88)          46           82.61           (5.65)          0.18              (2.92)
      Drought in 1545 (%)                       1347           99.48          (0.20)          38            100            (0.00)         -1.54             (0.91)
      Log(Pop. Density in 1570)                 1347           0.52           (0.03)          38            0.53           (0.21)          0.04              (0.06)
 Notes: Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. See Data Appendix for more information
on variables. Sample is limited to the New Spain region of Mexico. Festival Date Undetermined is an indicator variable equal to 1 if we were unable to determine the patron
saint day festival in a municipality, and 0 otherwise. The value displayed for regressions estimates is the coefficient estimate for Festival Date Undetermined, conditional
on state fixed effects, planting-month and harvest-month fixed effects, and festival week fixed effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                    Table D7: Municipality Characteristics and "Local" Patron Saints

                                                                Official                                      Local                          Regression Estimates:
                                                              Patron Saint                                 Patron Saint                        Local Patron Saint

                                                   Obs.          Mean             SE           Obs.          Mean                 SE         Coef.              SE
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)               (7)           (8)

   Geographic Characteristics:
      Precipitation                                1615          95.91           (1.16)            60         84.50           (4.18)         -2.25            (3.48)
      Temperature                                  1615          19.17           (0.10)            60         18.69           (0.50)         -0.08            (0.18)
      Land Suitability                             1615          86.02           (0.33)            60         88.02           (1.75)         -1.11            (0.95)
      Maize Suitability                            1615          34.23           (0.54)            60         36.93           (2.59)          2.58           (1.53)
      Area                                         1615         332.37          (12.57)            60        445.03          (70.19)         -9.24           (36.49)
      Longitude                                    1615          -98.27          (0.05)            60        -99.55           (0.28)         -0.06            (0.06)
      Latitude                                     1615          18.67           (0.04)            60         19.29           (0.17)          0.07            (0.05)
      Log(Dist. to Mexico City)                    1615           5.46           (0.02)            60         5.26            (0.10)         -0.02            (0.02)
      Slope                                        1615          10.27           (0.16)            60         9.08            (0.63)         -0.53            (0.46)
      Elevation                                    1615         1549.24         (19.57)            60       1692.05         (100.74)         31.91           (36.06)
   Colonial Characteristics:
      Has Colonial Characteristics (%)             1615          85.76           (0.87)            60          95             (2.84)         -0.04            (2.88)
      Drought in 1545 (%)                          1385          99.49           (0.19)            57          100            (0.00)         -1.52           (0.91)
      Log(Pop. Density in 1570)                    1385           0.52           (0.03)            57         0.42            (0.16)          0.03            (0.06)
 Notes: Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. See Data Appendix for more
information on variables. Local Patron Saint is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the patron saint in a municipality is not an official Vatican patron saint, and
0 otherwise. The value displayed for regressions estimates is the coefficient estimate for Local Patron Saint, conditional on state fixed effects, planting-month
and harvest-month fixed effects, and festival week fixed effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                      30
 Table D8: Robustness to Missing Festival Dates: Development Outcomes
(Assuming All Municipalities with Missing Festival Dates Have Coinciding
                               Festivals)

                                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                                                Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest          -0.191       -0.173       -0.220 -0.219 -0.201
                                                              (0.090)      (0.073)      (0.063) (0.063) (0.069)


   State Fixed Effects                                            N            Y            Y            Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                             N            N            Y            Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                              N            N            N            Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                   N            N            N            N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y

   Observations                                                 1,639        1,639        1,639         1,639        1,632
   Adjusted R2                                                  0.002        0.345        0.538         0.543        0.562
   Mean Dep. Var.                                               3.239        3.239        3.239         3.239        3.238
   SD Dep. Var.                                                 1.328        1.328        1.328         1.328        1.329

                                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                                        Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest          -0.478       -0.328       -0.485       -0.492        -0.525
                                                              (0.277)      (0.227)      (0.194)      (0.194)       (0.207)


   State Fixed Effects                                            N            Y            Y            Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                             N            N            Y            Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                              N            N            N            Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                   N            N            N            N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                    N            N            N            N             Y

   Observations                                                 1,639        1,639        1,639         1,639       1,632
   Adjusted R2                                                  0.001        0.344        0.563         0.568       0.588
   Mean Dep. Var.                                              -0.576        -0.576       -0.576       -0.576       -0.574
   SD Dep. Var.                                                 4.039        4.039        4.039         4.039       4.047
 Notes: Regressions in this table are identical to those in Table 2, except that municipalities with missing festival dates
(previously not included in sample) are now included in the sample, and we assume that their festivals all coincide with
planting or harvest (for these observations, festival week is randomly chosen for the inclusion of Festival-Week Fixed Effects
in column 5). Data is from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of
Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic Development is the first principal component
index for a number of development outcomes in the census for a municipality (see Data Appendix). Festival Coincides with
Maize Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to
30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality
using FAO GAEZ data. For this table, we assume all undetermined festival dates are coinciding festivals. Geography
Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid
longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the municipality. Colonial
Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia
(2018). For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we control for an
indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed
Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according
to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar date of the municipality's saint day festival.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                              31
 Table D9: Robustness to Missing Festival Dates: Development Outcomes
(Assuming No Municipalities with Missing Festival Dates Have Coinciding
                               Festivals)

                                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                                                  Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.280 -0.205 -0.249 -0.254 -0.228
                                                                (0.099) (0.079) (0.070) (0.070) (0.075)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N            Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N            N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N            N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N            N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N            N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N            N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   1,639         1,639        1,639         1,639         1,631
   Adjusted R2                                                    0.004         0.345        0.538         0.543         0.561
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 3.239         3.239        3.239         3.239         3.237
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   1.328         1.328        1.328         1.328         1.329

                                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                                          Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.708       -0.428        -0.592 -0.613 -0.617
                                                                (0.300)      (0.239)       (0.208) (0.207) (0.226)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N            Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N            N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N            N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N            N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N            N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N            N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   1,639        1,639         1,639         1,639        1,631
   Adjusted R2                                                    0.002        0.344         0.564         0.569        0.588
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                -0.576        -0.576        -0.576       -0.576        -0.578
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   4.039        4.039         4.039         4.039        4.045
 Notes: Regressions in this table are identical to those in Table 2, except that municipalities with missing festival dates
(previously not included in sample) are now included in the sample, and we assume that none of their festivals coincide with
planting or harvest (for these observations, festival week randomly chosen among non-planting and non-harvest months
for inclusion of Festival-Week Fixed Effects in column 5). Data is from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations
are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic
Development is the first principal component index for a number of development outcomes in the census for a municipality
(see Data Appendix). Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day
festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal
maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. For this table, we assume all undetermined festival dates
are not coinciding festivals. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the
surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize
suitability for the municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using
data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are
set to zero, and we control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics.
Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize
for each municipality according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar date of the
municipality's saint day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                32
  Table D10: Robustness to Including "Local" Patron Saints: Development
                                Outcomes

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                                   Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.261 -0.183               -0.234 -0.239 -0.195
                                                                (0.099) (0.080)             (0.070) (0.070) (0.076)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N             Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N             N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N             N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   1,625         1,625         1,625         1,625         1,625
   Adjusted R2                                                    0.003         0.347         0.537         0.543         0.565
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 3.251         3.251         3.251         3.251         3.251
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   1.329         1.329         1.329         1.329         1.329

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                           Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.661        -0.350        -0.539       -0.559 -0.491
                                                                (0.301)       (0.243)       (0.211)      (0.210) (0.225)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N             Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N             N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N             N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                    1,625        1,625        1,625          1,625        1,625
   Adjusted R2                                                     0.002        0.349        0.565          0.570        0.594
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 -0.528        -0.528       -0.528        -0.528        -0.528
   SD Dep. Var.                                                    4.048        4.048        4.048          4.048        4.048
 Notes: Regressions in this table are identical to those in Table 2, except that municipalities celebrating "local" saints (those
not appearing in official Roman Catholic records outside of Mexico, previously not included in sample) are now included in
the sample, and we use their actual festival celebration dates to determine whether they coincide with planting or harvest.
Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of Mexico.
Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Index of Economic Development is the first principal component index
for a number of development outcomes in the census for a municipality (see Data Appendix). Festival Coincides with Maize
Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior
to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ
data. For this table, we assume all undetermined festival dates are not coinciding festivals. Geography Controls includes
mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land suitability, the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean
elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City, and mean maize suitability for the municipality. Colonial Controls
includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For
these colonial controls, values for municipalities with missing information are set to zero, and we control for an indicator
variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects
includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according to FAO
GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects for the calendar date of the municipality's saint day festival. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                33
           Table D11: Robustness to Spatial Autocorrelation:
Impact of Agriculturally-Coinciding Festivals on Development Outcomes

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                                   Panel A: Log HH Income
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.275        -0.204        -0.251 -0.255 -0.206
                                                                (0.107)       (0.080)       (0.082) (0.079) (0.075)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N             Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N             N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N             N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                   1,593         1,593         1,593         1,593         1,593
   Conley Window (kms)                                             100           100           100           100           100
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 3.234         3.234         3.234         3.234         3.234
   SD Dep. Var.                                                   1.330         1.330         1.330         1.330         1.330

                                                                                    Dependent Variable:
                                                                           Panel B: Index of Economic Development
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)


   Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest            -0.695        -0.422        -0.593 -0.613 -0.537
                                                                (0.342)       (0.252)       (0.226) (0.220) (0.190)


   State Fixed Effects                                              N             Y             Y             Y             Y
   Geography Controls                                               N             N             Y             Y             Y
   Colonial Controls                                                N             N             N             Y             Y
   Planting-Month Fixed Effects                                     N             N             N             N             Y
   Harvest-Month Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y
   Festival-Week Fixed Effects                                      N             N             N             N             Y

   Observations                                                    1,593        1,593        1,593          1,593        1,593
   Conley Window (kms)                                              100          100          100            100          100
   Mean Dep. Var.                                                 -0.589        -0.589       -0.589        -0.589        -0.589
   SD Dep. Var.                                                    4.039        4.039        4.039          4.039        4.039
 Notes: Data are from the 2010 Mexico Population Census. Observations are municipalities in the New Spain region of
Mexico. Conley (1999) standard errors are presented in parentheses with the cut-off window denoted as the Conley Window
in kms. Index of Economic Development is the first principal component index for a number of development outcomes in the
census for a municipality (see Data Appendix). Festival Coincides with Maize Planting or Harvest is an indicator variable equal
to 1 if the saint day festival in a municipality occurs either 0 to 30 days prior to the optimal maize planting date or 0 to 30 days
after the optimal maize harvest date for a municipality using FAO GAEZ data. For this table, we assume all undetermined
festival dates are not coinciding festivals. Geography Controls includes mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean land
suitability, the surface area, centroid latitude, centroid longitude, mean elevation, mean slope, log distance to Mexico City,
and mean maize suitability for the municipality. Colonial Controls includes drought intensity in 1545 and log population
density in 1570 using data from Sellers and Alix-Garcia (2018). For these colonial controls, values for municipalities with
missing information are set to zero, and we control for an indicator variable equal to 1 if the municipality is not missing
these colonial characteristics. Planting & Harvest Month Fixed Effects includes fixed effects for the optimal planting-month
and harvest-month for maize for each municipality according to FAO GAEZ data. Festival-Week Fixed Effects are fixed effects
for the calendar date of the municipality's saint day festival. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                34
Appendix References
Catholic Church, Martirologio Romano, Vatican City: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1956.
  , Calendarium Romanum, Vatican City: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1969.
Conley, Timothy, "GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence," Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 1999, 92, 1­45.
Hijmans, R.J., S.E. Cameron, J.L. Parra, P.G. Jones, and A. Jarvis, "Very High Resolution
  Interpolated Climate Surfaces for Global Land Areas," International Journal of Climatol-
  ogy, 2005, 25, 1965­1978.
INAFED, Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal, "Enciclope-
  dia de los Municipios y Delegaciones de México," 1988.
Michalopoulos, Stelios, "The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity," American Economic
 Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1508­39.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney, "The
  Global Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible
  Climate Change," Global Ecology and Biogeography, 2002, 11, 377­392.
Sellers, Emily A. and Jennifer Alix-Garcia, "Labor Scarcity, Land Tenure, and Historical
  Legacy: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Development Economics, 2018, 135, 504­516.
Watkins, Basil, The Book of Saints: A Comprehensive Biographical Dictionary, New York,
 United States: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, 2015.




                                           35
