                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          A LONG AND A SHORT LEG MAKE FOR A WOBBLY EQUILIBRIUM

                                      Nicolae B. Gârleanu
                                       Stavros Panageas
                                      Geoffery X. Zheng

                                      Working Paper 28824
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28824


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We would like to thank seminar participants at SAIF for useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Geoffery X. Zheng. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Long and a Short Leg Make For a Wobbly Equilibrium
Nicolae B. Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Geoffery X. Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 28824
May 2021
JEL No. G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that the online discussion on the WSB subreddit had a substantial negative
impact on the profitability of shorting strategies across a number of stocks -- even those that
were neither heavily discussed on the subreddit, nor experienced an unusual increase in retail
buying volume. We provide a model to explain how fears among short sellers can become self-
fulfilling. In the model, the market for shares and the lending market must clear jointly. Despite
standard assumptions, the model features multiple equilibria and "run-type'' behavior by shorting
agents. More broadly, the model provides a tractable framework to interpret several empirical
observations on the relation between short interest, lending fees, and expected returns.


Nicolae B. Gârleanu                             Geoffery X. Zheng
Haas School of Business                         NYU Shanghai
F628                                            geoff.zheng@nyu.edu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu

Stavros Panageas
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
stavros.panageas@anderson.ucla.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28824
   The events surrounding Gamestop and the WSB subreddit caught the attention of the
popular press. Somewhat less noticed was the broader "ripple effect" of these events on short-
selling strategies. We show that, as the price of Gamestop skyrocketed, several other stocks
with high short interest also experienced high returns, leading to losses on short positions
and a subsequent decline in short interest. These outcomes occurred despite the fact that
these stocks were substantially larger than Gamestop, were not particularly discussed on the
WSB subreddit, and did not experience an extraordinary rise in retail purchases.
   A natural explanation is that the events surrounding Gamestop spread fear among short
sellers. In this paper we develop a model that helps explain how such fears can become
self-reinforcing and go as far as to cause a collapse in share lending and short-selling. In
the model the stock market and the lending market have to clear jointly. Remarkably,
even under a set of standard, "neoclassical" assumptions (Walrasian markets, price-taking
investors, etc.) the model features multiple equilibria: In the baseline version of the model,
a high short-interest, low Sharpe-ratio equilibrium with high expected gains for short sellers
coexists with two other equilibria featuring smaller, respectively zero, short interest with
short-sellers experiencing lower gains. This multiplicity provides a stark way of conveying
the intuition that shorting strategies may be exposed to behaviors akin to a "run."
   While motivated by recent events, the model provides a broader framework to interpret
some findings of the empirical literature. For example, the model can help explain the
observation that a supply shift in the market for loanable shares impacts lending fees and
short interest but at the same time has a muted or even ambiguous effect on expected returns.
   In the remainder of the introduction we provide a more detailed summary of the paper's
empirical findings and the assumptions and results of the model.
   The motivating facts for our analysis can be summarized as follows. January 2021 was
an unprecedented month for a strategy that goes long stocks with high short interest and
finances this position by shorting the broad market portfolio. (A bet against the "shorts").


                                              1
Also during that month, the online discussion on the WSB subreddit saw explosive growth,
largely centered around Gamestop. Consistent with articles in the popular press linking
this online discussion with retail purchases, we show that high-frequency fluctuations of
Gamestop mentions on the WSB subreddit exhibited a very high correlation (at hourly
intervals) with retail purchases of Gamestop. This strong high-frequency correlation sug-
gests that the WSB subreddit was an effective vehicle in coordinating retail purchases for
this particular stock. Interestingly, several other high-short-interest stocks, that were barely
mentioned on the WSB subreddit, had substantially higher stock market capitalization, and
did not experience any unusual increase in retail purchases, also experienced dramatic de-
clines in short interest over that same period. Indeed, the performance of shorting strategies
continues to be strikingly poor, even if we remove stocks that attracted some attention on the
WSB subreddit, and if we only focus on large market-capitalization stocks. For stocks with
these properties, it appears implausible that they were the target of a coordinated "short
squeeze."
    The goal of our model is to explain why shorting strategies may be particularly susceptible
to self-propagating fears that manifest themselves as multiple equilibria. The model features
investors with heterogeneous beliefs. One group of investors holds optimistic and one group
of investors holds rational beliefs about the expected return of a positive-supply, risky stock.1
This difference of opinion between the traders prompts trade among the investors, with the
rational investors having an incentive to short the stock whenever the expected excess return
becomes negative. If the rational investors want to short the stock, they must borrow it from
the optimistic investors. A lending fee clears the lending market. To sharpen our results, we
keep the rest of the model structure standard, in the sense that all investors are competitive
(thus precluding market manipulation) and market clearing in both the stock market and
   1
     Motivated by the empirical fact that stocks with high short interest tend to have low subsequent returns,
we assume that the comparatively more pessimistic investors are actually rational, but this is not an essential
assumption for our results.



                                                      2
the lending market is Walrasian.
   As is known, the presence of lending fees modifies the returns experienced by the rational
and the optimistic investors. The equilibrium risk compensation (the "Sharpe ratio") is
impacted both by the magnitude of the lending fee and the fraction of the shares that
are shorted (the short interest). All else equal, higher short interest acts essentially as a
subsidy for long positions. This basic property of the model is responsible for equilibrium
multiplicity. To show this, suppose that -- for whatever reason -- some rational investors
decide to refrain from shorting. The resulting reduction in lending income diminishes the
implicit subsidy to the long positions. Since the effective return on long positions declines, the
equilibrium Sharpe ratio needs to rise in order to keep investors with long positions content
with their holdings. But this rise in the Sharpe ratio reinforces the incentive of short sellers
to abandon their positions, which further raises the Sharpe ratio until the market settles
on a new equilibrium with (possibly zero) short interest. An additional implication of this
reasoning is that even marginal changes in the supply of loanable shares (a "short squeeze")
can be quite effective in terms of causing lending income to decline, raise the Sharpe ratio,
prompt short sellers to abandon their positions, and ignite the self-propagating circle that
can lead to a discontinuous change in equilibrium.
   The paper is organized as follows. After reviewing related literature, section 1 presents
the empirical evidence that motivates the model. Section 2 presents the baseline model.
Section 3 contains the analysis of the model and describes the equilibria of the model.
Section 4 discusses equilibrium properties. In that section we also discuss some broader
implications of the model for the empirical literature on short selling, placing some emphasis
on the ambiguous relation between short interest and lending fees on the one hand and the
Sharpe ratio on the other. Section 5 presents an extension of the model to an economy with
multiple risky assets. In that section we also discuss the quantitative implications of the
model. Section 6 discusses a version of the model in which high short interest is associated


                                                3
with high lending fees. Section 7 concludes. Proofs, detailed data descriptions, various model
extensions, and additional results are contained in the appendix.


Related Literature

Our work relates to several strands of the asset-pricing literature. The most closely related
one considers the joint determination of lending fees, short interest, and returns. In par-
ticular, D'Avolio (2002), Duffie et al. (2002), Vayanos and Weill (2008), and Banerjee and
Graveline (2013) consider explicit frictions to lending and borrowing shares, which translate
into non-zero lending fees that in turn impact expected returns.2 Our model is closer in
spirit to D'Avolio (2002)3 and Banerjee and Graveline (2013), which also feature instan-
taneous clearing of lending and spot markets -- rather than explicit search frictions. For
our purposes, a key feature of all these papers is the uniqueness of the equilibrium. Put
simply, a higher short interest must necessarily be accompanied by a lower effective return
for the short sellers -- despite the higher lending fee -- and simultaneously a higher effective
return for the long investors. The only way to achieve such a joint outcome is to increase
the proportion of one's long portfolio that is lent along with the lending fee. Given the
hard constraints on lending imposed in these papers -- specifically, up to a given exogenous
proportion of shares are loanable without frictions, but no more can be lent -- positive fees
only obtain for a fixed level of short interest, guaranteeing at most one equilibrium with
non-zero fees. In addition, our model allows for a different class of dynamics, driven by the
endogenous fluctuations in wealth of the different types of agents.
       A large body of work studies the empirical relation between short interest and stock
returns. Desai et al. (2002), Diether et al. (2009), Asquith et al. (2005), and Dechow et
   2
    Such frictions also motivated the empirical studies of Geczy et al. (2002), Lamont (2012), Jones and
Lamont (2002), Kaplan et al. (2013), and Asquith et al. (2005) among others.
  3
    More precisely, to a working-paper version of this study, which contains a theoretical model that did not
make it in the published article. Unfortunately, we have been unable to find a copy.



                                                     4
al. (2001) study the cross-sectional relation and find that stocks with higher short inter-
est underperform those with lower short interest. Later work by Cohen et al. (2007) and
Boehmer et al. (2008) uses proprietary data on quantities lent as well as shorting fees and
find consistent results. Drechsler and Drechsler (2014) documents that asset pricing anoma-
lies concentrate in stocks with high shorting fees, while Lamont and Stein (2004) studies
the information content in aggregate short interest and finds that short interest declined as
stock market valuations rose in the late 90's.
       In our model, the motive for shorting is generated by differences in beliefs among the
two types of agents. This feature traces back to seminal papers such as Williams (1956),
Harrison and Kreps (1978), and Miller (1977).
       Our paper also relates to a sizable theoretical literature analyzing multiple equilibria
in asset pricing and macroeconomics. Multiple equilibria can arise through a number of
mechanisms, chief among them a) bubbles (or money) in OLG economies, b) increasing
returns to scale and production externalities, and c) portfolio constraints.4 To our knowledge,
ours is the first paper in which multiple equilibria are due to shorting fees that can make a
long position sufficiently attractive to sustain a higher level of the short interest.
       Finally, as in canonical asset pricing models with heterogeneous agents -- see, e.g., Dumas
(1989) and G^
            arleanu and Panageas (2015) -- the relative wealth shares of agents is an
important state variable in our model. Rather than attempting to summarize the large body
of work in this area, we refer readers to Panageas (2020), which discusses both theoretical
and empirical contributions in this area of asset pricing research.
   4
    We refer the reader to the survey by Benhabib and Farmer (1999), which lists and discusses the different
mechanisms that lead to multiple equilibria and indeterminacies. G^  arleanu and Panageas (2021) discusses
the asset-pricing implications of models with multiple equilibria and "sunspot shocks".




                                                     5
1       Empirical Motivation

We motivate our theoretical model by first documenting some empirical facts. Specifically,
we show that: a) January 2021 was the worst month for shorting strategies across all years
for which data are available (48 years); b) these remarkably bad returns coincided with an
exponential growth in discussion on the WSB subreddit, focused primarily on Gamestop and
a few other stocks with high short interest; c) the events of January 2021 impacted shorting
strategies across the board -- even for stocks substantially larger than Gamestop and not
particularly heavily discussed on the WSB subreddit.
    In terms of data, we combine standard academic data-sets with social media posts col-
lected from the WallstreetBets subreddit (WSB), a subdomain of the Reddit website. (For a
detailed description of the data collection process, see Appendix D.) Reddit is a large online
website featuring specialized communities in which users post messages and other users can
comment on these posts in message-board fashion. Users on the WSB subreddit actively
discuss financial news, investments, and individual securities with one another. We plot the
daily submissions to WSB in Figure 1 on a logarithmic scale. Though the subreddit has
existed for a number of years (it was created in 2012), daily activity on WSB grew exponen-
tially in late 2020, starting around November and continuing to increase through January
2021.
    Concurrently with the rise in this online discussion, the returns of shorting strategies
collapsed. In Figure 2, we plot the returns to an equal-weighted portfolio that "bets against
the shorts." The portfolio is long the top decile of Russell 3000 stocks, ranked by short
interest, and short the broad market. To put the recent returns of shorting strategies in
historical perspective, we plot a histogram of the monthly returns of this strategy for as
long as data are readily available (since 1973). Stock return data are from CRSP and short
interest data are from the SEC. Figure 2 depicts these returns and shows that the January



                                              6
                                                 150000
                                                 100000

                                                   50000




                    WallStreetBets Submissions




                                                       Jan-20         Apr-20         Jul-20        Oct-20        Jan-21



Figure 1: 7-Day Moving Average of Daily Submissions to the WallstreetBets subreddit,
(January 1, 2020 - February 7, 2021). The vertical axis is on a logarithmic scale.




                                                                                          Jan-21
                    Frequency




                                                 -.2            -.1            0             .1             .2            .3
                                                                               Monthly Returns



Figure 2: Histogram of Monthly Returns, 1973-2021. Equal weighted returns on a portfolio
long highly shorted stocks and short the market. The arrow indicates the portfolio return
in the month of January 2021.


2021 return is unprecedented historically (approximately six standard deviations larger than
the historical mean). For details of the portfolio construction, see Appendix D.
   The popular press attributed the unprecedented bad returns on shorting strategies to the
belligerent posts on the WSB subreddit targeting the hedge funds that pursue these shorting

                                                                                    7
                                                                    Retail Investor Trading Volume
                                                                    Mentions of GME on WSB
                                             400                                                                    400




                    Trading Volume ($ mln)
                                             300                                                                    300




                                                                                                                          Submissions
                                             200                                                                    200


                                             100                                                                    100


                                               0                                                                    0

                                                               21




                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                1
                                                                                       02




                                                                                                               02
                                                          20




                                                                                   ,2




                                                                                                           ,2
                                                           ,
                                                        11




                                                                                  19




                                                                                                          25
                                                    n




                                                                               n




                                                                                                      n
                                                   Ja




                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                     Ja
                                                                            Date



Figure 3: Retail Trading Volume in GME (January 7 - January 25, 2021). Hourly trading
volume in GME, measured using the methodology of Boehmer et al. (2020), plotted against
hourly mentions of the GME ticker on the WallStreetBets subreddit.


strategies. There is high-frequency evidence that this was indeed the case for Gamestop. One
advantage of using high-frequency data on WSB mentions is that we are able to identify a
strong "real-time" link between mentions of Gamestop on WSB and retail trading volume,
which we measure in TAQ data with the methodology of Boehmer et al. (2020). Figure 3
plots the two series at hourly frequency. Over the three trading weeks shown, Gamestop
mentions on WSB and retail trading purchases exhibit strikingly strong comovement (0.94
correlation). Figure 17 in Appendix E plots analogous time series of purchase volume and
WSB discussion for other popular tickers over this period.
   While high short-interest stocks had a higher likelihood of being the subject of discussion
on the WSB subreddit, it is also important to note that the vast majority of the discussion
focused on a very limited number of stocks. Our textual analysis enables the creation of high-
frequency time series of ticker-mentions by aggregating mentions within a time interval. As
can be seen in Figure 4, the vast majority of mentions centered around GME. From December
1, 2020 to February 1, 2021, six stocks account for about 80% of the discussion. That number


                                                                              8
                                                     1



                                                     .8




                    Share of Mentions (Cumulative)
                                                                                                           Other
                                                     .6                                                    TLRY
                                                                                                           TSLA
                                                                                                           SPCE
                                                                                                           BBBY
                                                     .4                                                    AMC
                                                                                                           GME

                                                     .2



                                                     0
                                                     02Dec2020 16Dec2020   01Jan2021 15Jan2021 29Jan2021



Figure 4: Cumulative fraction of discussion, (December 1, 2020 ­ January 31, 2021). Relative
shares for ticker s are computed as:
                Mentionsst
     mst =
               s S Mentionss t

"Other" consists of all other tickers mentioned on WSB.


peaks to over 80% in the week of January 18­25, primarily driven by the rise in Gamestop
mentions.
   Despite the focus of the discussion on only a few stocks, the events surrounding Gamestop
had a substantial impact on short positions -- even in stocks that were not particularly
discussed on the WSB subreddit. As two final pieces of motivating evidence, we show that
a) shorting activity exhibited a broad retreat over the two weeks between January 15 and
January 29, and b) losses on short positions extended to the larger universe of highly shorted
stocks, not just those discussed on WSB.
   In Figure 5, we show a bin scatter of short interest on January 15, 2021 against the
subsequent decline in short interest, as well as a quadratic curve of best fit. Whereas short
interest is typically highly persistent at the individual stock level, there was a systematic
decline in short interest over this period. Furthermore, this decline is concentrated among


                                                                                   9
                                             0



                                           -.01




                     Chg. Short Interest
                                           -.02



                                           -.03



                                           -.04
                                                  0   .05               .1               .15   .2
                                                            Short Interest, Jan 15, 2021

                                                             Reduction in Short Interest
                                                             Predicted Reduction



Figure 5: Change in Short Interest, January 15­January 29, 2021. Stocks are binned into
one of twenty groups based on short interest as of January 15, 2021. The average percentage
point reduction in short interest from January 15 to January 29, 2021 for each bin is plotted
on the y-axis. Predicted reduction is computed based on an AR(1) fitted on five-percent
bins of short interest fitted on historical changes in shorting data. The dashed and dotted
lines represent best-fit quadratic curves.


those stocks with high short interest on January 15, 2021. Figure 5 also shows that the
decline in short interest amongst stocks with high short interest is not just a manifestation
of mean reversion. The change in short interest that would be predicted by a simple AR1
model would be associated with much smaller declines in short interest compared to the one
observed in the data. In Figure 6 we put the January 2021 reduction in aggregate short
interest into historical context. We compute the monthly reduction in short interest for
stocks in our betting against the shorts trading strategy and show that the steep decline
in January 2021 was a significant negative outlier. In Appendix E, we present analogous
histograms controlling for the lagged level of short interest and date fixed effects .
   While short sellers certainly lost money as the stock price of GME increased, the histor-
ically unparalleled losses in January 2021 on short selling were the result of broad declines
across the strategy. The returns we show in Figure 2 correspond to monthly returns on



                                                                   10
                                200




                                150




                    Frequency
                                             Jan-21
                                100




                                50




                                 0
                                      -.04   -.02             0                .02   .04
                                                    Change in Short Interest



Figure 6: Monthly Change in Short Interest, January 1973-January 2021. Histogram of
equal weighted reduction in short interest for stocks in the betting against the shorts long
portfolio. Kernel density in black.


an equal-weighted portfolio, of which GME and other reddit stocks comprise only a small
fraction. In the first column of Figure 7, we repeat that histogram, but also show that the
unusual returns hold for: a) a value-weighted portfolio; b) the residuals of a regression of
the equal-weighted "bet against the shorts" strategy regressed on the Fama-French factors
and c) the residuals of a regression of the value-weighted "bet against the shorts" strategy
regressed on the Fama-French factors. Fama-French factor portfolio returns are taken from
Ken French's website. The second column repeats this exercise while explicitly excluding
popular reddit tickers from the set of portfolio holdings. Finally, in the third column we
restrict our sample to S&P 500 constituents in which there is high short interest. Regardless
of the exact choices underlying the construction of the long-short portfolio, January 2021
was among the worst, if not the worst, months for shorting strategies (i.e., the portfolio that
bets against the shorts had an unprecedentedly strong performance).
   The systematic reduction in short interest in January 2021 is not the result of retail
traders' security purchases. In Figure 8, we plot the abnormal retail purchase volume against


                                                         11
                                  Short Interest, Top Decile                          Excl. Popular Reddit Tickers                                     Excl. Small Cap Stocks
                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-21
                                                    Jan-21                                                Jan-21
           Returns (EW)




                           -.2         -.1      0       .1         .2    .3   -.2     -.1         0            .1             .2               -.2     -.1         0           .1       .2




                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-21
                                                             Jan-21                                            Jan-21
           Returns (VW)




                           -.2          -.1         0             .1     .2   -.2      -.1            0             .1             .2    -.2          -.1          0             .1           .2




                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-21
           Residual (EW)                                Jan-21                                                 Jan-21




                                 -.1            0            .1         .2    -.2      -.1            0             .1             .2           -.1           0            .1                .2




                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-21
                                                        Jan-21                                                      Jan-21
           Residual (VW)




                            -.1                0         .1              .2     -.1   -.05      0       .05              .1        .15   -.2          -.1           0            .1           .2
                                             Monthly Returns                                 Monthly Returns                                                 Monthly Returns




Figure 7: Monthly returns, 1973-2021. Histograms show monthly returns to a trading strat-
egy long highly shorted stocks and short the market index. The first column shows returns
to holding the top decile of stocks, sorted on short interest. The second column excludes
popular stocks discussed on Reddit. The third column excludes small market capitalization
stocks. Returns during the month of January 2021 are indicated with an arrow. The first
row shows a histogram of unadjusted returns to the long-short strategy that equal weights
stocks in the portfolio. The second row shows the same for a value-weighted portfolio. The
third row shows the monthly returns to the equal-weighted portfolio, net of exposures to the
3 Fama-French factors. The fourth row shows the adjusted returns for the value-weighted
portfolio.




                                                                                                 12
                                                            10




                    Short Interest Change (Standardized)
                                                             5



                                                             0



                                                           -5



                                                           -10
                                                                 -4        -2               0               2               4
                                                                                Retail Buy Volume (Standardized)

                                                                      Linear Regression ( = -0.07)                 95% CI
                                                                      Popular Reddit Tickers                       All Other Tickers



Figure 8: Cross-sectional Relationship between Retail Volume and Short Interest, January
2021. Abnormal changes in both retail purchase volume and change in short interest were
calculated as standardized z -scores using TAQ and SEC data from January 2015 through
January 2021. Each month, we calculate retail purchase volume and short interest; stan-
dardized values are demeaned and divided by the sample standard deviation on this period.
Tickers which were popular discussion topics on WSB and which are also in the top decile
of short interest are indicated with "+", while all other tickers are indicated with " ".


the abnormal change in short interest for all stocks in the top decile of short interest in
January 2021. We can see that, while there is a negative slope coefficient, it is economically
small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Abnormal changes in both retail purchase
volume and change in short interest were calculated as standardized z -scores using TAQ
and SEC data from January 2015 through January 2021. Each month, we calculate retail
purchase volume and short interest; standardized values are demeaned and divided by the
sample standard deviation over this sample period.
   Taken together, these panels show that the losses on shorting were broad-based and
systematic, extending even to stocks not heavily discussed on reddit as well as to stocks with
much larger market caps than GME. Table 1 makes this point in a regression framework, in
which we show the magnitude of the portfolio return in January 2021 and test whether it is
statistically different from the average return on the strategy over the full 48 year sample.


                                                                                          13
             Highly Shorted Stocks   Excl. Popular Reddit Stocks     Excl. Small Stocks
      rEW            0.270                         0.232                    0.156
                    (6.728)                       (5.773)                  (3.491)
      rV W           0.194                         0.161                    0.183
                    (6.287)                       (5.246)                  (4.716)
      EW             0.207                         0.169                    0.120
                    (8.458)                       (6.894)                  (3.218)
      V W            0.170                         0.136                    0.164
                    (6.686)                       (5.431)                  (4.781)

Table 1: Portfolio returns, January 2021. Monthly return to a long-short portfolio buying
highly shorted stocks and shorting the market index. Here, r denotes raw returns, and 
residuals after controlling for Fama-French 3-factor exposure. EW denotes equal weighted
portfolio returns and V W denotes value weighted portfolio returns. t-statistics on a January
2021 indicator variable are shown in parentheses. Standard errors are the larger of OLS
standard errors and White standard errors.


    In summary, the month of January 2021 was associated with historically bad returns for
short sellers even for stocks that were not the focus of discussion on the WSB subreddit.
This suggests that the events surrounding Gamestop were a game-changer for short sellers
across the board. In the next section we develop a model to better understand why short
selling is a strategy that is likely to be particularly exposed to changes in market fears and
sentiments ­ to the point where any event that makes short sellers fearful could make the
shorting market unravel.



2     Model

2.1     Heterogeneous agents

Time is continuous and infinite for tractability. To obtain a stationary wealth distribu-
tion, we follow G^
                 arleanu and Panageas (2015) and assume that investors continuously arrive
("births") and depart ("deaths") from the economy. Per unit of time a mass  of investors
arrives, and a mass  departs. By the law of large numbers, the population of agents who

                                             14
were born at time s  t is e-(t-s) , while the total population is constant and equal to
 t
 -
        e-(t-s) ds = 1.
       To introduce trade in equities, we assume that investors have heterogeneous beliefs. For
simplicity, a fraction   (0, 1) of investors perceive the correct data-generating process.
We refer to them as rational investors ("R" investors). The remaining fraction are overly
optimistic (we model this optimism shortly), and we refer to these investors as "I " investors.
       For tractability, both investors have logarithmic utilities and their expected discounted
utility from consumption is

                          
                (i)
         Vti  Et             e-(+)(u-t) log ci
                                             u,t du                                                       (1)
                      t



for i  {I, R}, with  a discount factor and ci
                                            u,t the time-u consumption of an agent of type
                                               (i)
i born at time t  u. The notation Et                 reflects the different investor beliefs. Because of
death, the effective discount rate is  +  .
       Before proceeding we comment on some of our assumptions. While it is crucial for our
results that investors have heterogeneous beliefs (so as to introduce a motivation for trading),
the assumption that one group has correct beliefs helps mostly to save notation and can be
easily relaxed. Similarly, the overlapping-generations structure is just a technical device to
ensure that no investor type disappears in the long run.5


2.2       Endowments

In order to support their consumption over their lives, we assume that the arriving investors
at time t are equally endowed with shares of new "trees," which are created at time t. Letting
   5
    In particular, the lack of inter-generational risk sharing, which is a feature of some of these models, is
not driving any of the results in this paper.




                                                       15
s  t denote the time of creation of a tree, we specify its time-t dividends as


      Dt,s = e-(t-s) Dt ,                                                                 (2)


where  > 0 captures depreciation and Dt follows a geometric Brownian motion with mean
µD and volatility D > 0,

      dDt
          = µD dt + D dBt ,                                                               (3)
       Dt

with Bt a standard Brownian motion. Accordingly, the time-t total endowment of this
economy is the sum of the endowment produced by all trees born up to to time t,

        t               t
            Dt,s ds =       e-(t-s) ds × Dt = Dt .
       -                -



The assumption that investors are endowed with shares of newly arriving trees follows
G^
 arleanu et al. (2012) and Panageas (2020). We adopt this assumption rather than in-
troducing labor income (as in G^
                               arleanu and Panageas, 2015 or G^
                                                              arleanu and Panageas,
2020), because ­for the purposes of this paper­ labor income would just complicate matters
without providing any novel insights.


2.3    Beliefs

The irrational investors are optimistic and believe that the aggregate endowment grows at
the rate µI > µD . Irrational investors hold this optimistic view over their life-time and do
not learn ("dogmatic beliefs"). Introducing learning would be a distraction for the purposes
of this paper and therefore we omit it.




                                             16
   Letting

               µI - µD
                       ,
                  D

define ZtI as

                      ( )2
      ZtI  e-          2
                           t+Bt
                                  .                                                                               (4)


The process ZtI constitutes the likelihood ratio between the correct probability measure and
the probability measure perceived by the irrational investors. An implication of Girsanov's
theorem is that we can write an irrational agent's maximization objective as

                                                                                             I
        (I )                                                                               Zu
      Et               e-(+)(u-t) log cI
                                       u,t du = Et                      e-(+)(u-t)                 log cI
                                                                                                        u,t du.   (5)
                t                                                t                         ZtI


2.4    Dynamic budget constraint and short-selling frictions

As in G^
       arleanu et al. (2012) and Panageas (2020) the arriving investors support their life-
time consumption by selling their firms into the stock market. These firms become part
of the market index (the "market portfolio"). Given our assumptions, the flow of arriving
                                                                              Pt,t
companies Pt,t over total market capitalization Pt is                         Pt
                                                                                     = .
   Letting Pt denote aggregate stock market capitalization, the instantaneous return of the
market portfolio is

                                      dPt                               Pt,t                        Dt
      dRt =                                           -                      dt            +           dt
                                      Pt                                Pt                          Pt
                    Change in aggregate market cap.       cost to purchase the new firms         dividend yield
                    dPt + Dt dt
               =                - dt.
                        Pt

   The definition of dRt reflects the fact that existing investors need to pay arriving investors

                                                                 17
                                                                                                                         dPt
to purchase the new firms, and hence the increase in stock market capitalization,                                        Pt
                                                                                                                             ,   needs
to be reduced by the payments that existing investors need to make to new investors, P
                                                                                     Pt
                                                                                       t,t 6
                                                                                          .
       Aside from investing in (positive supply) shares of the market portfolio and (zero net
supply) risk-free assets, we follow Blanchard (1985) in assuming that each investor annuitizes
her entire wealth (since there are no bequest motives) by pledging it to an insurance company
upon death in exchange for receiving an income stream while alive. Assuming a perfectly
competitive insurance market, the income stream is Wt,s per unit of time dt, allowing the
insurance company to break even.
       The main departure from a frictionless market is that if investors want to short stocks,
                                                             i
they have to pay a lending fee, ft . Specifically, letting Wt,s denote the time-t wealth of an
                                                  i
investor of type i who was born at time s  t and wt,s the fraction of wealth invested in
stocks, the dynamic budget constraint is


            i      i                i
                                                                                 ci
                                                                                  t,s
         dWt,s = Wt,s rt +  + nt + wt,s µt - rt + i
                                                  t.s -                             i
                                                                                                i
                                                                                          dt + wt,s   i
                                                                                                    Wt,s t dBt ,                   (6)
                                                                                 Wt,s

where µt and t are the equilibrium expected return and volatility (respectively) of a stock
investment and rt is the equilibrium interest rate.
       The terms nt and i
                        t,s are the two terms that capture the presence of shorting frictions.

   6                                                                   t                                    dPt
       For a more detailed derivation, start from Pt =                 -
                                                                           Pt,s ds. Time-differentiating     Pt ,   using Leibniz's
                   Dt           Dt,s ds
rule, and adding   Pt   =        Pt       we obtain
                            t                                          t
         dPt   Dt           -
                                  (dPt,s + Dt,s ) ds       Pt,t               Pt,s      dPt,s + Dt,s           Pt,t
             +    dt =                                 +        dt =                                    ds +        dt
          Pt   Pt                         Pt               Pt          -      Pt            Pt, s              Pt
                            t
                                           dPt,s + Dt,s         Pt,t            Pt,t
                     =            wt,s                     ds +      dt = dRt +      dt = dRt + dt,
                            -                  Pt, s            Pt              Pt

                                                                                      t           dPt,s +Dt,s dt
where wt,s are market-capitalization weights and the equality dRt =                   -
                                                                                           wt,s       Pt, s         ds follows from
the fact that the market portfolio is a self-financing strategy.




                                                                 18
The term i
         t,s is defined as




      i
      t.s  ft × 1{wt,s
                   i <0
                        } +  yt 1{wt,s
                                   i 0
                                       } ,                                                         (7)


where yt is the fraction of a long portfolio that is loaned out by the representative "brokerage
house" and  is the fraction of the lending fees that accrues to the investor. (We discuss
the optimizing choice of yt by the brokerage house and the term nt shortly.) Equation (7)
                                                 i
reflects that an investor with a short position wt,s < 0 has to pay a multiple ft of the value
                                i      i
of her entire short position, |wt,s |Wt,s , so that the post-fee rate of return per dollar shorted
                                                                                       i
is - (µt - rt + ft ) dt - t dBt . Similarly, an investor holding a positive position, wt,s > 0,
obtains a rate of return equal to (µt - rt +  yt ft ) dt + t dBt on her stock investments.

   Market clearing in the lending market requires


            +       -
      yt W t = W t ,                                                                               (8)


            -                                                           +
where W t is the value of the aggregate short interest and W t that of the aggregate long
position,

                         t                                              t
        -                      i      i                 +                    i     i
      Wt                     |wt,s |Wt,s   i <0 ds, and W
                                         1wt,s            t                 wt,s Wt,s 1wt,s
                                                                                        i >0 ds.

                i{I,R}   -                                     i{I,R}   -



   To model the choice yt as an optimizing choice, in Appendix A we introduce competitive
firms ("brokerage houses") who obtain an investor's long portfolio and choose the fraction
of shares that they supply to the lending market, yt . Placing shares on the lending market
allows brokerage houses to collect lending revenue equal to the prevailing lending fee times
the value of shares loaned. However, lending shares is a costly activity, which requires a
resource ("human capital ") owned by households. Brokerage houses pay a fraction  of the



                                                  19
lending fees to (long-portfolio) investors in order to obtain their permission to place their
shares on the lending market. The remaining 1 -  fraction of lending revenue is used by the
competitive broker to compensate households for providing their human capital. Appendix A
shows that the optimizing choice of yt by the brokerage firms results in an upward-sloping
relation ft = l (yt ) with l (·)  0. We refer to l(yt ) as the supply curve for lendable shares.
   The appendix also shows that compensating the household sector (as renumeration for
services rendered) results in the following expression for nt in equation (6),

               (1 -  ) ft Wt-
      nt =                    .                                                               (9)
                    Wt

Using (8), (9) and aggregating across all households we obain

           -                      -       -
      ft W t     = (1 -  ) ft W t +  ft W t
                                      +
                 = nt Wt +  ft yt W t .                                                     (10)

                                                                            -
   The left hand side of (10) reflects the aggregate lending fees ft W t . The right-hand
side reflects the ultimate division of lending income between the households (who obtain a
fraction 1 -  of lending, irrespective of their portfolio) and long investors, who obtain a
fraction  of the lending income.
   Equation (10) shows that share lending does not result in any loss of aggregate resources:
All payments made by investors with short positions are received either by investors with
long positions or by brokerage firms, who rebate them to the household sector. This shows
the dual role played by brokerage firms. On the one hand, their optimizing choices provide
a micro-foundation for an upward sloping supply curve ft = l(yt ). On the other hand, they
help capture the notion that only a fraction  of lending fees is received by long investors,
with the remainder of the lending fees being rebated to the households in a manner that
does not impact their portfolio choice.

                                               20
2.5       Equilibrium

Equilibrium in the lending market requires that the lending fee be such that the supply of
                        +                +                                                 -
loanabe shares yt W t = l-1 (ft )W t is equal to the demanded short interest, W t (equation
(8)).
    The rest of the equilibrium definition is standard. We require that investors I and R
maximize (1) over ci        i
                   t,s and wt,s subject to the budget constraint (6), and µt , rt , and t are
                                                      t
such that the bond market clears,            i{I,R}   -
                                                            i 1 - wt,s
                                                                   i     i
                                                                       Wt,s ds = 0, the stock market
                    t
clears,    i{I,R}   -
                         i wt,s
                            i     i
                                Wt,s ds = Pt , where Pt is aggregate stock market capitalization, and
                                         t
the goods market clears,        i{I,R}   -
                                              i ci
                                                 t,s ds = Dt . By Walras' Law, market clearing of the

bond market implies stock market clearing and vice versa, and accordingly the asset-market
                                                                               t
clearing requirements can be written equivalently as Wt =             i{I,R}   -
                                                                                    i Wt,s
                                                                                        i
                                                                                           ds = Pt .
    For future reference, we note that the clearing of the stock market requires that yt < 1:

               -            -
            W        Wt
        yt = t+ =        - < 1.
            Wt    Pt + W t


3       Analysis

We analyze the model in two steps. First, we consider a special parametric case that allows
us to characterize all equilibrium quantities in closed form. The special case we analyze
is the "elastic supply" case, that is, the limiting case where the supply of loanable shares
is horizontal at some level l(yt ) =  . (As we explain in Appendix A, this special case
corresponds to a linear specification for the disutility of lending out shares.) In Section 6
we repeat the analysis for increasing functions l(yt ) and show how the key results readily
extend to this more general case.




                                                      21
3.1    Optimal portfolio and consumption

For a log investor the wealth-to-consumption ratio is constant and equal to

      ci
       t,s
         i
           =  + .                                                                          (11)
      Wt,s

Another convenient property of logarithmic utility is that the portfolio is myopic and maxi-
mizes the logarithmic growth rate of an investor's wealth,


       i              i                                     1 i     2
      wt,s = arg max wt,s µt + t 1{i=I } - rt + i
                                                t,s -         w t       ,
                  iwt,s                                     2 t,s

where 1{i=I } is an indicator function taking the value one when i = I and zero otherwise.
Letting


      µi
       t  µt + t 1{i=I }




denote the expected return on the stock as perceived by investor i  {I, R}, the optimal
portfolio is
               
                   µi
                    t -rt +ft
                                   if µi
                                       t - rt + ft < 0
                       t2
               
       i          µi
                   t -rt + ft yt
      wt,s =             2         if µi
                                       t - rt + ft yt > 0
                                                                                           (12)
                       t
               
                          0        otherwise
               


By inspection, the optimal portfolios do not depend on the cohort s, only on the type of
                                                                               R      I
investor i  {I, R} . Therefore, from now on we drop the subscript s and write wt and wt .
   One straightforward implication of equation (12) is that if investor R is actively shorting
  R
(wt < 0) then it must be the case that the excess rate of return per dollar shorted is positive,
                                                                                       R
even after netting out the fee ft . Indeed, evaluating (12) with i = R, assuming that wt <0



                                                     22
and re-arranging leads to -(µt - r - ft ) = -(µR                R 2                 R 2
                                               t - r - ft ) = -wt t > 0. The term -wt t ,

which corresponds to the absolute value of the covariance of the stock's return with the short
seller's portfolio, is the risk compensation to the short seller for taking a short position.


3.2      Equilibrium

It is useful to start by defining the consumption share of each type of agent i  {I, R}:

                    t
                i   -
                         e-(t-s) ci
                                  t,s ds
        xi
         t                               .
                          Dt

                              i
Using (11), the wealth-weight t and the consumption weight xi
                                                            t coincide:


                    t
        i
                i   -
                         e-(t-s) Wt,s
                                   i
                                      ds           ( +  )-1 xi t         i
        t                                =                       -1 i = xt ,                (13)
                          Wt                     i{I,R,S } ( +  )  xt

where Wt is aggregate wealth.
   With these definitions in hand, the goods market and stock market clearing requirements
imply

                           t                                  t
        Dt =                    i ci
                                   t,s ds = ( +  )                 i Wt,s
                                                                       i
                                                                          ds
                i{I,R}    -                          i{I,R}   -


             = ( +  ) Wt = ( +  ) Pt .                                                      (14)


Taking logarithms gives d log Dt = d log Pt and therefore the stock market volatility equals
 = D . The implication that the volatility of the stock is constant and equal to the volatility
of dividend growth is convenient for obtaining closed-form solutions. In Section 5 we discuss
extensions of the model that allow for a time-varying price-dividend ratio and volatility.




                                                         23
   Applying It^
              o's Lemma to (13) and using (6) and (14) yields


       i
      dt = µi      i
            t dt + t dBt ,




where

      i   i  i
      t = t wt - 1 D ,                                                                           (15)

      µi   i       2               i            i    i 2   i
       t = t -µD + D -  + rt -  + wt µt - rt + st - wt D +  .                                    (16)


                                                             i                              i
   The market clearing requirement                 i{I,R}    t = 1 implies that   i{I,R}   dt = 0 and
                            i
therefore          i{I,R}   t = 0 and    i{I,R}   µi
                                                   t = 0. As mentioned earlier, in an effort to obtain

a tractable solution, we assume that the supply of loanable shares is perfectly elastic at the
rate  :

Assumption 1 l(y ) =  > 0.

   We maintain this assumption until Section 6 in order to develop intuition. In Section 6
we generalize the results to an upward-sloping supply function l(·), so that the lending fees
increase with short interest.
   In preparation for the description of the equilibrium, we start with the following definition
and assumptions on the parameters.

Definition 1 Let

                                 
          (1)
                    - D -        D
                             
                                     .                                                           (17)
                      -      D


and

                                                    2
                                                                2                    
      F ( )          D -  (1 +  )   -                   - 4            D + (1 -  )     -        . (18)
                                  D                           1 -  D                 D

                                                        24
   The following assumption collects all the requirements we impose on the parameters.


Assumption 2 Assume that  ,  , D , and  are such that

                          
      (1 +  )       >>                                                                        (19)
                D         D
                    D
       (1)   >              >0                                                                (20)
               (1 +  ) D
                         - 


and F ( ) has a unique root in the interval (0, 1), denoted by  (2) .


   The following proposition asserts that the set of parameters  ,  , D , and  that satisfy
Assumption 2 is non-empty.


Proposition 1 There is an open set of positive values  ,  , D , and  that jointly satisfy
Assumption 2.


   The next proposition describes the equilibria in our economy.


Proposition 2 Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then  (2) >  (1) and the equilibria in
this economy can be described as follows.
         R
   i) If t  ( (2) , 1] there is no short-selling in equilibrium. The equilibrium is unique and
                       µt -rt
the Sharpe ratio t      D
                                is given by

          
           D - 1 -  R                      R              D
                                        if t >1-
          
                   t                                      
      t =                                                           .                         (21)
           D -    R                     if    R
                                              t         (2)
                                                   ( , 1 -    D
                                                                ]
                1-t                                           


          R
   ii) If t  [ (1) ,  (2) ], then there are three equilibria. The first equilibrium continues to be
given by (21) and involves no short-selling. The second and third equilibria involve shorting
and the ratio of shorted-to-loanable shares yt corresponds to the two roots y + and y - of the



                                                   25
quadratic equation

              D                      D     
      y +     R
                -   (1 -  y ) -  -     R
                                         -   (1 -  y )               = 0,                   (22)
              t   D                1 - t   D

which has two real roots y + and y - in the interval (0, 1). The Sharpe ratio in the equilibrium
associated with y + (resp. y - ) is

                                  R               R
                                  t          1 - t
      ±            R
      t =  D - 1 - t  -              1 +  y±    R
                                                         .                                  (23)
                                  D            t

   iii) If t  [0,  (1) ), then the equilibrium is unique and involves shorting. In this case only
the larger of the two roots (y + ) of equation (22) lies in the interval (0, 1), and the unique
equilibrium Sharpe ratio is given by + .
   In all three cases the interest rate is given by


      rt =  +  + µD -  - t D .                                                              (24)


                                                          R
   Additionally, because t , rt , and yt are functions of t , equations (12), (15), and (16)
imply that µR     R                  R                                        R
            t and t are functions of t and hence the equilibrium is Markov in t .


                                                         R
   Figure 9 illustrates Proposition 2. The figure plots  t , the Sharpe ratio, as a function
of the wealth share of rational agents.
                                                                         R
   As a benchmark, the line labeled "Zero shorting cost" depicts D - 1 - t  , i.e., the
Sharpe ratio that would obtain in this economy in the absence of any shorting frictions
( = 0). The curve "No shorting Equil." depicts the Sharpe ratio in the equilibrium that
                                           R
involves no shorting and for the values of t that such an equilibrium exists. Similarly for
the curves "Medium shorting" and "High shorting," which depict equilibria with shorting,
                           R
assuming that the value of t permits such equilibria.
                              R                          D
   The figure shows that when t is larger than 1 -       
                                                             the lines "Zero shorting cost" and

                                               26
                          Figure 9: An illustration of Proposition 2


"No shorting Equil." coincide, reflecting that all investors invest strictly positive amounts in
the stock market in this region.
        R                                 D
   When t becomes smaller than 1 -        
                                              (but larger than  (2) ), the rational investor puts
zero weight on stocks, but the shorting fee  deters her from actively short-selling. Since only
the irrational investor is marginal in financial markets, the lines "Zero shorting cost" and "No
                                              R              D
shorting Equil." deviate from each other when t <1-          
                                                                 . In this region the magnitude
of the lending fee, , does not impact the Sharpe ratio directly, (except for deterring the R
investors from actively shorting).
      R
   If t becomes smaller than  (2) (but larger than  (1) ) the economy exhibits three equi-
libria. In the first equilibrium, there is still no shorting. In the second and third, there is


                                               27
Figure 10: The ratio of shorted-to-loanable shares, yt in the equilibria of model as a function
    R
of t  .


active shorting by the rational investor. Across these three equilibria, the higher the extent
                                                                              R
of shorting, the lower the Sharpe ratio. This is illustrated in Figure 10. If t becomes
smaller than  (1) , then the equilibrium becomes unique and involves shorting.7
       Several features of Figure 9 are noteworthy. First, the Sharpe ratio is always lower than
it would be in the absence of lending fees, even if investor R is not actively shorting shares,
but is only investing in bonds.
       Second, the presence of a region where multiple equilibria co-exist is not a very common
feature of asset pricing models, especially when there is only one good and one positive-
   7                                                                                  R
    To see why an equilibrium without shorting can no longer be an equilibrium when t   <  (1) , assume
otherwise. Indeed assume that the R investor holds zero stocks and is not marginal in the stock market
 wtR
     = 0 . The market clearing requirement, t  R R
                                                w t + 1 - t  R
                                                               wtI
                                                                   = 1, along with wtI
                                                                                        =   t +
                                                                                              D
                                                                                                 implies
                                       D
that the Sharpe ratio would be t = 1-R -  . Under this supposition, it would therefore be the case
                                           t

that µt - r +  = D t +       D  = D 1-   D
                                          t R -  + D
                                                     
                                                          < 0, where the inequality follows from t R
                                                                                                     <  (1) .
Because µt -r + < 0, equation (12) implies that the R investor would want to short the market, contradicting
the assumption that she is optimally holding zero stocks.


                                                     28
supply asset. To better understand the source of this multiplicity, it is useful to provide a
concise derivation of the key statements in Proposition 1.
                                                                                    R
   Specifically, suppose that we consider equilibria that involve active shorting (wt < 0).
In such equilibria, the optimal portfolio holdings can be expressed as

                     
       R
               t +   D
      wt   =                                                                                (25)
                 D
                         
       I
               t +  +    D
                            yt
      wt   =                     ,                                                          (26)
                     D

while asset market clearing requires


      R R        R  R
      t wt + 1 - t wt = 1.                                                                  (27)


   Combining equations (25)­(27) leads to

                                     R               R
                  R                  t          1 - t
      t = D - 1 - t -                   1 +  yt    R
                                                         ,                                  (28)
                                     D            t

which is equation (23) of Proposition 1. Note that the partial derivative of t with respect
to yt is negative. This is intuitive: A higher value of yt increases the effective rate of return
to (long-portfolio) stock holders (I investors). The increased appetite by I investors to hold
long positions lowers the Sharpe ratio. (Phrased differently, the absolute value of the Sharpe
                                                          R
ratio increases, since the Sharpe ratio is negative when wt < 0.)
   This lowering of the Sharpe ratio strengthens the short-sellers' appetite to borrow the
stock and short it. In equilibrium, the increased shorting demand raises the ratio of shorted-
to-loanable shares, yt , increasing the effective return to I investors, which further reduces
the Sharpe ratio, etc.
   These self-reinforcing effects are the root cause of the multiple equilibria. The easiest



                                                29
way to see this is by completing the computation of the Sharpe ratio, which requires us to
determine the value of yt that clears the lending market. Indeed, in any equilibrium involving
 R          I
wt < 0 and wt > 0 we must have

             Wt-   -wtR
                        WtR      R
                                wt     tR
     yt =        =          = -    ×        .                                             (29)
             Wt+     I
                    wt WtI       I
                                wt   1 - tR



                                            R
                                           wt
   Using (25) to compute the ratio          I
                                           wt
                                                gives

                         
                  t +   D               tR
     yt = -                       ×        R
              t +    I +  D
                             yt       1 - t
                 R                (1-t
                                     R 
                                       )
             1 - t  - D -             D
                                            (1 -  yt )         tR
        =                         R                      ×        R
                                                                    ,                     (30)
                     R
                 D + t -
                                  t
                                       (1 -  yt )            1 - t
                                  D


where the last line follows from (28) after collecting terms and simplifying. Rearranging (30)
gives the quadratic equation (22), which is the key equation of Proposition 1. The rest of
the proposition is devoted to studying this quadratic equation and confirming that its roots
correspond to valid equilibria.
   While equation (30) is particularly simple to analyze, the multiplicity of equilibria does
not hinge on assuming that the supply curve l (yt ) is constant at the level  , as we show in
Section 6.
   The intuition behind the multiplicity of equilibria is contained in equation (30). For a
given wealth distribution and belief discrepancy, a higher yt makes long investors content
with holding the same positive position at a lower equilibrium Sharpe ratio. This negative
relation between the Sharpe ratio and yt is responsible for equilibrium multiplicity: For in-
stance, if something prompts rational investors to abandon their short positions, the resulting
reduction in lending income requires a higher Sharpe ratio to clear the market. But this rise
in the Sharpe ratio reinforces the incentive of short sellers to abandon their positions, which



                                                    30
lowers lending income, and further raises the Sharpe ratio, etc., until the market settles on
a new equilibrium with (possibly zero) short interest.



4     Properties of the Equilibria

In Section 4.1 we show that equilibria with high shorting are beneficial for R investors. This
implies that the worst possible outcome for R investors is for markets to coordinate on the
equilibrium that deters them from short selling. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 discuss some broader
implications of the model that are unrelated to coordination, but help further illustrate the
model's key intuitions. Specifically, we perform comparative statics with respect to changes
in  , which capture shifts in the supply of loanable shares. Section 4.2 shows how marginal
changes in the supply curve can lead to discontinuous drops in short interest. Section 4.3
shows that exogenous shifts in the supply of loanable shares may impact lending fees and
short interest but have a muted impact on equilibrium expected returns.


4.1     Dynamics of the wealth shares

The three equilibria we identified above have different implications for the dynamics of the
wealth shares of R investors. The next proposition shows that both the drift rate µR R
                                                                                   t t

of the wealth share of type R investors and the expected logarithmic growth rate of their
wealth are higher in equilibria that feature higher short interest yt .

                                                        R
Proposition 3 For a fixed wealth share of the R-agents, t , consider two equilibria A and
B with the following properties:

        R
    1. wt  0 in both equilibria A and B .

        B    A
    2. yt > yt (and accordingly B   A
                                t < t ).




                                               31
Figure 11: An illustration of Proposition 3. The figure depicts the stationary distribution of
 R
t  for the "high shorting" and the "no shorting" equilibrium of Figure 9.


   Then the drift of investor R's wealth share, µR R
                                                 t t , satisfies




     µB,R
      t
          R
          t > µA,R
               t
                   R
                   t ,


where µA,R
       t
           R
           t is the drift of investor R's wealth in equilibrium A and µB,R
                                                                       t
                                                                           R
                                                                           t is the
respective drift in equilibrium B.
   In addition, the drift of the logarithmic growth rate of investor R, defined as


      R            R                     1 R       2
     gt  rt + max wt (t D +  ) -           w D         - ( +  ) ,                        (31)
                wR 0                     2 t

                                                         B,R R    A,R R
is higher in equilibrium B than in equilibrium A, i.e., gt   t > gt   t .


   Figure 11 provides an illustration of Proposition 3. The figure shows the stationary


                                             32
                R                                                           R
distribution of t in the equilibrium associated with no shorting for values t  ( (1) ,  (2) )
and in the equilibrium associated with the highest shorting, y + t
                                                                 R       R
                                                                   , for t  ( (1) ,  (2) ).
                                          R
The figure shows that the distribution of t has a higher stationary mean in the second
equilibrium rather than in the first equilibrium. This is consistent with Proposition 3,
which asserts a higher (logarithmic) growth rate for the wealth of R investors in the second
equilibrium.
                                                                 R
   The comparatively higher probability mass of larger values of t in the equilibrium that
features shorting implies that there are two competing effects on the stationary mean of the
                                               R
Sharpe ratio t . On the one hand ­ for a fixed t ­ the Sharpe ratio is lower in equilibria
                                                                               R
featuring comparatively higher short selling. On the other hand, low values of t become
less likely in equilibria with comparatively more shorting activity. The first effect tends
to lower the stationary mean of the Sharpe ratio in equilibria with comparatively higher
shorting, the second effect tends to raise it. The overall effect on the stationary value of the
Sharpe ratio is ambiguous. We revisit this issue in section 5, when we discuss extensions of
the model that allow the price-dividend ratio to differ across equilibria and across different
          R
values of t .


4.2    The instability of short interest

Besides the sensitivity that emanates from demand-side coordination, our model also im-
plies that small shifts in the supply of loanable shares can lead to discontinuous changes in
equilibrium short interest.

Lemma 1

      d (2)
            < 0.
       d

                                                                  R
   Lemma 1 states that an increase in  lowers the range of values t that are associated

                                              33
                                                        B
                                                    A




       Figure 12: Points A and B are no longer equilibrium points when  increases.


with multiple equilibria. By implication, if, say, a given company can take some action to
to induce an upward shift in the supply curve for its loanable shares (i.e., an increase in  ),
                                                                                        R
this can lead to a discontinuous change of short interest from a positive value to 0 if t is
close to  (2) .
    Figure 12 illustrates the effects of a change in  (an upward shift in the supply for loanable
                                  R
shares) on the equilibrium values t . The figure shows that points such as A and B , which
used to correspond to equilibria associated with positive short interest stop being eqilibura
if  increases, even marginally.




                                               34
4.3    The ambiguous relation between Sharpe ratio and short in-

       terest

It would seem natural to expect that an increase in the supply of loanable shares (a downward
shift of the loan supply curve) should raise the Sharpe ratio, since this should incentivize
short sellers to short the stock and thus lower the absolute value of the (negative) Sharpe
ratio. Remarkably, this is not the case in this model. Depending on the equilibrium, there is
no unambiguous relation between the Sharpe ratio and shorting costs. This may be one of
the reasons why the empirical literature finds that randomized increases in loanable shares
affect short interest and lending rates but not excess returns.
   The following proposition illustrates the novel implications of the model by focusing on
                  R
the case of small t .

Proposition 4 Assume that the equilibrium involves a positive amount of short interest. In
the equilibrium associated with y + (which is the unique equilibrium if t
                                                                        R
                                                                          <  (1) ), it holds
                             R
that, for sufficiently small t ,

      d
        > 0.                                                                                (32)
      d

In the equilibrium associated with y - , for any value of t
                                                          R
                                                            ,

      d
        < 0.                                                                                (33)
      d

   Equation (32) in Proposition 4 appears counterintuitive. The explanation is that decreas-
ing  has two opposing effects. Inspection of equation (28) shows that a decline in  has the
direct effect of raising t ; however, since yt is endogenous, the decline in  also increases yt ,
which -- for a given  -- has the effect of lowering t . Therefore, it is possible that a decline
in  (say, because of an exogenous change in the cost of supplying shares) lowers the fee ft

                                               35
and increases the short interest yt , but leaves the expected return on the stock unchanged.
This is consistent with the empirical findings of Kaplan et al. (2013).
                                                                                 R
        Figure 12 illustrates that an increase in  could either raise or lower t t , depending
                                  R
on the equilibrium and on whether t is large or small.



5         Multiple Risky Assets and Time-Varying Price-Dividend

          Ratio

In the baseline model, the price-dividend ratio and the volatility of the stock market are
both constant. This is an implication of a) logarithmic utility over intermediate consumption
(which implies a constant wealth-to-consumption ratio) and b) a single asset in positive net
supply. As is typical of models with similar setups, fluctuations in the interest rate offset
the fluctuations of the risk premium, thus rendering the overall discount rate -- and by
implication the price-dividend ratio8 -- constant.
        We next present a version of the model that features multiple risky assets and a time-
varying price-dividend ratio. After extending Proposition 2 to allow for multiple risky assets
-- a result of independent interest -- we consider a limiting case that permits simple compu-
tations. Specifically, we study the limit in which there is a "small" stock subject to shorting
costs and a "large" stock that can be shorted costlessly. In that limit, only the endowment
of the large stock matters for the interest rate and thus the price-dividend ratio of the small
stock is time-varying and reflects variations in its risk premium.


5.1         Multiple risky assets

In this section we introduce an additional Lucas tree (stock "2") to our baseline model, which
is not subject to any trading frictions, and comprises a potentially large part of the total
    8
        Note also that the expected dividend growth is constant.

                                                       36
market capitalization. We continue to assume that borrowing stock 1, which now comprises
only (a possibly small) part of the market capitalization, requires lending fees, as in the
baseline model.
      We make one more convenient and realistic assumption. Specifically, while all investors
hold interior portfolios in stock 2 and the risk-free asset, only a fraction of investors pays any
"attention" to stock 1. The remaining fraction of investors simply optimize their portfolio
over the risk-free asset and stock 2 and assign zero weight to stock 1. This assumption is in
the spirit of Robert Merton's "limited recognition hypothesis," the idea that only a fraction
of investors actively trade in some smaller stocks.
      Because stock 1 is no longer the only positive-supply asset, consumption-market clearing
no longer implies a constant price-to-dividend ratio for stock 1. This prevents a full analytical
solution of the model. However, we can still provide an analytic "CAPM-style" formula,9
which constitutes a natural extension of the results of Proposition 2.
      To start, we assume that equilibrium returns on stocks 1 and 2 follow diffusion processes
of the form


        dR1,t = µ1,t dt + 1,t dB1,t + bt 2,t dB2,t                                           (34)

        dR2,t = µ2,t dt + 2,t dB2,t ,                                                        (35)


where B1,t and B2,t are independent Brownian motions, µ1,t and µ2,t are the expected excess
returns of the two stocks, and
                      
           1,t bt 2,t 
        t             
            0   2,t
  9
    By "CAPM-style" formula we mean that the formula provides a connection between expected excess
returns and the covariance matrix of returns.




                                                     37
is a matrix capturing the loadings of the two stocks to the two Brownian motions. We
assume that investors I believe that Brownian motion 1 follows the dynamics10 dB1,t + dt,
while no investor has any belief distortions pertaining to Brownian motion 2. We let mj,t
for j  {1, 2} denote the market capitalization of the two stocks.
       Letting t denote the wealth share of the investors who actively participate in the market
for stock 1, the market clearing condition is
                                                        
                      i
                      t -               0 
         t              wit + (1 - t )     = mt ,                                                                (36)
                      t                w
             i{I,R}                               2,t



                      µ2,t -rt
where w2,t =            22           is the optimal portfolio holdings of stock 2 by investors who don't
                           ,t

participate in stock 1, and -
                            wit is the vector of portfolio holdings of an investor i  {I, R}

that is active in the market for stock 1. The market clearning condition (36) leads to the
following result.

                                             (µ1,t -r)-bt (µ2,t -r)
Proposition 5 Define 1,t =                            1,t
                                                                      as the Sharpe ratio of a portfolio that invests
                                                                                   m1,t            i
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                              i
1 unit in asset 1 and shorts bt units of asset 2. Let m1,t                          t
                                                                                          and t    t
                                                                                                       for i  {I, R}.
       Then, in an equilibrium with shorting in asset 1 (yt > 0), yt corresponds to the root(s)
y ± of the quadratic equation

                          m1,t                          m1,t       
         0 = yt  +              -
                           R 1,t
                                      (1 -  yt ) -  -          -
                                                             R 1,t
                                                                       (1 -  yt )                                (37)
                          t       1,t                 1 - t        1,t
  10
    More formally, the Radon-Nikodym derivative of the true probability measure to the subjective one is
given by
                  2
          I
         Zt  e-   2   t+B1,t
                                 .




                                                                 38
   that lie(s) in the interval [0, 1), and the Sharpe ratio is given by

                                                               R
                          R    R                          1 - t    ±
     1,t = m1,t 1,t - 1 - t  - t                    1+       R
                                                                  yt .                                         (38)
                                           1,t              t

                                                                                     R
   Similarly, in an equilibrium without shorting in stock 1, we have 1,t = 1,t - 1 - t 
                                                                             1,t
if investor R holds an interior position in asset 1 and 1,t =               1-t R   -  otherwise.
   The excess return to asset 2 is given by the conventional CAPM relationship


     µ2,t - rt = [0, 1] t t mt .                                                                               (39)


   Equations (38) and (37) specialize to (23) and (22), respectively, when m1,t = 1, 1,t = D ,
    R   R
and t = t . In this sense, Proposition 5 is a natural extension of Proposition 2, except
that the Sharpe ratio in Proposition 5 pertains to a portfolio that invests one dollar in stock
1 and shorts bt units of asset 2 (so as to "hedge out" the exposure of the portfolio to the
second Brownian shock).
   As in Proposition 2, the excess return on asset 1 can be decomposed into a risk premium,
a (wealth-weighted) belief distortion, and a component that reflects the impact of shorting
costs. Specifically, equation (38) implies that in an equilibrium with active shorting, the
expected return of stock 1 is


                                        2                R                     R       R
     µ1,t - rt = bt (µ2,t - rt ) + m1,t 1 ,t -       1 - t 1,t              -  t + 1 - t  yt . (40)
                      risk compensation          wealth-weighted optimism           impact of shorting costs



   All else equal, a higher level of yt lowers µ1,t - r, consistent with the empirical finding
that short interest negatively predicts returns. Also, higher values of the lending fee  lower
equilibrium expected excess returns.




                                                    39
5.2         A limiting economy with a small and a large stock

Next we consider a limiting, multi-stock economy, where trees of type 1 are small compared
to trees of type 2 and also the fraction of investors that pay attention to trees of type 1 is
small.
       Specifically, suppose that there are two types of trees, namely "small" trees (type-1
trees) and "large" trees (type-2 trees). Type-2 trees have dividends similar to the baseline
model, namely D2,t,s = 2 2 D2,t e-2 (t-s) , where 2 > 0, 2 > 0, and D2,t follows a geometric
                           dD2,t
Brownian motion,            D2,t
                                   = µ2,D dt + 2,D dB2,t . Type-1 trees produce dividends


         D1,t,s = 1 1 D2,s e-1 (t-s)+1,D (B1,t -B1,s ) ,


with 1 > 0 and 1 > 0. With the above dividend specifications, the dividend share of type-1
trees is

                     t
         D1,t        -
                          D1,t,s ds
              =      t                = 1 zt ,                                                    (41)
         D2,t             D2,t,s ds
                     -


where

                     t
                            D2,s
         zt  1                        e-1 (t-s)+1,D (B1,t -B1,s ) ds                              (42)
                     -      D2,t

is a stationary process.
       The above assumptions imply that the dividend shares of type-1 and type-2 trees are
stationary fractions of aggregate consumption D1,t + D2,t , while the dividends of a given tree
belonging to a fixed cohort s follow a geometric Brownian motion.11 Moreover, when type-1
  11
       Ito's Lemma implies that
                         2
         dD1,t,s         1,D                               dD2,t,s
                 =           - 1      dt + 1,D dB1,t and           = (µ2,D - 2 ) dt + 2,D dB2,t
          D1,t,s         2                                  D2,t,s



                                                             40
                                              1
trees are small compared to type-2 trees      2
                                                   0 , aggregate consumption is approximately
equal to the aggregate dividends of the type-2 trees, and therefore aggregate consumption
follows a geometric Brownian motion. The implication is that the interest rate and the risk
                                                                     1
premium for type-2 trees both converge to constants as the ratio     2
                                                                          0 goes to zero.
   In Appendix B we also specify entry and exit by investors into the market for stock 1
to ensure that a) per unit of time dt a mass  i dt arrives in each group i  {I, R} and b)
the aggregate wealth share of investors who pay attention to stock 1 at each point in time
is proportional to the stock market capitalization of stock 1 (mt = m is constant). We refer
to that appendix for the precise mathematical details. Here we simply note that with these
specifications, the price-dividend ratio of stock 1 is the solution to an ordinary differential
equation, as the next proposition shows.

                                         i
Proposition 6 Using the expressions for wt , 1,t (with b = 0) and yt from Proposition 5,
                  i
the wealth shares t follow the diffusion process


          i
        d t = µi      i
               t dt + t dB1,t ,                                                             (43)


where

                                                             yt m
        µi   i
         t = t
                       i
                      w1                           i
                         ,t - m 1,t (t - 1,t m) + w1,t  +
                                                                                    i
                                                                    (1 -  ) +   i - t ,
                                                            1 - yt
        i   i  i
        t = t w1 ,t - m 1,t ,


                                                                      p (t
                                                                         R
                                                                           )     R
where 1,t is the volatility of the stock 1 and is given by 1,t =         p(t
                                                                                 t + D , and the
                                                                           R
                                                                             )
                            R
price-dividend ratio pt = p(t ) is the solution of the ordinary differential equation

        1  2p   R      2       p
              2 t          +    R
                                  µR   R
                                   t + t - 1,t D - p × (r + 1 + 1,t D,1 ) + 1 = 0.          (44)
        2 ( )
            R                  




                                                  41
       The expressions for µi     i
                            t and t in Proposition 6 coincide with (16) and (15) when m = 1

and 1,t = D .12 Moreover, with the dividend growth of type-1 and type-2 stocks being
independent, so are their stock-price processes (in the limit where stock-1 becomes small)
                              i
and the expressions for yt , w1 ,t , and 1,t in Proposition 6 (when m = 1 and 1,t = D )

coincide with the respective expressions of the baseline model. In short, if one dropped
the goods-market clearing requirement from the baseline model and instead postulated a
constant interest rate, the resulting expression for the price-to-dividend ratio would be given
by (44) (with m = 1).
       Equation (44) is a non-linear ordinary differential equation, which has to be solved nu-
merically.13 Figure 13 presents the solution of this ordinary differential equation. For this
numerical exercise we assume that the volatility of dividends is 1,D = 12%. The disagree-
ment is  = 0.5. To translate this disagreement into more meaningful units, it is useful to
perform the following back-of-the envelope exercise: If a type-I agent were to behave like an
econometrician and reject her null hypothesis that  = 0.5 in favor of the hypothesis that
                                                                                         2
                                                                                  1.65
 = 0, based on empirical observations, it would take on average                    
                                                                                              11 years to reject
the hypothesis that  = 0.5 (in favor of  = 0) at the 95% level.14 The values of  and 
                                                                R
control the stationary mean and the degree of mean reversion of t . We choose  = 0.1
to focus on a market where rational investors are the minority and consider  = 0.2 in our
  12
      To see this substitute the expression for the equilibrium interest rate (24) to (16) .
  13
      The reason why (44) is a non-linear (rather than linear) ordinary differential equation is that µi         i
                                                                                                             t , t
                                                  R           R
depend on 1,t , which in turn depends on p(t        ) and p (t  ). For this reason we use an iterative numerical
procedure to solve (44). We start with t = 1,D as an "initial guess". We then exploit the fact that for
                          R                                           R            R
a given function 1,t (t     ), (44) is a linear ODE to compute p(t      ) and p (t   ). With these estimates we
compute a new 1,t and iterate to convergence.
   14
      In the model it is known that the Brownian motion B1,t has a volatility equal to one, but agent I thinks
it has a drift of  , when the true drift is zero. In a normal experiment where the true mean is zero and the
variance is one (and known), the empirical mean after observing T years of data is normally distributed with
a mean of zero and a standard deviation equal to T -0.5 . Suppose    that someone adopts a rule of rejecting the
null that  = 0.5 in favor of the alternative that  = 0 whenever T (0.5 - X ) > 1.65 to reflect the one-sided
nature of the hypothesis. Under    the truth, the expected value of E (X  ) is zero, and therefore the expected
value of T (0.5 - X ) is just 0.5 T . This quantity exceeds 1.65 when T > 10..65   5 . For the above calculations
it is immaterial whether the data are observed discretely or continuously (see, e.g., Merton (1980).)




                                                       42
baseline. We also assume that the sum of interest rate and depreciation r + 1 for stock
1 is 0.08. (The appendix presents results for several different combinations of  and 1 .)15
We choose a value of  = 0.8 based on the industry practice of rebating about 80% to the
mutual funds or ETFs that provide their shares for lending.16 Finally, we consider several
values of the lending fee  . For our baseline case, we choose a large value ( = D = 0.06)
because a) we want to focus on stocks that are "on special" and, more importantly, b) this
choice implies 1 = 0, and thus, if there exists an equilibrium with positive shorting (for a
      R
given t ), it always co-exists with an equilibrium without shorting.
                                                                   R
       Figure 13 depicts the price-dividend ratio as a function of t . The line "shorting" depicts
the log-pd ratio under the assumption that the market always coordinates on the equilibrium
with the highest value of yt , while the "no shorting" line depicts the log-price dividend ratio
assuming that the market always coordinates on the equilibrium with the lowest value of yt
(which is zero when  = D  .). The grey area in the left plot depicts the 99% interval of
          R
values of t in the stationary distribution. The right plot depicts the difference between the
                                                                                    R
"shorting" and the "no shorting" log-pd ratio, as well as the stationary density of t . The
vertical line labeled depicts  (2) , i.e., the highest value of t
                                                                R
                                                                  above which the equilibrium
value of yt is zero and the equilibrium is unique.
       As is evident from the figure, the price-dividend ratio in the no-shorting equilibrium is
higher than the price-dividend ratio in the shorting equilibrium. This is remarkable, because
               R
-- for a fixed t -- the Sharpe ratio in the no-shorting equilibrium is higher than in the
equilibrium that features shorting. The reason is that in the equilibrium with shorting the
        R                                                                    R
process t tends to grow faster when the shorting market is active (i.e, when t is low).
Quantitatively, the gap between the shorting and the no-shorting equilibrium is non-trivial.
  15
     Note that in the baseline model  and 1 had to be the same number. With multiple stocks,  and 1
                                                                        R
can be separated, with  determining the speed of mean reversion in t      , and 1 capturing the depreciation
of stocks of type 1.
  16
     Source: "Unlocking the potential of your portfolios: iShares Security Lending." Blackrock, 2021. Avail-
able at https://www.ishares.com.



                                                    43
Figure 13: This figure repeats the quantitative exercise of Figure 13 using the same param-
eters (D,1 = 0.12,  = 0.5,  = 0.8,  = 0.2,  = 0.1,  = D,1 ). We choose 1 so that
r + 1 = 0.08. Figure 18 in the appendix reports results for various alternative specifications.


In our base calibration the price jumps by approximately 13% (when there is a permanent
and unexpected transition to the no-shorting equilibrium).
    Figure 14 illustrates another property of the model, namely that the stock price is not
                                                                                  R
monotone in the level of the shorting fee  . The figure shows that, for any fixed t , there
is no monotone relation between the stock price and the level of the fee. This observation is
not surprising in light of the discussion in Section 4.3.



6     General supply curve for shorting

The baseline version of the model assumes an elastic supply of loanable shares, so that the
lending fee is constant. The results generalize readily to the case where the supply of loanable

                                              44
                      Figure 14: Log price-dividend ratio for various levels of  .


shares is increasing in yt so that ft = l (yt ), where l (yt ) > 0.
   We obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 7 Consider the model of Section 2, but without Assumption 1. Define


      z (yt )  ft (1 -  yt ) = l (yt ) (1 -  yt ) .                                                        (45)


                       D                                   
   Assume that        1-tR   -  < 0 and that there exists yt  (0, 1) such that

                    D        1  
               -   1-t R -  z (yt )
                             D
      yt   =        D      1   
                                    ,                                                                      (46)
                  +  R -  z (yt )
                     t     D



            D                                               D
and  -     1-tR   -   1
                      D
                        z   (y  ) > 0. Moreover, if  -     1-tR   -   1
                                                                      D
                                                                        z   (0) < 0, then there exist at least
                   (j )                                                      D         1
two values of yt , j = {1, 2} satisfying both (46) and  -                   1-tR   -   D
                                                                                         z   y (i) > 0 and three
equilibria co-exist. In the first equilibrium, the R investor holds a zero portfolio, and the
                             D
Sharpe ratio is t =         1-tR   -  . There also exist another two equilibria, with the R investors

                                                      45
                        1




                      0.8




                      0.6




                      0.4




                      0.2




                        0




                      -0.2
                             0       0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1




                                 Figure 15: An illustration of Proposition 7.


holding negative portfolios, and the Sharpe ratio given by

                                        R                                   R
                                 R      t    (j )               (j ) 1   - t
      t = D - 1 -                t    -   l yt           1+    yt         R
                                                                              .                          (47)
                                        D                                t

                                                                                                  (j )
In all equilibria the interest rate is given by (24), and the lending fee is given by l yt                .


Remark 8 In the special case l (yt ) = , equations (46) and (47) become identical to (22)
and (23), respectively.


   Figure 15 illustrates Proposition 7. For this particular numerical example we choose
                  3
l (yt ) =  (1 + 2yt ), keeping all parameters (including  ) as in Figure 9. The figure plots the
left hand side (dotted line) of equation (46) and the right hand side (solid line). Points B
and C correspond to the two fixed points. Point A in the figure illustrates the assumption
     D         1
-   1-tR   -   D
                 z   (0) < 0. This inequality implies that there is a third equilibrium in which

                                                             46
R investors are deterred by the presence of the lending fee and the shorting market is
inactive. The fees in the three equilibria differ, with the lending fee being lowest (l (0) =  )
in equilibrium A, in which the shorting market is inactive, and highest in equilibrium C , in
which y is highest.



7     Conclusion

The main finding of this paper is that shorting can be fickle. We utilized a time-honored
device in economic theory, namely the presence of multiple equilibria to illustrate this point.
    In the model shorting exhibits "run-type" patters. Any event that makes some short
sellers abandon their short positions ignites a self-propagating circle: Less shorting also
implies less lending income for investors with long positions, who now need to be compensated
with a higher Sharpe ratio, which in turn further prompts short sellers to abandon their
strategies. (Going in the opposite direction, high shorting activity acts as a subsidy to long
positions, thus lowering the equilibrium Sharpe ratio and attracting further short selling).
Thus, for the same fundamentals, there can be multiple equilibria -- a manifestation of the
self-reinforcing nature of shorting decisions.
    The paper can consequently provide an explanation of how events affecting a single
stock of small market capitalization can spiral quickly across many shorting strategies --
even among stocks that did not see an unusual increase in retail trading purchases. The
model also implies that (possibly small) shifts in the supply of loanable shares can have a
disproportionately large impact on the level of short interest and the Sharpe ratio, by shifting
the equilibrium.
    While motivated by recent events, the analysis of the paper has broader implications.
For instance, the model helps explains why shifts in the supply of loanable shares need not
have a clear impact on the equilibrium Sharpe ratio, or why higher short interest and higher


                                                 47
lending fees negatively predict subsequent returns.




                                             48
References

Asquith, Paul, Parag A Pathak, and Jay R Ritter, "Short interest, institutional
  ownership, and stock returns," Journal of Financial Economics, 2005, 78 (2), 243­276.

Banerjee, Snehal and Jeremy J. Graveline, "The Cost of Short-Selling Liquid Securi-
  ties," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (2), 637­664.

Baumgartner, Jason, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and
  Jeremy Blackburn, "The Pushshift Reddit Dataset," 2020.

Benhabib, Jess and Roger Farmer, "Indeterminacy and sunspots in macroeconomics,"
  in J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, Part A 1999,
  chapter 06, pp. 387­448.

Blanchard, Olivier J., "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 1985, 93 (2), 223­247.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles M Jones, and Xiaoyan Zhang, "Which shorts are
  informed?," The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (2), 491­527.

  ,   ,   , and Xinran Zhang, "Tracking retail investor activity," Journal of Finance,
  Forthcoming, 2020.

Cohen, Lauren, Karl B Diether, and Christopher J Malloy, "Supply and demand
  shifts in the shorting market," The Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (5), 2061­2096.

Dechow, Patricia M, Amy P Hutton, Lisa Meulbroek, and Richard G Sloan,
  "Short-sellers, fundamental analysis, and stock returns," Journal of financial Economics,
  2001, 61 (1), 77­106.




                                            49
Desai, Hemang, Kevin Ramesh, S Ramu Thiagarajan, and Bala V Balachandran,
  "An investigation of the informational role of short interest in the Nasdaq market," The
  Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (5), 2263­2287.

Diether, Karl B, Kuan-Hui Lee, and Ingrid M Werner, "Short-sale strategies and
  return predictability," The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (2), 575­607.

Drechsler, Itamar and Qingyi Freda Drechsler, "The shorting premium and asset
  pricing anomalies," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae G^
                          arleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Securities lending,
  shorting, and pricing," Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 66 (2-3), 307­339.

Dumas, Bernard, "Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market," Review of
  Financial Studies, 1989 1989, 2 (2), 157­188.

D'Avolio, Gene, "The market for borrowing stock," Journal of Financial Economics, 2002,
  66 (2), 271­306. Limits on Arbitrage.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae and Stavros Panageas, "Young, old, conservative, and bold: The im-
  plications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing," Journal of Political Economy,
  2015, 123 (3), 670­685.

   and     , "What to expect when everyone is expecting: Self-fulfilling expectations and
  asset-pricing puzzles," Journal of Financial Economics, 2021, 140 (1), 54­73.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae B and Stavros Panageas, "Heterogeneity and asset prices: A differ-
  ent approach," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae, Leonid Kogan, and Stavros Panageas, "Displacement risk and
  asset returns," Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105 (3), 491­510.


                                              50
Geczy, Christopher C., David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed, "Stocks are special
  too: an analysis of the equity lending market," Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 66
  (2), 241­269. Limits on Arbitrage.

Harrison, J Michael and David M Kreps, "Speculative investor behavior in a stock
  market with heterogeneous expectations," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1978, 92
  (2), 323­336.

Jones, Charles M and Owen A Lamont, "Short-sale constraints and stock returns,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 66 (2-3), 207­239.

Kaplan, Steven N, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Berk A Sensoy, "The effects of stock
  lending on security prices: An experiment," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (5), 1891­
  1936.

Lamont, Owen A, "Go down fighting: Short sellers vs. firms," The Review of Asset Pricing
  Studies, 2012, 2 (1), 1­30.

   and Jeremy C Stein, "Aggregate short interest and market valuations," American
  Economic Review, 2004, 94 (2), 29­32.

Merton, Robert C., "On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
  investigation," Journal of Financial Economics, 1980, 8 (4), 323­361.

Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres,
  Matthew K Gray, Joseph P Pickett, Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig,
  Jon Orwant et al., "Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books,"
  science, 2011, 331 (6014), 176­182.

Miller, Edward M, "Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion," The Journal of finance,
  1977, 32 (4), 1151­1168.

                                            51
Panageas, Stavros, "The implications of heterogeneity and inequality for asset pricing,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Vayanos, Dimitri and Pierre-Olivier Weill, "A Search-Based Theory of the On-the-Run
  Phenomenon," The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (3), 1361­1398.
  Wharton Research Data Service - WRDS

Wharton Research Data Service - WRDS, 2021.

Williams, John Burr., The theory of investment value / John Burr Williams, North-
  Holland Pub. Co Amsterdam, 1956.




                                          52
