                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GENDER DIFFERENCES IN JOB SEARCH AND THE EARNINGS GAP:
                      EVIDENCE FROM BUSINESS MAJORS

                                        Patricia Cortés
                                          Jessica Pan
                                        Laura Pilossoph
                                          Basit Zafar

                                      Working Paper 28820
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28820


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021


We thank conference and seminar participants at Boston University, Brown, Cornell, Duke,
Loyola Marymount University, Monash University, New York University, Northwestern
Kellogg, Rady School of Management, Rochester, Sciences Po, Singapore Management
University, Southern Methodist University, University College London, UCLA, UC Santa
Barbara, UC Merced, University of Chicago, University of Essex, University of Exeter,
University of Florida, University of Maryland, University of Nebraska, University of Oxford,
University of Pennsylvania, UT Austin, University of Wisconsin Madison, Yale, the 2019 ASSA
Meetings, and the 2020 NBER Labor Studies Summer Institute for numerous helpful comments
and suggestions. Jacob French, Maria Paola Ugalde Araya, Kevin Winseck, and Zhi Hao Lim
provided excellent research assistance. We would also like to gratefully acknowledge the
generous financial support from the National Science Foundation through Grant SES-1824469
and the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund (Tier 1). All errors
that remain are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Patricia Cortés, Jessica Pan, Laura Pilossoph, and Basit Zafar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Differences in Job Search and the Earnings Gap: Evidence from Business Majors
Patricia Cortés, Jessica Pan, Laura Pilossoph, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 28820
May 2021
JEL No. D83,D91,J64

                                         ABSTRACT

To understand gender differences in the job search process, we collect rich information on job
offers and acceptances from past and current undergraduates of Boston University's Questrom
School of Business. We document two novel empirical facts: (1) there is a clear gender difference
in the timing of job offer acceptance, with women accepting jobs substantially earlier than men,
and (2) the gender earnings gap in accepted offers narrows in favor of women over the course of
the job search period. Using survey data on risk preferences and beliefs about expected future
earnings, we present empirical evidence that the patterns in job search can be partly explained by
the higher levels of risk aversion displayed by women and the higher levels of overoptimism (and
slower belief updating) displayed by men. We develop a job search model that incorporates these
gender differences in risk aversion and (over)optimism about prospective offers. Our
counterfactual exercises show that simple policies such as eliminating ``exploding offers" by
allowing students to hold onto offers for an additional month, or providing them with accurate
information about the labor market, can reduce the gender gap significantly.

Patricia Cortés                                 Laura Pilossoph
Questrom School of Business                     Macroeconomics and Monetary Studies Function
Boston University                               Federal Reserve Bank of New York
595 Commonwealth Avenue                         33 Liberty Street
Boston, MA 02215                                New York, NY 10045
and NBER                                        pilossoph@gmail.com
pcortes@bu.edu
                                                Basit Zafar
Jessica Pan                                     Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Michigan
National University of Singapore                611 Tappan Street
1 Arts Link                                     Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
Singapore                                       and NBER
and IZA                                         basitak@gmail.com
jesspan@nus.edu.sg
1     Introduction
Despite the significant advances that women have made in terms of reversing the gender gap in
education, labor market attachment, and representation in professional spheres, gender gaps in
earnings remain remarkably persistent, even among the highly-skilled (Blau and Kahn, 2017). The
persistence of these gaps, even among groups of women who are arguably as skilled and well-
trained as men, has led researchers to consider "new classes of explanations," such as the role
of gender differences in psychological attributes, in order to explain the observed labor market
disparities (Bertrand, 2011). Along these lines, a large experimental literature has documented
robust differences in risk preferences and overconfidence between men and women, with women
exhibiting a greater degree of risk aversion (see surveys by Croson and Gneezy (2009) and Eckel
and Grossman (2008a)) and men displaying a greater degree of overconfidence in their relative
ability (Barber and Odean, 2001; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). Recent work also finds that these
differences in risk preferences and overconfidence can explain part of the gender gap in educational
choices and earnings expectations (Buser et al., 2014; Reuben et al., 2017).
     One particular aspect of the labor market where one might expect risk preferences and beliefs
about relative ability to matter is job search. Since searching for a job is an inherently dynamic
process that involves a considerable amount of uncertainty, systematic differences in preferences
and beliefs across gender are likely to lead to differences in job search behavior and outcomes.1 This
is particularly true for the job market of fresh college graduates, where job offers with relatively
short deadlines and exploding offers are common.2 Nevertheless, we know surprisingly little about
gender differences in labor market search behavior and its impacts on (early-career) gender wage
gaps. A likely reason for this is that researchers usually have limited information on job search
behavior and the offers that people receive. The few exceptions focus on the job search behavior of
unemployed workers (Krueger and Mueller, 2011; Spinnewijn, 2015), less commonly on employed
workers (Faberman et al., 2017), and the role of learning in labor market search (Conlon et al., 2018).
To our knowledge, few studies have systematically documented and examined gender differences in
job search behavior.
     In this paper, we draw on rich retrospective survey data that we collected on job offers and
acceptances from recent undergraduate alumni from Boston University's Questrom School of Busi-
ness to document novel facts about gender differences in the job search process. Specifically, we
    1
      Standard models of job search that incorporate heterogeneity of risk preferences show that individuals who are
more risk tolerant will have higher reservation wages (Pissarides, 1974; Feinberg, 1977; Acemoglu and Shimer, 1999).
    2
      Although most universities have guidelines that require employers to provide students with sufficient time to
consider an offer (typically at least 14 days), "exploding offers" are relatively common (see, for example, https:
//hbr.org/2014/04/15-rules-for-negotiating-a-job-offer). In our data, approximately three-quarters of job
offers to undergraduate business majors from Questrom required students to decide within two weeks of receiving the
offer. In slightly more than 40% of job offers, students were only given about a week to consider the job offer. Once
a student formally accepts a job offer, reneging the offer is highly frowned upon. See http://www.bu.edu/careers/
for-employers/policies/ for information on BU's recruiting policies.



                                                         1
ask graduates from the 2013­2019 graduating classes details about the job search process that led
to their first job after graduating from Questrom, such as the characteristics of their accepted offer
(e.g. salary components, job characteristics, timing of the offer, and when the offer was accepted).
We also asked similar questions about the characteristics of up to three job offers that were rejected,
as well as the reasons for rejecting the offer. The survey also included questions on demographic and
academic background, negotiation behavior, perceived relative ability, beliefs about the salary of
their peers, and measures of risk preferences. To understand how expectations about the job search
process evolve, we supplement the alumni survey with a prospective survey of current students from
the graduating classes of 2018 and 2019. For these students, we surveyed them at three points in
time ­ twice before they graduated ­ to ask about their earnings expectations and (intended) job
search behavior, as well as eight months post-graduation to ask about the outcomes of their job
search process (e.g. timing and nature of job offers and accepted job).
     We begin by establishing two novel facts regarding gender differences in the job search pro-
cess. First, we document a clear gender difference in the timing of acceptance of the first job after
graduation ­ women, on average, accept jobs about one month earlier than their male counterparts
(60% of women have accepted a job before graduation, compared to 52% of males). This difference
is observed in the raw data and is robust to controlling for concentration (e.g. finance, marketing,
etc.), GPA, and standard demographics such as race, cohort, country of birth, and parental educa-
tion. In addition, this gap does not appear to be driven by gender differences in industry choice.
Second, we find that the gender gap in accepted offers narrows in favor of women over the course
of the job search period. For example, the average gender gap across all accepted offers starts at
around 17% in August of the senior year and declines to about 10% by the following October and
thereafter. These patterns are taking into account the aforementioned controls. In addition, we
provide evidence suggesting that gender differences in outside options, expected duration at the
first job, marriage market considerations, and locational preferences are unlikely to be driving the
observed gender differences in job search behavior that we document.
     In the second part of the paper, we develop a model of job search that can account for these
empirical facts. We show how a model of job search that incorporates gender differences in risk
aversion, overoptimism about the mean of the offer distribution, and learning (that is, updating of
beliefs) ­ all assumptions which our data support ­ can rationalize the observed data patterns.3
   3
     In principle, biased beliefs in the job search process can be modeled as biases in expectations of the mean of the
offer distribution (like we do in this paper) or biases in beliefs about the arrival rate of offers. Previous work on
unemployed workers has focused on biases in the job finding probability (e.g. Spinnewijn, 2015), which in itself is
a function of both earnings expectations and beliefs about the job arrival rate. Conceptually, both types of biases
are likely to generate qualitatively similar dynamics in the model since they operate through reservation wages. In
terms of understanding the job search behavior of college students, we chose to focus on potential biases in earnings
expectations since it seems more natural to elicit earnings expectations than beliefs about the job arrival probability
(e.g. previous work has shown that college students have fairly well-formed expectations about their future earnings,
and that these earnings expectations (elicited in college) are predictive of future earnings at age 30 (Wiswall and
Zafar, 2019; Arcidiacono et al., forthcoming).



                                                          2
Intuitively, higher levels of risk aversion for women lead them to have lower reservation wages, to
start searching for jobs earlier, and to accept jobs earlier. On the other hand, higher levels of
optimism on the part of men increase their reservation wages, lead them to accept jobs later, and
make the gender gap in accepted earnings smaller over time as they learn.4
    We examine both the model's assumptions and predictions using our survey measures of risk
aversion and overconfidence. Risk preferences are measured as the average of responses to two
survey questions on the willingness to take risks regarding financial matters or in daily activities.
Overoptimism, at the aggregate level, is obtained from comparing students' ex ante earnings expec-
tations distribution with their own (or previous cohorts') ex-post earnings realizations. We show
that male students, on average, are significantly more risk tolerant than their female counterparts,5
and have upward biased beliefs about future earnings. Females also tend to have upward biased
beliefs, but the extent of their bias is smaller. Using data on beliefs collected at two points in time
during the search process, we also show that male students' beliefs take longer to converge to the
"truth" relative to females' beliefs.
    Consistent with the model predictions, the data show that, on average, more risk-tolerant
students tend to accept jobs later, and there is a strong positive relationship between risk tolerance
and accepted offer wages. Gender differences in risk preferences account for a non-trivial proportion
(approximately 19%) of the residual gender gap in accepted earnings6 and, at the individual level,
the degree of overoptimism (crudely measured as the percent gap between ex ante expected earnings
and ex post realized earnings) is strongly positively associated with month of job acceptance.7 More
risk averse individuals start searching for jobs earlier, and we find a systematic positive relationship
between reported reservation wages and both risk tolerance and overoptimism. In analyzing these
reduced form relationships, we also consider other potential explanations for the empirical patterns
   4
      Throughout the text, we use the terms "overconfidence" and "overoptimism" interchangeably, acknowledging
that these are not the same concepts. In the model, this manifests itself as students having upward biased beliefs
about the mean of the offer distribution that they face.
    5
      As discussed in a recent review paper by Shurchkov and Eckel (2018), the most common finding in the literature
that spans different environments and methods is that women tend to be slightly more risk averse than men. However,
the magnitude of the gender difference appears to depend on the elicitation method, context, and framing. In
particular, the Holt and Laury (2002) multiple price list elicitation method where subjects are asked to make ten
binary choices between a less-risky and a more-risky lottery tends to find smaller (sometimes zero) gender differences
relative to elicitation methods that use a simpler set of decisions involving 50/50 gambles (e.g. Eckel and Grossman,
2002; Eckel and Grossman, 2018; Charness and Gneezy, 2012). Several researchers suggest that more complex
elicitation methods may mask gender differences (e.g. Charness et al., 2013). Studies that use survey questions as an
alternative to incentivized choices over lotteries tend to find larger gender differences. Crosetto and Filippin (2016)
find that these survey measures of risk tend to correlate strongly with the Eckel and Grossman (2002; 2008b) measure
and weakly with the Holt and Laury (2002) measure.
    6
      The residual gender earnings gap is adjusted for gender differences in standard demographics (e.g. cohort, race,
US-born, and parents' education), concentration, and undergraduate GPA. Inclusion of further (endogenous) controls
such as city fixed effects, industry fixed effects, and hours worked do not change the results substantively.
    7
      One should be cautious in interpreting this gap measure at the individual level. Since most students receive only
one draw from the offer distribution (that is, one offer), one cannot categorically conclude that a positive value of this
gap measure signals overoptimism at the individual level. However, at the aggregate level, the fact that expectations
are clearly biased upwards relative to realizations suggests that individuals, on average, are overoptimistic.


                                                            3
such as gender differences in patience, procrastination, and rejection aversion. While we are unable
to fully rule out these alternative explanations, we show that most of these explanations are not
consistent with the full set of empirical patterns observed in the data.
     We next calibrate the model's parameters via Simulated Methods of Moments (SMM), choosing
the parameters to minimize the distance between specific model-generated moments and data-
generated moments, such as many of the ones discussed above. In terms of the moments that
we target, data on the evolution of earnings expectations is used to inform the learning rule and
overconfidence, while information on the time path of mean accepted offers by gender and the
share of students who have accepted offers over time is used to inform the preference and search
parameters. The calibrated model is able to broadly match the key empirical patterns observed in
the data. For example, we capture the decline in the gender gap in accepted earnings and the fact
that women begin searching for, and accept jobs earlier than men.
     Apart from providing us with testable implications that we can take to the data, our calibrated
model allows us to conduct various counterfactual exercises of interest, which we undertake in the
final part of the paper. First, to assess the importance of biased beliefs in generating the observed
gender earnings gap over the course of the job search period, we conduct a counterfactual simulation
in which both males and females have perfect information. We find that gender differences in
overconfidence explain about 25% of the mean gender gap in earnings. Moreover, we show that
while overconfidence, on average, results in a larger gender earnings gap in favor of men, this rise
in earnings comes at a cost. The welfare gain of perfect information is more than twice as large
for men relative to women. This result is supported by evidence from the survey that men are
less likely to be satisfied with the job search process and report more search regrets than women.
Second, we simulate a policy counterfactual that relaxes the deadline for deciding on a job offer ­
something that arguably could be mandated by universities ­ and thus serve to mitigate the effects
of risk aversion as well as overconfidence. The model simulations indicate that such a policy reduces
the gender gap by about 40%.
     Our work is related to three main strands of literature. First, it contributes to the growing
literature on the role of psychological attributes and behavioral biases in job-finding behavior. Most
of these studies focus on search behavior among unemployed workers. For example, DellaVigna and
Paserman (2005) study the relationship between time preferences and job search and show that
workers who are more impatient exert lower search effort and exit unemployment more quickly.
DellaVigna et al. (2017) show that a job search model with reference-dependent preferences appears
to fit the observed patterns of exit from unemployment better than standard job search models.
In terms of the relationship between risk preferences and job search, evidence from laboratory and
observational data points toward a strong negative correlation between risk aversion and reservation
wages (Cox and Oaxaca, 1992; Pannenberg, 2010).8 In particular, Spinnewijn (2015) finds that
   8
     In terms of the role that other psychological traits play in job search behavior, McGee (2015) and Caliendo et
al. (2015) find that job-seekers with higher internal locus of control (i.e., an individual who attributes success to his


                                                           4
unemployed workers are overly optimistic about how quickly they will find work and examines the
implications of biased beliefs for the optimal design of unemployment insurance. These studies,
however, do not focus on gender differences in psychological attributes and job search behavior.
     Second, this paper is also related to a small literature that seeks to explain gender gaps through
a search framework. Earlier work by Bowlus (1997) and Bowlus and Grogan (2009) uses an equi-
librium search framework to show that gender differences in labor market search resulting from
women's greater tendency to exit jobs for non-participation (because of personal reasons) can
account for a non-trivial proportion of the gender wage gap in the U.S. and the U.K.9 More re-
cently, Le Barbanchon et al. (2019) show that women trade-off commuting time against wages
in their job search decisions. Other papers use matched employer-employee data and equilibrium
search models to examine the role of compensating differentials resulting from gender differences
in preferences for job amenities, statistical discrimination, taste discrimination, and labor market
attachment in explaining gender pay gaps over the lifecycle (Morchio and Moser, 2020; Xiao, 2020;
Flabbi and Moro, 2012; Flabbi, 2010). More closely related to our work, Vesterlund (1997) extends
the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model and shows that gender differences in risk aversion could
result in women accepting lower quality matches, and lower wages conditional on productivity.
Although our paper also uses a search framework, our focus is on early career job search, and in
understanding the roles of gender differences in risk aversion, overconfidence, and (lack of) learning.
Non-participation and joint relocation due to family constraints do not feature in our setting, as
we do not find that they are first-order considerations for our sample of young, recent, graduates
searching for their first job after graduation.10
     Finally, our paper contributes to the recent literature that examines less traditional explanations
for the persistence of gender differences in labor market outcomes, including the role of gender
differences in behavioral traits and psychological attributes. Recent review articles by Shurchkov
and Eckel (2018) and Blau and Kahn (2017) summarize the large and growing experimental evidence
from both the lab and the field that typically finds that women, on average, tend to exhibit greater
or her own efforts and abilities rather than luck or fate) search for jobs more intensively and have higher reservation
wages. Using a laboratory setting, McGee and McGee (2016) further show that the relationship between locus of
control and search behavior is driven by differences in beliefs regarding the returns to search effort. Relatedly, Flinn
et al. (2020) examine how education and the Big Five personality traits influence job search behavior and labor
market outcomes by developing and estimating a partial equilibrium search model. Using a panel dataset of newly-
unemployed individuals in Germany, they find that the gender wage gap can be accounted for by the differential
valuation of women's personality traits relative to men, with conscientiousness and agreeableness emerging as the
key traits that contribute to the observed gaps. Donna and Veramendi (forthcoming) document that women pay
consistently less for work-related air travel than men, even after accounting for a large set of employer, employee, and
trip characteristics. The authors provide suggestive evidence that gender differences in positive/negative reciprocity
and trust play a role in explaining variation in the the gender gap in paid fares across countries.
    9
      Albanesi and Sahin (2018) study differences in observed outcomes (specifically, the unemployment rate) and
infer from these observed outcomes differences in job search behavior. They do not use direct information on offers
and acceptance decisions for men and women, but rather calibrate a search model to match differences in the
unemployment rate between men and women.
   10
      We do not have data on commuting times. However, it is worth noting that, conditional on speciality, we do not
find gender differences in the geographic locations of the first jobs of individuals in our sample.


                                                           5
risk aversion, lower levels of competitiveness, and a lower willingness to negotiate relative to men.11
More recent work has sought to link these gender differences in behavioral traits to observed gender
gaps in the labor market. Blau and Kahn (2017) provides a summary of the results of several
studies that examine the quantitative importance of psychological attributes or non-cognitive skills
on the gender pay gap and find that, overall, these traits account for a small to moderate portion
of the gender pay gap (about 16% or less). Our paper extends this literature by showing how
gender differences in two behavioral attributes ­ risk aversion and overconfidence ­ affects job
search behavior, and consequently, early career wage gaps among a group of highly-skilled men and
women entering the corporate sector.12
    While our focus on early career job search abstracts from family considerations that have been
emphasized as a key explanation for the widening of gender pay gaps over the lifecycle, there are
reasons to expect early-career wage gaps to matter for gaps later in one's career. In the simplest
case where earnings grow proportionately with job experience, initial gaps will naturally persist
over time.13 In addition, when switching jobs, employers are likely to use information on previous
salaries to benchmark pay (Hansen and McNichols, 2020). There is also a growing literature which
documents that initial conditions in the labor market are long-lasting, with young workers entering
the labor market during a recession facing lower wages relative to cohorts that entered during better
economic times for at least 10 to 15 years (e.g. Oyer, 2006; Kahn, 2010; Oreopoulos et al., 2012;
Wee, 2016). Recent work by Rothstein (2019) suggests even more permanent effects of the Great
Recession on college graduates, which he argues might be due, in part to the fact that weaker labor
market conditions early in one's career could result in a weak bargaining position that persists
throughout the lifecycle (Beaudry and DiNardo, 1991). Furthermore, given that workers typically
switch jobs several times over the lifecycle, we expect that the same forces that we argue matter
for early-career job search (i.e., risk aversion and biased beliefs) will likely matter for subsequent
job searches. Thus, we believe that our paper offers a new explanation for the persistent gender
wage gap.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we describe the survey instruments
and sample selection. Section 3 presents the main characteristics of our sample of undergraduate
  11
     See also reviews by Bertrand (2011) and Azmat and Petrongolo (2014).
  12
     Several other papers examine the dynamics of the gender gap among professionals and the highly-educated
later in the lifecycle and emphasize the role of labor supply and other career adjustments around motherhood as a
key explanation for the observed divergence in labor market trajectories between similarly skilled men and women
(Bertrand et al., 2010; Azmat and Ferrer, 2017; Noonan et al., 2005). These factors, while clearly important in
understanding the gender earnings gap, are unlikely to be first-order considerations for our sample of young graduates.
We will provide some evidence that supports this view in the sections that follow.
  13
     It is worth noting that the raw gender earnings gap in our sample is quite similar to that in the 2014 to 2018
American Community Survey, among individuals who are 23-27 years old and have a Bachelor's degree in a business
major. The raw gender gap in the ACS is 12.6% for these individuals and increases to 32.3% for business majors who
are 35-54 years old. While some of this increase may reflect compositional differences across cohorts, these patterns
suggest that a significant fraction of the earnings gaps appear at the stage of entry into the labor market. Among
non-business college graduates, the raw gender gap is larger at 17.7% for those aged 23-27 and 33.5% for those aged
35-54.


                                                          6
business students, as well as empirical facts on gender differences in job search behavior and labor
market outcomes. Section 4 develops a model of job search that can explain the patterns in the
data. Section 5 discusses the empirical evidence that provides support for the model assumptions
and presents the reduced-form analysis of the model predictions. Section 6 discusses the policy
counterfactuals and reports the results from the simulations. Section 7 concludes.


2         Survey Design and Administration
The data are from original surveys administered to undergraduate business majors from Boston Uni-
versity's Questrom School of Business (Questrom). Questrom is a selective, private business school
at Boston University that offers both undergraduate and graduate programs. It has a relatively
large undergraduate enrollment of about 3,200 students (across four years of study). Our analysis
is based on two main survey instruments: (1) a retrospective survey of recent Questrom alumni
("Survey of Graduates"), and (2) a prospective survey of current Questrom students ("Survey of
Current Students"). The online surveys were administered using the SurveyMonkey platform.14
We describe each survey in detail in the subsections that follow.

2.1         Survey of Graduates
Our first data source is from the Survey of Graduates, an online survey administered to the 2013
to 2017 Questrom graduating classes between April 2017 and February 2018. We obtained a list of
student emails from the Questrom Alumni Office and invited eligible alumni to participate in the
online survey via email. The survey took approximately 20 minutes to complete and individuals
were compensated with a $20 Amazon gift card for successfully completing the survey. A total of
about 1,000 alumni completed the survey, corresponding to a response rate of about 20%. The
survey included questions on demographic and academic background, salary and other job char-
acteristics (for the initial as well as current job), negotiation behavior, perceived ability, salary of
peers, and risk attitudes. Central to our analysis, we collected detailed information on the timing
of job offers and characteristics not only for the job offer that individuals accepted, but also for
offers that individuals ended up rejecting (up to three of such offers) for the initial job search,
which starts in college for most students. This allows us to construct a detailed timeline of how the
job search process unfolds for each individual in our sample in the months leading up to and after
graduation. We supplement this information with data from a similar post-graduation survey of
the 2018 and 2019 graduating classes that was conducted in January 2019 and 2020, respectively.
This is the third and final component of the "Survey of Current Students" that we describe in
greater detail below. Throughout, we will refer to the merged alumni surveys for the 2013-2019
graduating classes as the "Graduate Survey."
    14
         When appropriate, questions have built-in logical checks. Item non-response is rare.


                                                              7
    This retrospective survey is the main source of empirical facts regarding search behavior. Risk
preferences are elicited as the average of responses to the following two questions (both measured
on a scale from 1 "not willing at all" to 7 "very willing"): (1) How would you rate your willingness
to take risks regarding financial matters? and (2) How would you rate your willingness to take risks
in daily activities? These survey-based risk measures are similar to those that have been validated
against the experimental approach by Dohmen et al. (2011) and Falk et al. (2016).15 Since very
few individuals picked the lowest possible value on the scale for each of the two risk questions, we
combine the lowest two values and rescale the responses to be between 1 and 6. For the analysis,
we use the simple average of the re-scaled responses to the two risk questions as a measure of an
individual's risk preferences (results are qualitatively robust to using either measure).

2.2    Survey of Current Students
Our second source of data is from a prospective survey of students who graduated in 2018 and
2019. Unlike the alumni survey which is retrospective, these students were surveyed twice before
graduation and once after graduation, allowing us to elicit earnings expectations and intended job
search behavior at different points during the job search process. The prospective nature of the
survey also allows us to compare students' earnings expectations at the beginning of the job search
process with their actual realized outcomes to explore systematic biases in beliefs.
    Students from the 2018 graduating class were first surveyed in the Fall of their senior year
(October 2017) while those from the 2019 graduating class were first surveyed either in the Fall
or Spring of their junior year (in November 2017 or March 2018, respectively). We refer to this
as the "baseline survey" in the text. The first follow-up survey (i.e., mid-search survey) for each
cohort was conducted approximately three months before graduation in March of the senior year.
The final post-graduation survey was administered eight months after graduation, in the following
January.
    The baseline survey, which took about 10 minutes to complete, was conducted in-class in two
mandatory courses that Questrom undergraduates typically take in their junior and senior years.
Course instructors set aside 10 minutes at the end of class and provided students with the link to
the online survey, which students could complete using a smartphone or a laptop. Students were
compensated with a $10 Amazon gift card for successfully completing the survey. The response
rate for the baseline survey was high ­ approximately 85% of those enrolled in the class completed
the survey.16 We also sent the survey to students in the 2019 cohort who were not enrolled in
the mandatory module in October 2018.17 Overall, approximately 1,055 students completed the
  15
     Dohmen et al. (2011) also show, using data from the German Socio-economic Panel (SOEP), that self-rated
willingness to take risk (in general) is a good predictor of actual risk-taking in various domains such as financial
matters, career, health, etc.
  16
     Even though the survey was conducted in-class, some students did not show up to class or chose not to complete
the survey.
  17
     These students may have taken the module prior to or after their junior year.


                                                         8
baseline survey, representing about 50%(65%) of the 2018 (2019) graduating classes.18
     The baseline survey collected information on demographic characteristics, earnings expecta-
tions, intended job search behavior, and measures of various psychological attributes such as risk
preferences, time preferences, and procrastination. The first follow-up survey, administered three
months prior to graduation, collected data on earnings expectations and current job search expe-
rience for students who had yet to find a job; students who had already accepted a job were asked
about their actual labor market outcomes and job search experience. The final post-graduation
survey, conducted 8-9 months after graduation, is similar in structure to the graduate survey de-
scribed above and asked students detailed information about their job search outcomes including
the timing and job characteristics of the offers that they received, regardless of whether the offer
was accepted or rejected. Nearly half of the 968 students with valid responses for the baseline
survey responded to the follow-up survey and about 33% took all three surveys (see Table A.1).
In terms of background characteristics, the sample of students who responded to more than one
survey is disproportionately female, Hispanic, less likely to concentrate in finance, and less risk
tolerant, compared to those who responded only to the baseline survey. They are also slightly more
likely to be US-born and less likely to have a father with a bachelor's degree. There appears to
be little difference across the samples in terms of ability proxies such as GPA, perceived relative
ability, and expected total pay (see Table A.2).

2.3    Selection into the Survey and Sample Selection
The voluntary nature of the survey naturally raises the question of the extent to which the survey
samples are representative of the underlying population of BU undergraduate business students.
To provide a sense of how respondents compare with non-respondents, we would ideally use ad-
ministrative student-level information for all the eligible cohorts of students. Unfortunately, we
have limited administrative data from the undergraduate student office that only includes some
background information (e.g. gender, current GPA, international student, concentration, etc.) on
all students enrolled as business majors in a given semester from Spring 2017 to Fall 2018. As such,
we examine selection into the baseline (in-class) survey for the Survey of Current Students (i.e.,
the 2018­2019 cohorts).19
     Table A.4 shows how our survey sample compares with the eligible cohort of students from the
2018­2019 cohorts. While there are some significant differences between the respondent sample
and the eligible cohort (e.g., our sample is disproportionately US-born and has slightly more credit
hours), the overall profile of students in our sample appears broadly representative to that of the
  18
     The higher response rate for the 2019 graduating class is due to the fact that the in-class survey was conducted
in both semesters of the mandatory course and the survey was also sent to students who were not enrolled in the
module. For the 2018 graduating class, we were only able to conduct the survey in one of the semesters that the
course was offered. Also, for this cohort, we did not send the survey to students who were not surveyed in-class.
  19
     The survey response rates for each admin data cohort are reported in Table A.3.



                                                         9
eligible cohort. More importantly, for our purposes, we do not find much evidence of differential
selection into our survey sample on the basis of gender (see last column of Table A.4).
     Before proceeding, we clarify some of the key data choices we make. We drop survey responses
that have missing values on key covariates such as cohort and gender, or do not have a valid email
address. All earnings variables (reaizations and expectations) are converted to 2017 dollars based
on the CPI. Individuals' salaries are also adjusted based on reported work hours to reflect full-time
equivalent earnings. To handle outliers, we drop observations where the reported total first year
earnings are less than $20,000 and more than $175,000.20 Finally, we also winsorize the month of
job acceptance, job offer, job rejection, and start of job search to be between -15 and 15, where 0
is defined as the month of graduation.


3        Empirical Facts on Gender Differences in Job Search Behavior
In this section, we describe our sample, document some statistics regarding initial labor market
outcomes, and then establish two novel facts regarding gender differences in job search behavior.
Our focus is on the job search process for undergraduate business majors searching for their first
job after graduation. This analysis uses the Survey of Graduates from the 2013-2019 graduating
cohorts.

3.1      Sample Description
Table 1 reports the main characteristics of our analysis sample which comprises graduates who
have accepted an offer by the time of the survey.21 The last column of the table reports the
p-value of the test of equality of the means across gender. Women make up slightly more than
half of the sample. Men and women appear broadly comparable in terms of demographics, family
background, and GPA ­ the differences are typically small and not statistically significant. The
biggest gender difference is observed in terms of degree concentration. Men are significantly more
likely to report concentrating in finance than women (65% vs. 38%), while women are significantly
more likely to concentrate in marketing (37% vs. 14%). Women are also significantly more likely to
concentrate in law and organizational behavior, although these are relatively small fields of study.22
    20
      This criterion drops about 7% of our main analysis sample (i.e. those who have accepted an offer). The main
results are robust to winsorizing earnings (above 175,000 and below 20,000) instead of dropping the outliers (results
available upon request).
   21
      Note that the proportion of men and women who accepted an offer to work right after graduation does not vary
by gender. Summary statistics for the full sample are reported in Table A.5 and are broadly similar to the summary
statistics for the sample conditional on having accepted a job (i.e. the main analysis sample).
   22
      Undergraduate business majors in Questrom are required to declare at least one functional concentration. In
our sample, slightly more than 50% of the alumni report a second functional concentration. Functional concentra-
tions provide students with a deeper study of a specific functional area in the study and practice of management (see
http://questromworld.bu.edu/udc/academics/concentrations/). There are 11 functional concentrations that stu-
dents can choose from. These include Accounting, Finance, General Management, Innovation and Entrepreneurship,



                                                         10
Consistent with the prior literature, women in our sample report significantly lower willingness to
take risks in financial or daily matters relative to men. The raw gender difference in risk attitudes
is approximately one-fifth of the mean or half of a standard deviation.23 Men are also more than
twice as likely to report an average willingness to take risks of five or more (on a six-point scale) as
compared to women (23% vs. 9%). Despite having similar GPAs as men on average, women report
significantly lower perceived relative ability, consistent with the previous literature documenting
that men tend to be more (over)confident than women.

3.2    Initial Labor Market Outcomes
Turning to initial labor market outcomes in Table 2, we find that, conditional on accepting an offer,
close to 95% of students in the sample had a first job that was based in the U.S. and are currently
working full-time. Moreover, in the full sample, we find that the vast majority of students (close
to 85%) accepted an offer to work after graduating from BU. There is little evidence of significant
gender differences in these employment outcomes, consistent with the idea that for this sample
of high-achieving business students, male and female students are similarly career-oriented at this
early-career stage (see Table A.5).24 Nevertheless, there is a large gender gap in accepted earnings
(i.e., total pay in the first job in the first year), with women earning about 10% less than their male
counterparts; the gender gap goes up to 13% when looking at current earnings. The magnitude of
these earnings gaps are comparable to the gender gap in annual earnings of about 12.6% among
young college graduates (between the ages of 23 to 27) in the U.S. with an undergraduate business
major as measured using the 2014­2018 American Community Survey (ACS).25 Not surprisingly,
the observed gender difference in concentration translates to similar differences in industry choice
with men significantly more likely to work in financial services, while women are more likely to be
in advertising/marketing and consumer products/retail.
     The summary statistics also reveal some suggestive gender differences in job search behavior.
The average student in the sample accepts their first job about half a month before graduation,
with women accepting their first job almost one month before men. Close to 92% of women accept
jobs within six months of graduation, compared with 86% of men. These patterns form the basis of
our first empirical fact in the next section. Despite the significant gender difference in the timing
International Management, Law, Management Information Systems, Marketing, Operations & Technology Manage-
ment, Organizational Behavior, and Strategy.
   23
      This gap is somewhat larger than what has been documented in the prior literature. For example, in Dohmen
et al. (2011) the size of the gender effect on a similarly survey-based measure of willingness to take risks, in general
(elicited on a 0 to 10 scale), is approximately 13% of the mean or about one-quarter of a standard deviation.
   24
      In this sample, less than 2% of individuals are currently married, and approximately 47% are in a relationship.
Women are slightly more likely to be in a relationship than men, but the difference is small (4.4 pp) and marginally
significant at the 10 % level. In Section 3.3, we discuss the role of marriage market considerations in the job search
process.
   25
      We consider wage-earners in the ACS who are not currently in school and report working full-time, full-year (i.e.
35 or more hours per week and 40 or more weeks per year).



                                                          11
of job acceptance, on average, women and men receive a similar number of offers (about 1.7) and
are equally likely to have rejected at least one offer (approx. 40%). While this may appear to
be puzzling, the last panel shows that women start searching for jobs earlier than men and search
behavior differs for both genders along several dimensions.26 , 27 In the model and empirical analysis,
we seek to jointly rationalize these gendered patterns of timing of search and job acceptance timing.

3.3     Two Novel Facts
3.3.1    Fact 1: Females Accept Jobs Earlier

The first main empirical fact that we document is a systematic gender difference in the timing of
job acceptance among men and women in our sample. Figure 1 shows the proportion of men and
women who have accepted a job as a function of months since graduation. As discussed above, the
month since graduation on the x-axis has been rescaled so that 0 indicates the month of graduation
(i.e. May); therefore, negative numbers along the scale indicate the months prior to graduation
and positive numbers indicate the months post-graduation. Job acceptances prior to (and after) 9
months before (and after) graduation are grouped into a single category (-9 or +9, respectively).
As observed in the figure, the distribution of job acceptance timing for men is shifted to the right of
that for females, indicating that more women have accepted jobs than men at almost every point in
the job search process; a formal statistical test developed by Davidson and Duclos (2000) indicates
that the male distribution first order stochastically dominates the female distribution (p < 0.01).
By graduation, 60% of females have accepted a job, compared to 52% of males (p = 0.004).
     Table 3 shows that the observed gender difference in the timing of job acceptance is robust to
the inclusion of controls for background characteristics (e.g. cohort fixed effects, a dummy for US-
born, and fixed effects for race and parents' education) and academic background (concentration
fixed effects and GPA). Columns (1) to (3) report estimates of the gender difference using a hazard
model where the outcome is the probability of accepting a job within six months of graduation, while
columns (4) to (6) report estimates from a linear specification using month of job acceptance as
the outcome variable. Column (1) indicates that women are 23% more likely to accept a job within
  26
     In the subsample of students (N = 452) for whom we have data on both the timing of starting search and job
acceptance timing, we find that gender differences in starting search can account for slightly more than half of the
observed gender gap in job acceptance timing. That is, conditional on starting search earlier, females still accept
jobs about half a month earlier than males (the gender gap in job acceptance timing in this subsample is about 1.3
months).
  27
     For example, we observe that men spend more hours searching for jobs per week and send out many more
applications. They also have a greater tendency to apply for jobs for which they are under-qualified (27% for men
vs. 24% for women, p = 0.12). They also generate fewer offers per application as compared to women (1.2 for men
vs. 1.6 for women per 100 applications, p = 0.09). This suggests that men and women may target their search
differently, and could be applying to different kinds of jobs. These patterns are broadly consistent with ongoing work
by Faberman et al. (2020), who similarly document gender differences in job search and targeting. A full exploration
of these patterns are beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, in the conclusion, we discuss how extending the
model to incorporate heterogeneity in job types could potentially reconcile some of these patterns.



                                                         12
six months of graduation relative to men. Column (2) shows that the expected hazard increases
to 1.29 with the inclusion of the individual-level covariates. The observed gender difference in job
acceptance timing does not appear to be driven by gender differences in industry choice ­ the hazard
odds ratio is slightly lower at 1.24 and remains highly statistically significant with the inclusion
of industry fixed effects in column (3).28 The OLS specifications reported in columns (4) to (6)
corroborate these findings ­ on average, women accept jobs about 0.9 months earlier than men.
The inclusion of covariates increases the observed gap to 1.1 months, while the inclusion of industry
fixed effects results in a gap of about 0.85 months. All the estimates are statistically significant at
the 1% level.

3.3.2      Fact 2: Declining Gender Gap Over Job Search Process

The second empirical fact that we observe in the data is that the cumulative gender earnings gap
in accepted offers in favor of men declines steadily over the job search period. As observed in
Figure 2, over the job search period, the cumulative mean accepted offer declines for both men and
women, with men experiencing a larger decline than women. Overall, we observe that the average
gender gap (male - female) across all accepted offers starts at around 17% in August of the senior
year and declines to about 10% by the following October. This implies that relative to women,
men who accept jobs early tend to accept jobs that offer higher pay and over the course of the
job search period, men increasingly accept jobs that offer lower pay. Figure A.2 confirms that the
observed decline in the cumulative gender earnings gap in accepted offers is robust to the inclusion
of controls for background characteristics (i.e. cohort, race, nationality, and parent's education)
and academic background (i.e. concentration and GPA). It is also worth pointing out that most
the closing of the gender gap in accepted offers happens by the time of graduation, as evidenced in
Figure 2.
    One may wonder about the extent to which these patterns could be due to gender differences in
preferences for non-wage amenities (Wiswall and Zafar, 2017). While such gender differences may
explain part of the gender gap in wage levels, they cannot explain the trends over the course of the
job search process (within and between gender). In Figure A.3, we show that the observed decline
in cumulative gender earnings gap still remains even after controlling for job characteristics such
as work flexibility, sick leave, parental leave, expected earnings growth, and perceived layoff risk.
This suggests that the observed patterns are not driven by gender-specific changes in the non-wage
attributes of accepted jobs over the job search period. These job characteristics are obviously all
choices, and so this analysis should be interpreted only as suggestive. In addition, our data show
that the prevalence of non-wage amenities tends to be higher in jobs that are accepted by females:
the mean number of non-wage amenities at their jobs is 7.40 versus 6.84 for males (p < 0.01).
However, within gender, the correlation between accepted earnings and the number of non-wage
 28
      It is not clear that one should control for industry since the choice of industry to work in is endogenous.



                                                           13
amenities at the job is positive, implying that the observed gender earnings gaps are unlikely to be
driven by compensating differentials.29

3.3.3    Making Sense of the Patterns

In the next section, we develop a formal model of job search to account for these key facts in the
data. We show how a standard model of job search that incorporates gender differences in risk
aversion and overconfidence can generate (1) gender differences in job acceptance timing, and (2)
a decline in the gender gap in accepted offers over the course of the job search period. The model
will also be able to reconcile some of the other observed patterns in the data such as the relative
times at which males and females begin their job search, the patterns in the value of offers received
over time, and the patterns in the probability of receiving an offer over time.
    However, before we move to the model section, we specifically examine whether the observed
gender difference in the timing of job acceptance is driven by factors such as gender differences
in the outside option, expected duration at the job, and family/marriage market considerations.
In what follows, we consider each of these potential explanations in turn, and rule them out as
possible factors.

Gender differences in the outside option. First, it is worth noting that the fact that the
gender gap in job acceptance timing is largely unaffected by the inclusion of controls for family
background (as proxied for by father's and mother's education) implies that gender differences in
liquidity constraints are unlikely to be the reason why women systematically accept jobs earlier
than men. Indeed, as observed in Table 1, parental education is very similar across gender. Further,
for a subsample of students for whom we have information on student debt, we also find limited
gender differences in the likelihood of having any student debt or the amount of debt. Both genders
also report similar importance of having a job by graduation ­ on the question, "On a 5-point scale,
how is it to you that you have a job lined up before the end of your senior year (that is, before
you graduate)?" the vast majority (more than 80%) indicate the top two values on the scale. The
mean difference in the response by gender is small and only marginally significant at the 10% level
(4.38 vs. 4.24, p = 0.08) (see Figure A.1).

Expected duration at the job. Another possible explanation for the gendered patterns of job
search that we observe is that perhaps women expect to stay at their initial job for a shorter
duration than men and, hence have lower reservation wages and accept jobs earlier. Two pieces of
evidence suggest that this is unlikely to be driving the observed empirical patterns. First, for the
older cohorts that have been in the labor market for 1 to 4 years, we find little evidence of differential
  29
    The positive correlation between earnings and non-wage amenities is observed unconditionally as well as condi-
tional on the standard set of controls for demographic characteristics and academic background, as well as industry
fixed effects.


                                                        14
transition rates to subsequent jobs by gender. Second, for the 2019 cohort, we collect data on how
long individuals plan to stay at the first job. There is little systematic difference by gender; if
anything, females expect to stay slightly longer at the first job than their male counterparts (2.16
years versus 1.92 years; difference not statistically significant at conventional levels).

Family/marriage market considerations. It is possible that women's differential job search
behavior could be influenced by marriage market considerations and expectations about their future
labor supply if married. To investigate this possibility, we examine whether women's self-reported
probabilities of working full-time or part-time at age 30 are correlated with the timing of job
acceptance and find little evidence of a systematic relationship.30
    Another aspect related to family/marriage market considerations is the possibility that women
may choose to accept jobs earlier as they have stronger geographic preferences or face more ge-
ographic constraints in their job search. Indeed, previous work by Le Barbanchon et al. (2019)
shows that, on average, women have a lower willingness to commute relative to men. Nevertheless,
we argue that for our sample of young graduates searching for their first job after graduation, such
constraints are less likely to matter differentially by gender. For one, unlike later in the life-cycle,
gender differences in employment outcomes at graduation are small (see Tables 2 and A.5). Fur-
thermore, we find little evidence that women are choosing to accept jobs that are closer to their
state of birth relative to men, suggesting that women do not appear to be placing a higher weight
on proximity to family in their job search decisions.31 Finally, for a subsample of students who
graduated in 2019, we specifically asked students whether factors such as proximity to family and
partner location played a role in their job search. Interestingly, we find that while close to half
of men and women in the sample indicated that their job search decisions were affected by such
considerations, women were, if anything, less likely to indicate that family proximity and partner
location played a role in their job search (51% for men vs. 43% for women, p-value of the difference
= 0.224).32 Taken together, these results provide suggestive evidence that locational preferences
due to family considerations or marriage market considerations are unlikely to be key drivers of the
observed gender differences in job search behavior that we document above.
  30
     We also find that women's expectations about future labor supply are uncorrelated with their risk aversion, and
although marginally correlated with earnings, do not explain the role of risk aversion in explaining the gender earnings
gap. These results are available upon request.
  31
     These results are available upon request.
  32
     This question was only fielded in the post-graduation survey for the 2019 cohort (N = 242). The specific question
asked was: "We are interested in whether any of the following factors played a role in your job search." Respondents
were asked to select any of the following options that applied: "I wanted to stay close to family, and preferred jobs
that were close to them"; "Because of my partner's location, I preferred jobs that were in certain locations"; "I had a
preference for certain locations, and that affected the jobs that I considered"; "I had no preferences for job location".




                                                           15
4         Model of Job Search
We now propose a model in which risk averse males and females search for their first post-graduation
job while they are still in school. The model makes a number of key assumptions that we validate
empirically using our survey data in Section 5. For the time being, we abstract from gender when
we lay out the model, and later introduce parameter heterogeneity by gender when we estimate the
model.
                                                                                                1- 1
    Time t is discrete and individuals have preferences over consumption given by u(c) = c 1--      ;
                                       ¯                                                 ¯
agents are risk averse. We denote by T > 1 the date at which graduation occurs; after T , we assume
                                                                       ¯}, students with and without
that agents are infinitely lived.33 We assume that from dates {1, ..., T
a job earn their value of leisure, b, but that starting from date t  T  ¯, individuals with a job earn
the agreed upon wage w, while students without a job continue to earn b. Since all students earn b
before graduation regardless of whether they have accepted a job, the risk of not having a job by
graduation is foregone wages.

Job Offers. Students who have yet to secure a job choose whether or not to search for a job
each period, taking into account the i.i.d. cost of search, c  H (c). If a student decides to search,
they receive an offer with probability  which is a random draw from F (log (w))  N (µ,  ). For
simplicity, we assume there is no search on the job ­ that is, once the student has secured a job
they cannot search further.

Beliefs. To model biases in beliefs, we assume students have an initial (t = 1) belief about the
mean log offers they will receive, denoted by µ1 . If the true mean log offer is µ , then optimistic
individuals have beliefs µt at date t such that µt > µ . To allow for learning and corrections in the
bias about the mean log offer, we model a simple learning rule in which beliefs converge to the true
value as time progresses. That is, we assume that beliefs at each date t take the following form:

                                     µt = µ1 e- (t-1) + µ 1 - e- (t-1)            for t,                        (1)

where  controls the speed at which learning occurs. This implies that individuals enter with beliefs
about the mean log offer given by µt which falls to the true µ as t increases. As  goes to ,
beliefs converge more quickly.
    Importantly, while we assume that beliefs change over time, we maintain the assumption that
students are myopic. That is, when making their decisions, they assume their beliefs are fixed and
will not change over time. As such, behavioral choices (reservation wages and search effort) will be
chosen under a fixed belief µ; beliefs are only updated ex-post.
    33                                                                                                     ¯.
         As will become clear, this implies that for a given set of beliefs, the model is stationary after T




                                                               16
4.1                                                      ¯
       Values of Employment and Unemployment at date t > T
                 ¯ and for any given belief µ, we assume that agents are infinitely lived and therefore
Starting at date T
the model is stationary. The value of employment at wage w can be solved for explicitly:34

                                                                u(w)
                                                   W (w, µ) =        .
                                                                1-

                                 ¯ is:
The value of unemployment for t  T

              U (µ) =         max -cs + u (b) + s               max{W (w, µt ), U (µ)}dF (w; µt ,  )
                         c   s{0,1}

                        +  (1 - s) U (µ) dH (c).                                                         (2)

The value of unemployment depends on beliefs, since the expectation is taken over the subjective
offer distribution. Given some draw for search costs c, students must decide whether or not to
search. If they choose not to search (s = 0), they receive no offers, whereas if they search (s = 1),
they receive offers with probability . Plugging in s = 1 above and comparing the value to the
case when s = 0, the student with belief µ will search if they draw a cost c  c (µ) where c (µ) is
defined as:

                             c (µ) =         max{W (w, µ) - U (µ), 0}dF (w; µ,  ).

Finally, we define the reservation wage w
                                        ^ (µ) as the wage which satisfies:

                                               ^ (µ) , µ) - U (µ) = 0.
                                            W (w

4.2                                                     ¯
       Values of Employment and Unemployment at date t  T
Before graduation, the model is not stationary since students' decisions will depend on the time
until graduation. Let Ut (µ) denote the value of being a student with some beliefs µ who has not
                                                    ¯). This value can be written as:
secured a job before graduation (i.e., in period t  T

                        Ut (µ) =          max -cs + u(b)
                                      c   s{0,1}

                                   + s          max {Wt+1 (w, µ), Ut+1 (µ)} dF (w; µ,  )
                                            w

                                   +  (1 - s) Ut+1 (µ)           dH (c).                                 (3)
  34
    The value of employment will be independent of beliefs since we do not allow for search on-the-job or job
separations. We index the value of employment by µt for completeness.




                                                          17
The value is similar to the value of unemployment after graduation, but values are time-dependent.
Again, plugging in s = 1 and comparing the value to s = 0, the student with beliefs µ will search
at date t if they draw a cost c  c               
                                    t (µ) where ct (µ) is defined as:


                     ct (µ) =       max{Wt+1 (w, µ) - Ut+1 (µ), 0}dF (w; µ,  ).

                                                       ¯ wiht belief µ is:
The value of being employed at some wage w and time t  T

                                  Wt (w, µ) = u b + Wt+1 (w, µ).                                  (4)

Finally, we define the reservation wage w
                                        ^t (µ) as the wage which satisfies:

                                         ^t (µ) , µ) - Ut (µ) = 0.
                                     Wt (w

4.3   Numerical Solution
To solve the model, we create a grid of wages w  {w1 , ..., wNw } and a grid of beliefs about
µ  {µ1 , ...., µNµ }. For each possible µ and w, we solve the model backwards in time. Once we
have solved for the value functions for every wage and possible belief, the "final" realized values of
unemployment at each point in time are dictated by equations (2) and (3) so that:

                                 ¯t = Ut (µt ) for t = {1, 2, .., T
                                 U                                ¯}.                             (5)

4.4   Comparative Statics
In this section, we examine how risk preferences and biases in beliefs affect search behavior in
our model. Figure 3 shows how reservation wages and the and the probability of receiving an
offer change with risk aversion  and initial biases µ1 . Panel (a) shows that, for a given level of
risk aversion, the reservation wage declines rapidly as one approaches the graduation date since
students want to avoid ending up without a job by graduation. As agents become more risk averse
(moving from blue to black line), reservation wages drop. Higher degrees of risk aversion imply
that agents fear the looming graduation date and its corresponding drop in consumption relatively
more; therefore, they lower their reservation wages to avoid ending up with no job by graduation.
For the same reason, Panel C shows that students raise the cutoff search cost below which they
search as risk aversion rises, leading to higher probabilities of searching for a job.
    Changes in the bias of beliefs about the mean log offer have different impacts on search behavior.
Panels (b) and (d) in Figure 3 show how reservation wages and the likelihood of searching change
as the initial bias in beliefs µ1 varies. First, as shown in Panel (b), as the bias rises (going from
blue to black), the overall option value of search rises, as agents believe they face a more favorable


                                                  18
offer distribution. Therefore, reservation wages rise since the option value of search rises. Similarly,
while the effect on search effort is smaller, it goes in the same direction; as the return to search
rises, the probability that students search also rises (Panel (d)).


5     Empirical Evidence for Model Assumptions and Predictions
Before estimating the model, we provide empirical evidence in support of the model's assumptions
and predictions using the survey data.

5.1   Empirical Basis for Model Assumptions
When estimating the model, we will allow the risk aversion parameter , the learning rate  , the
true mean of log offers µ , and initial beliefs µ1 to differ by gender. Otherwise, we will tie our
hands and assume that all remaining parameters are the same for both genders. We next provide
empirical support for these assumptions.

(No) Gender Differences in Outside Options and On-the-Job Search. The model as-
sumes that the value of leisure, b, does not differ by gender. We believe this is borne out by the
data: as discussed in Section 3.3.3, family background characteristics and student debt levels do not
differ by gender. Moreover, both genders report similar importance of having a job by graduation.
     The model also assumes no on-the-job search or job separation. While this is a simplification,
this could be a problematic assumption if genders differed in how long they stayed (or expected to
stay) at the first job. However, as discussed in Section 3.3.3, we do not find evidence of this either.

Gender Differences in Risk Preferences. When we estimate the model, we allow men and
women to have different degrees of risk aversion. This is motivated by the evidence in previous
studies and in Table 1 of a significant gender difference in self-reported willingness to take risks.

Biases in Beliefs. We use two approaches to illustrate the empirical basis for biased beliefs
(in the form of overconfidence). First, we compare the ex ante earnings expectations distribution
of the 2018 (2019) cohort with the earnings realizations of the previous cohort ­ i.e. 2017(2018)
graduating cohort (obtained from the graduate survey). Earnings expectations were elicited using
the following question: "We would next like to ask you about the kind of job that you expect to
work at when you first start working after graduation. We would like to know how much you
expect to make at this job in the first year." This question was asked in the baseline survey for the
2018-2019 cohorts. The distributions of earnings expectations for the 2018-2019 cohorts and the
corresponding realizations for the previous cohorts (2017-2018) are shown in Figure 4 separately by
gender. For both men and women, the earnings expectations distribution is generally to the right of


                                                  19
the distribution of earnings realizations, suggesting that both genders have earnings expectations
that tend to be higher than previous years' realizations. However, the rightward shift is much
more pronounced for males: 30% of males expect to make less than the previous cohort median,
compared to 37% of females.
     One might be concerned that the rightward shift of the expectations distribution relative to
the realizations distribution of the previous cohort may not necessarily imply an over-optimism
bias if students believe that the earnings distributions are non-stationary and are shifting up over
time. However, in order to fully explain the different patterns that we observe by gender in Figure
4, student beliefs' about the non-stationarity of the earnings distributions would have to vary
systematically by gender. To provide additional evidence that beliefs are indeed biased, we use
data from the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts and compare the ex-ante expectations of students
with their own ex-post realizations. Note that this comparison is possible only for a relatively
small subset of students who answered both the baseline and final surveys. Figure 5 plots the
two distributions. Consistent with the cross-cohort comparison, on average, both men and women
overestimate their earnings, with men exhibiting a somewhat greater degree of optimism regarding
their future earnings outcomes.35
     An alternative interpretation of the observed gap between earnings expectations and realizations
is that this reflects misinformation (that is perhaps more prevalent for men relative to women) rather
than a psychological attribute such as an optimistic bias. We can rule out this possibility as we
also elicit beliefs about population earnings.36 Collectively, the evidence we present here strongly
indicates that students' beliefs - in particular, those of male students ­ are systematically biased
upwards.

Learning Another aspect of biased beliefs that is important for job search is the extent to which
learning occurs over the job search period. Although the gender differences in belief bias at the
mean is relatively modest, men and women appear to update their beliefs at different speeds. Using
data on earnings expectations from two time points, once at the beginning of job search and another
mid-search, we are able to observe how earnings expectations evolve. Table 4 reports the earnings
expectations and eventual realizations for the full sample (Panel A), as well as the consistent sample
of men and women who answered both the baseline and mid-search surveys (Panel B). The data
for both samples paint a similar picture ­ both men and women revise their earnings expectations
  35
     To be sure, a search model without any bias in beliefs can have differences in expectations and realizations, but
they should be zero on average.
  36
     Specifically, the survey asks, "Consider those [male/female] Questrom graduates from the last five years and
who started working full-time immediately after graduation. What do you think their starting total annual salary (in
dollars) was, on average? " To assess whether the observed patterns are driven by misinformation, we compare the
distributions of population earnings beliefs, own-earnings expectations of the 2018-2019 cohort, and the distribution
of realized earnings of the 2017-2018 cohort. As observed in Figure A.4, both genders appear to underestimate
population earnings. This indicates that the bias in own-earnings expectations is more consistent with overoptimism
rather than with misinformed beliefs about population earnings.



                                                         20
downward over time. However, looking at the consistent sample, we see that men are slower to
update. By the mid-search survey, both the mean and median women's earnings expectations have
largely converged to the observed realizations. By contrast, men's earnings expectations remain,
on average, about 10% higher than eventual realizations (i.e. overly optimistic).

5.2    Reduced-Form Evidence for the Model Predictions
Next, we provide some reduced-form evidence in support of the key predictions of the model. It is
important to bear in mind that the proxies for risk preferences and optimism bias that we use are
based on individual self-reports and are likely to be prone to measurement error. In addition to the
underlying psychological attributes that they are meant to capture, these survey measures of risk
and belief biases could also be correlated with other individual-level characteristics; as such, we
view these empirical tests as useful in providing suggestive evidence of the main model mechanisms,
and refrain from attaching a strong causal interpretation to the observed correlations. Similarly,
given measurement error concerns, we are also cautious about attaching too much weight to the
precise magnitude of the observed relationships. For these reasons, when we formally estimate the
model, the survey measures of risk and overconfidence do not feature directly in the model, and
both risk preferences and the extent of bias in beliefs (and learning) are among the key parameters
that will be estimated from the data.
     First, we examine the relationship between risk preferences, accepted earnings, and job accep-
tance timing. As outlined in Section 4.4, the model predicts that higher levels of risk aversion
leads to lower reservation wages and lower accepted wages at any given point in time. Moreover,
the lower reservation wages translate to a higher likelihood of job acceptance at any point in time.
As such, we would expect to see more risk-tolerant individuals accepting jobs later, as well as a
positive relationship between risk tolerance and accepted earnings. The model also predicts that
part of the relationship between risk preferences and timing of job acceptance is due to more risk
averse individuals starting search earlier.
     The left panel of Figure 6 presents a binned scatterplot of the relationship between the survey
measure of risk tolerance (on the x-axis) and the month of job offer acceptance (on the y-axis)
while the right panel of Figure 6 presents a similar plot, with the share accepting a job six or more
months after graduation on the y-axis instead. Both figures support the model prediction that
risk preferences are positively related with the timing of job acceptance. Likewise, consistent with
the model, the left panel of Figure 7 shows a negative relationship between risk tolerance and the
likelihood of starting the job search process before graduation.37 Turning next to the relationship
between risk preferences and accepted earnings, as depicted in the right panel of Figure 7, there is
a strong positive association between individuals' willingness to take risks and accepted earnings
  37
   Qualitatively, we find similar patterns within gender, though the relationships are not always precisely estimated.
Results available upon request.



                                                         21
in the first job. The economic magnitude is quite large: a one-point increase in risk tolerance is
associated with a nearly $2,000 higher starting salary.
    A natural question is how much of the gender earnings gap can our survey measure of risk
preferences explain? Table 5 addresses this question. Column (1) indicates that, on average, females
earn $6,719 less than their male counterparts. This difference is statistically significant at the 1%
level. Adjusting for individual-level differences in background characteristics (i.e., cohort, race,
country of birth, and parents' education) and academic background (i.e., GPA and concentration)
reduces the gender gap by close to 30% to $4,542 (see Column (2)).38 This is largely due to
the fact that men tend to choose high-paying concentrations such as finance, while women choose
lower-paying concentrations such as marketing. Nevertheless, the residual gender gap in accepted
earnings is still highly statistically significant and reasonably large (approximately 7.4% of mean
earnings). In Column (3), we add our survey measure of risk preferences. The coefficient on the
female dummy declines further to $3,687 (p < 0.01). This implies that gender differences in risk
preferences, as measured in our survey, explain approximately 19% of the residual gender earnings
gap in accepted offers. The results are similar when we replace the continuous risk measure with
a dummy variable for "high" risk tolerance (defined as an average response of 5 or above on the
continuous risk measure) (see Column (4)). As shown in the remaining three columns, the results
remain qualitatively similar even if we include controls for job characteristics such as industry
fixed effects, log hours of work, and city fixed effects (these controls are all choices, and hence
endogenous). In this specification, we find that gender differences in risk preferences can explain
approximately 25% of the residual gender earnings gap (net of job characteristics) in accepted
offers. The results are similar if we use a log specification for earnings instead of levels (see Table
A.6).
    The model also predicts that a systematic upward bias in beliefs (overoptimism) would lead to
higher reservation wages at a given point in time, and hence a lower likelihood of job acceptance at
any point.39 Therefore, we should observe such individuals accepting offers later. To empirically
examine the relationship between overoptimism and timing of job acceptance, we turn to data
from the subset of individuals for whom we have data on both ex-ante earnings expectations and
realizations. We construct the individual-level proxy of over-optimism as the percent deviation
between the earnings expectations and realizations (with positive values indicating that the indi-
viduals' earnings expectations exceed their eventual realizations).40 As mentioned earlier, caution
  38
     Using the 2014­2018 ACS, we find that the inclusion of similar background controls (e.g. dummies for age and
year, a dummy for US-born) and fixed effects for detailed major categories within business (13 categories) accounts
for 29.7% of the observed gender earnings gap among college graduates who majored in business in the U.S. These
results are available upon request.
  39
     Empirically, in the subsample of individuals for whom we have data on risk preferences and overconfidence
(N = 393), we find that risk tolerance and overconfidence are virtually uncorrelated (r = -0.06, p = 0.201).
  40
     As shown in Figure A.5, expectations are indeed predictive of future earnings, though the slope is far from one.
This is in line with findings by Conlon et al. (2018) and Wiswall and Zafar (2019) who find that ex-ante earnings
expectations of workers and college students, respectively, tend to be predictive of ex-post earnings realizations.


                                                         22
is warranted in interpreting this measure at the individual level. A positive value of this measure
may not necessarily imply overoptimism at the individual level. However, at the aggregate level,
expectations are clearly biased upwards (Figures 4 and 5). This measure is positive for 54% of
the individuals. Figure 8 shows a clear positive and statistically significant relationship between
our proxy of overoptimism and month of acceptance. Consistent with the model's prediction, indi-
viduals who are more overoptimistic, as measured by the gap between their expected and realized
earnings, are also those who tend to accept jobs later. Unlike risk preferences, the aggregate impact
of overoptimism on accepted earnings is ambiguous; while overoptimism will lead to jobs being ac-
cepted later at lower reservation wages, for jobs that are accepted early, wages will be higher as a
result of higher reservation wages.41
     In the model, a key mechanism through which risk preferences and overoptimism affect the
timing of job acceptance and accepted earnings is through reservation wages. We test this prediction
using data on ex-ante reservation earnings from the baseline survey of current students. To increase
statistical power, at least for risk preferences, we pool responses from two additional cohorts of
students that took the same in-class survey in their junior year. That is, we use data from cohorts
of students who are expected to graduate between 2018 and 2021. Reservation earnings were elicited
using the following survey question: "What would the lowest annual total compensation (including
base pay, signing bonus, and bonus pay) have to be for you to accept a job offer?" 42
     The left panel of Figure 9 shows a strong positive association between our survey measure of risk
tolerance and students' reports of their ex-ante reservation earnings. Turning to the relationship
between reservation earnings and overconfidence, we plot a similar figure in the right panel, for
the subset of students for whom we have data on earnings expectations and realizations (i.e., the
2018-2019 cohorts) and meet the sample restrictions as discussed above. Even for this small sample
of students, there is evidence of a significant relationship between higher reservation earnings and
greater optimism in earnings expectations. Table A.7 further shows that there is a clear gender
difference in reservation earnings. Women, on average, report reservation earnings that are about
$3,000 less than men. This difference is reduced to about $2,000 controlling for the standard set of
individual-level background controls. More importantly, the inclusion of the survey measure of risk
preferences and overconfidence reduces the raw (residual) gender gap by 32% (46%), indicating that
both attributes can account for a sizable portion of the observed gender difference in reservation
earnings. Taken together, these findings lend further support to the model mechanisms.
  41
      Naively regressing accepted earnings on our proxy of overoptimism gives a negative estimate, which is largely
mechanical since overoptimism is defined as (expectations - accepted earnings).
   42
      This data was collected for a different project that utilizes the same survey instruments. We do not use the data
from the additional cohorts for the other analyses as these students have not completed the follow-up surveys.
   We winsorize the top and bottom 2.5% of reservation earnings and further restrict the sample to students with
reservations earnings above $10,000, those whose reported reservation earnings are lower than their expected earnings,
and indicate that they plan to work immediately after graduation. The results are similar, albeit somewhat weaker,
if we do not impose the additional restrictions. These restrictions ensure that the self-reported reservation earnings
are less susceptible to outliers and measurement error.


                                                          23
5.3   Other Potential Explanations
In Appendix A, we consider alternative explanations that may account for the observed empirical
patterns. In particular, we consider the extent to which gender differences in other psychological
attributes such as procrastination, patience, and rejection aversion, might generate similar patterns
in job acceptance timing and earnings. We show that these alternative explanations might be able
to explain isolated patterns in the data, but not all of them.


6     Estimation
In this section, we estimate the model using our data on job search. As mentioned earlier, the risk
aversion parameter , the learning rate  , the true mean of log offers µ and initial beliefs µ1 are
allowed to differ by gender, and we will denote gender-specific parameters with a superscript (one
of {m, f }). All remaining parameters are the same for both genders.
     As shown in section 5.1, for parameters that we can directly observe, the assumptions we make
are largely supported by the data; returns to search are equivalent across genders, as is the variance
of log offers. For parameters with no direct counterparts in the data, the above assumption imposes
that search is not differentially costly by gender at this early stage of the job search process (except
through endogenous choices of whether or not to search), and that both genders have the same
dollar value of leisure, but that it is valued differently only because of risk preferences.
     We set the discount rate to  = 0.996 for both genders to match a five percent annual interest
rate in our monthly estimation. The graduation date is set to T    ¯ = 10, nine months from when our
model begins. Since the variance of log offers in our data is similar across genders, we exogenously
set  to equal the observed variance of log wage offers in our data, pooled across gender. For the
average log offer for each gender (µ,m ,µ,f ), we use our data on offers and set them equal to the
mean log offer received by each gender. Finally, we make the parametric assumption that search
costs c are distributed according to an exponential distribution with parameter , and estimate the
parameter  as part of the procedure below. To pin down the probability of receiving an offer 
conditional on searching, we use the average probability of receiving an offer for those who report
searching.
     We choose the remaining parameters via Simulated Methods of Moments (SMM), minimizing
the distance between specific model-generated moments and data-generated moments. Specifically,
                                                                         f
we search for the set of eight parameters  = {b, , µm         m m f          f
                                                          1 ,  ,  ,  , µ1 ,  } that solve the following
problem:

                                         ^        ^ () - M
                           ^ = argmin M () - M
                           
                                                  M
                                      
                                             M       M
                                  subject to    and f  m
                                              f m




                                                  24
where M  ^ denotes the vector of model-generated moments and M denotes the vector of empirical
moments. To find the global solution to this minimization problem, we use the Tik-Tak algorithm
(Arnoud et al., 2019), and solve the model on a Sobol set of 100,000 points. We then proceed to
look for local minima as described in (Arnoud et al., 2019).
    For the empirical moments contained in M , we use data on the evolution of earnings expecta-
tions (for which we have information at two points in time, T ¯ - 8 and T
                                                                        ¯ - 2) to inform the learning
rule and overconfidence, and information on the time path of cumulative mean accepted offers by
gender and the share of students who have accepted offers over time to inform the preference and
search parameters.43 Throughout, and consistent with the evidence outlined above, we impose the
restrictions that (i) risk aversion for women is larger than for men, and (ii)  f >  m , in line with
the reduced-form evidence.
    While we do not offer a formal proof of identification, we think heuristically of the expectations
data at different moments in time as identifying bias and learning, the offer arrival rates as identi-
fying the search cost parameters, mean offers as identifying the offer distribution parameters, and
the full cumulative mean accepted offer curve as identifying b, f and m . The discussion in Section
4.4 provides some intuition on how the risk parameter, learning rate, and overconfidence impact
the moments that we target, while Figure A.8 shows how the objective changes as we move away
from the estimated parameters.
    The estimated parameters are summarized in Table 6. The top panel reports the gender-neutral
parameters, while the bottom panel reports the gender-specific parameters. The risk aversion
parameter for men is m = 1.9 with a larger value for women of f = 2.0.44 The value of leisure
(net of search costs) before graduation is 5% of offered wages, while the average cost of search is
roughly 0.3% - 0.5% of offered wages for women and men, respectively. The mean annual salary
offer is $66, 068 for men and $59, 848 for women. Men have more optimistic beliefs about the mean
offer that they will receive relative to women; the implied bias in wages at graduation is 22% for
men and 8% for women. Moreover, the learning rate of women is about 40% higher than that of
men.
    As can be seen in Table A.9, the model is able to broadly match the key empirical patterns
observed in the data. For example, we capture the decline in the gender gap in accepted and the
fact that women accept jobs earlier than men earnings. While the model overpredicts the likelihood
of searching, it generates the observation that women are more likely to search for jobs earlier than
men. Figure 10 plots the implied gender gap in cumulative mean accepted offers in our estimated
model. The model is able to capture the decline in the gender gap as graduation nears, though it
  43
      Specifically, for the former we use the value for each gender at t = 1, and then the slope parameter from a linear
fit of the model-generated data; for the latter, we use the cumulative share that have accepted jobs at t = 1 and
t=T   ¯ for each gender.
   44
      While at face value the difference may appear small, what matters is how these differences translate into differ-
ential behavior in the model. Figure 3 shows that reservation wages move significantly for this quantitative move in
risk aversion.



                                                          25
slightly underpredicts the level at earlier dates. Figure 11 plots the cumulative share of men and
women who have accepted jobs over the job search period, in both the model and the data. The
model captures the fact that females accept jobs earlier than males, driven by the fact that they
are more likely to search earlier (see Table A.9). Finally, while women are always less likely to
reject an offer, the composition of job acceptance dates implies that, overall, men and women are
likely to reject at least one offer at similar rates; this is consistent with the raw data as well, where
we see similar likelihood of rejecting any offer by gender (see Table 2).


7        Policy Counterfactuals
In this section, we use the model to conduct two policy-relevant counterfactuals. First, we simulate
an information intervention and investigate the earnings and welfare impacts of eliminating the bias
in beliefs about the offer distribution. Second, given the gender differences in risk preferences (both
in the data and the model), we investigate the impact of instituting a policy where individuals can
hold on to previous offers for a longer duration. These counterfactuals abstract away from general
equilibrium considerations. In addition, it is worth noting that we take the gender-specific offer
distributions as given. To the extent that those differences might arise due to gender differences in
risk preferences/overconfidence, our counterfactuals arguably yield a lower bound of the impacts
on the gender gap.

7.1      Costs of Overconfidence: Earnings and Welfare Implications
Overconfidence can have important impacts on welfare and earnings. If students perceive that
they face a more favorable offer distribution than they actually do, they will raise their reservation
wages or search too hard, and may end up rejecting jobs that they would otherwise have accepted
had they known the truth, or pay too much in search costs. For some "lucky" individuals, this
can ultimately lead to higher earnings, but for others, once expectations have been revised and
reservation wages lowered, earnings might fall. Therefore, the welfare gains from knowing the truth
can be heterogeneous.
    Evidence from our survey provides some indication that overconfidence might be more costly
for men. In particular, women are more likely to be satisfied with the job search process than
men (5.94 vs. 5.50 on a 10-point scale) and report significantly fewer search regrets (41% vs.
52%).45 Men are also significantly more likely to have rejected an offer that is higher than the one
they end up accepting relative to women (21% vs. 13.7%). The last fact could also be consistent
with compensating differentials; however, given that the literature typically finds that non-wage
amenities are valued more by women, we would have expected the gender gap in these statistics to
    45
     The survey instrument also included a question regarding regret for accepting a job too early. We find no gender
difference in response to this question: roughly 18% of both genders report regret for accepting a job too early.



                                                         26
be flipped if that were the case.46
     We can use the model to study the implications of overconfidence on earnings and welfare. To
do so, we conduct the following exercise. We assume that both genders have perfect knowledge
about the mean offer, and thus do not need to learn. We then study what happens to earnings and
welfare in this counterfactual, perfect information world.
     Figure 12 plots the implied gender gap in cumulative mean accepted offers under perfect in-
formation. The solid black line reproduces the model-generated gender gap, previously plotted in
Figure 10, along with the empirical gender gap (black dashed line). The red curve plots the implied
cumulative gender gap in accepted offers under perfect information. By the time of graduation, the
gender gap falls by 18% relative to the model with imperfect information. Overall, as shown in Ta-
ble 7, the gender gap under perfect information is 10.1% versus 13.5% under imperfect information,
or about 75% of the gap.
     While overconfidence, on average, results in a larger gender gap in favor of men, the rise in
earnings comes at a cost. To get a sense of the welfare implications of imposing perfect information,
we solve for the additional constant flow income in the imperfect information, baseline model that
would deliver the same change in date t = 1 present discount value (PDV) welfare as the change from
going from imperfect information to perfect information. For men, the mean (median) welfare gain
of perfect information is equivalent to a $216 ($108) annual increase in flow income in the baseline
imperfect information model. For men to achieve the welfare gain (from the perspective of t = 1)
that women experience, flow income in the baseline model would only need to increase by $86 ($36)
annually. Therefore, consistent with the survey data, the expected PDV welfare gains of perfect
information are twice as large for men.

7.2    Limiting Exploding Offers
Next, we consider a policy that could arguably minimize the role of risk preferences (and overconfi-
dence) ­ allowing student to hold onto offers that they receive for an additional month (i.e., slowing
down exploding offers). Such a policy removes part of the risk associated with rejecting an offer,
as an additional month allows for another possible offer draw. On the other hand, such a policy
also makes mistakes due to overconfidence less costly, which may benefit males. Thus, the impact
on the gender gap is not ex ante clear. In principle, universities could mandate employers to allow
students a longer time to contemplate over offers, and so such a counterfactual is feasible.47
    To conduct this counterfactual exercise, we extend our baseline model to allow for these "non-
   46
      We also added a module to the nationally representative NY Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations about job
search behavior. In response to the question, "Have you ever regretted rejecting a job offer?", 18.9% of males answered
"yes" compared to 14.4% of females. That is, the gender gap in ex post regret that we find in our sample also seems
to be present in more representative samples.
   47
      Our goal here is to quantify how such a policy may impact the gender gap. The general equilibrium consequences
of such a policy (especially for employers themselves) are not clear at all. In addition, such a policy is only possible
if all schools coordinate on it.


                                                          27
exploding" offers. In this environment, all students begin the job search process without an offer
in hand. As before, after date T¯ the model is stationary:

                                                                    u(w)
                                                       W (w, µ) =        .
                                                                    1-

                                                  ¯ and some belief µ is:
The value of unemployment without an offer for t  T

      U (µ) =             max -cs + u(b(1 -  ))
                 c        s{0,1}

                + s           max{W (y, µ), U of f er (µ, y ), U (µt )}dF (y ; µ,  ) dH (c) +  (1 - s)U (µ),

while the value with an offer w in hand with belief µ is:

U of f er (w, µ) =           max -cs + u(b(1 -  )) + s               max{W (w, µ), W (y, µ), U of f er (y, µ)}dF (y ; µt ,  )
                      c     s{0,1}

                     +  (1 - s) max{U (µ), W (w, µ) dH (c).

   For t < T¯, the perceived value of being a student at date t with no job in hand and no offer in
hand beliefs µ is:

                     Ut (µ) =               max -cs + u(b)
                                    c       s{0,1}

                                   + s          max{Wt+1 (y, µ), Utof f er
                                                                   +1 (y, µ), Ut+1 (µ)}dF (y ; µ,  )

                                   +  (1 - s) Ut+1 (µ) dH (c) ,

where the only change from the earlier formulation is that if an offer comes, the student can either
accept the offer or hold on to the offer, which gives them the perceived value of having no job, but
an offer y in hand, Utoffer
                      +1 (µ, y ). For some current offer w , this value is given by:


           Utof f er (w, µ) =                max -cs + u(b)
                                        c   s{0,1}

                                   + s           max{Wt+1 (w, µ), Wt+1 (y, µ), Utof f er
                                                                                 +1 (y, µ)}dF (y ; µ,  )+

                                    (1 - s) max{Ut+1 (µ), Wt+1 (w, µ)} dH (c).

In this case, if the student receives another offer y , she has three choices: accept the offer that was
held on to w, accept the new offer y , or take the offer y into the next period and reject the offer
w. If no offer is received in the current period, the student can either accept the offer they held on
to, or reject the offer and continue searching without an offer in hand. The value of employment


                                                               28
for each job j remains as in equation (4).
    For those who have an offer w in hand, we can re-write the value as:

                Utof f er (w, µ) =        max -cs + u(b)
                                     c   s{0,1}

                                     + s       max{Wt+1 (y, µ), Utof f er
                                                                  +1 (y, µ)}dF (y ; µ,  )
                                             w
                                              w
                                     + s          max{Wt+1 (w, µ), Utof f er
                                                                     +1 (y, µ)}dF (y ; µ,  )

                                  (1 - s) max{Ut+1 (µ), Wt+1 (w, µ)} dH (c).

That is, for any offer y > w, we know that accepting y will dominate accepting w, and so the choice
is between accepting y or holding on to the offer y . For any wage offer y < w, accepting the old
offer dominates accepting the new offer, so the relevant choice is between accepting the old offer or
holding on to the new offer. Therefore, there are two cutoff wages to define. The first defines the
wage offers the student will accept for all offers that she receives that are above the current offer
w:
                                                              
                                    Wt (µ, y1  (µ)) = Ut (µ, y1 ),

and the second is the offers the student will hold on to, for all offers which are below w:

                                                             
                                         Wt (µ, w) = Ut (µ, y2 (µ, w)) .

    Therefore, if a student with an offer w in hand and beliefs µ receives an offer, the decision to
accept, reject, or hold on to the new offer y is given by  (µ, w, y ):
                                
                                 hold y , reject w,      for w  y  y1   (µ)
                                 accept y , reject w,    for w  y1  (µ) < y
                      (w, y ) =
                                 hold y , reject w,         (µ, w )  y  w
                                                      for y2
                                
                                 accept w, reject y, for y  y  (µ, w)  w
                                
                                                               2

     We solve this model in the same way as discussed in 4.3 and then calculate the implied gender
gap in the case where students have two months rather than one month to accept or reject an
offer. Note that because the learning rule we adopt is exogenous, there is no change in learning in
response to the policy which limits exploding offers. It is not clear how learning would be impacted
in reality in such a regime.
     The red line in Panel (b) of Figure 12 shows the gender gap in the counterfactual environment
in which students can hold on to offers for longer. The gender gap in cumulative accepted offers
falls significantly at all points in time. The last row in Table 7 shows that the average gender gap in
this case would be about 8%, which is about 40% smaller than the gap in the case with exploding

                                                        29
offers. Thus, given our model estimate, such a policy favors females and helps to reduce the gender
gap in accepted wages.


8    Conclusion
Despite the central importance of labor market search for understanding job-finding behavior and
outcomes, and the large theoretical and empirical literature on this topic, surprisingly little is
known about gender differences in job search behavior. In this paper, we collect rich survey data
on the job search process and labor market realizations of undergraduate business majors from
Boston University and document novel facts about the job search behavior of male and female
college graduates in the entry labor market. In particular, we find that women accept jobs close
to a month earlier than comparable men and the cumulative gender gap in accepted offers declines
over the job search period. Using survey data on risk preferences and beliefs about offer wages
(and their subsequent realizations), we provide empirical evidence that men's greater degree of risk
tolerance and overconfidence (along with a slower rate of learning) relative to women play a role
in explaining the observed gender differences in job acceptance timing and the resulting gender
earnings gap.
    We show that a job search model that incorporates gender differences in risk aversion, overconfi-
dence (and learning) can match the key patterns in the data. Moreover, by allowing for endogenous
search effort, the model is also able to generate other empirical observations such as the fact that
women start searching (and receive their first offers) earlier. Policy counterfactuals using the model
suggest that gender differences in overconfidence can explain about 25% of the gender gap in ac-
cepted earnings at the mean. Although men gain, on average, from having overconfident beliefs,
this behavior is costly. Survey evidence shows that females are more likely to be satisfied with the
job search process and report significantly fewer search regrets. Using the model to simulate the
counterfactual with correct beliefs, we find that the welfare effects of overconfidence are sizable,
with men experiencing larger gains from moving to perfect information. We also show that a simple
policy of allowing students to hold on to previous offers for just one additional month can reduce
the gender gap by 40%.
    Our paper highlights that gender differences in psychological attributes such as risk aversion
and overconfidence, by affecting how men and women search for jobs, play a non-trivial role in
generating early career earnings gaps among the highly-skilled. We thus offer a novel explanation
for gender gaps among the highly-skilled. While we focus on the point of entry in the labor market,
understanding disparities in the initial conditions is important since they tend to have long-lasting
effects on workers (Rothstein, 2019).
    Our findings suggest that policies aimed at reducing biased beliefs, especially that of men, can
lead to overall welfare gains. Policies could also be adopted to mitigate the effects of risk preferences
such as allowing students to hold onto job offers for longer. Other policies could include providing

                                                   30
students with more information and guidance during the job search process about the expected
timing and distribution of offers. By correcting biased beliefs and helping to resolve uncertainty,
these policies could help both men and women make better decisions during the job search process
and potentially mitigate the gender earnings gap.
     It is worth noting that in the model, we take the gender-specific offer distributions as given
and stationary, which essentially treats employers as passive. By allowing the offer distribution
to vary by gender, this implicitly allows unobserved factors such as discrimination on the part of
employers (e.g., Neumark et al., 1996) or gender differences in preferences for job attributes to
affect job search behavior through offered wages. If, however, gendered offer distributions arise,
in part, due to gender differences in risk preferences and overconfidence, what we capture in our
analysis is a lower bound on the importance of these traits in the job search process. Future
work that sheds light on what causes men and women to apply to different jobs would be fruitful.
Doing so would require richer data not only on employer-employee matches, but also on application
behavior, which is challenging. In principle, one could endogenously generate gender differences
in offer distributions and non-stationarity by allowing for heterogeneity in job types. Extending
our single-job model to a two-job model could capture additional features of the observed gender
differences in search behavior, but identification of such a model is less clear. We do not pursue
that for these reasons.
     Finally, we have shown that males, relative to their female counterparts, tend to be more
overoptimistic and slower to learn. We take these beliefs as given. Our learning rule, while directly
informed by the data, also lacks micro-foundations. Survey evidence suggests that this could
partially be because men and women gather information differently (e.g., Table 2 shows that men
are more likely to rely on referrals, and women find the career center more useful). Future work
that tries to understand the origins and persistence of such biases would be valuable. However, the
data needs for doing so are quite demanding; we believe a more stylized laboratory setting may be
more amenable to answering these questions.




                                                 31
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, "Efficient Unemployment Insurance," Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, 1999, 107 (5), 893­928.

Albanesi, Stefania and Aysegul Sahin, "The Gender Unemployment Gap," Review of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics, October 2018, 30, 47­67.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Theresa Romano, "Ex Ante
 Returns and Occupational Choice," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Arnoud, Antoine, Fatih Guvenen, and Tatjana Kleineberg, "Benchmarking Global Op-
 timizers," NBER Working Papers 26340, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc October
 2019.

Avilova, Tatyana and Claudia Goldin, "What can UWE Do for Economics?," NBER Working
 Papers 24189, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2018.

Azmat, Ghazala and Barbara Petrongolo, "Gender and the Labor Market: What Have We
 Learned from Field and Lab Experiments," Labour Economics, 2014, 30, 32­40.

   and Rosa Ferrer, "Gender Gaps in Performance: Evidence from Young Lawyers," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2017, 125, 1306­1355.

Barbanchon, Thomas Le, Roland Rathelot, and Alexandra Roulet, "Gender Differences
 in Job Search: Trading off Commute Against Wage," Working Paper 2019.

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, "Boys Will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and
 Common Stock Investment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116, 261­292.

Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo, "The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages
 over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99
 (4), 665­688.

Bertrand, Marianne, "New Perspectives on Gender," in Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card,
 eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, Amsterdam: Elsevier, Ltd., 2011, pp. 1545­1592.

  , Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Pro-
  fessionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 2, 228­255.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence Kahn, "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Expla-
  nations," Journal of Economic Literature, 2017, 55 (3), 789­865.

Bowlus, Audra J., "A Search Interpretation of Male?Female Wage Differentials," Journal of
 Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (4), 625­657.

   and Louise Grogan, "Gender Wage Differentials, Job Search, and Part-Time Employment in
  the UK," Oxford Economic Papers, 2009, 61, 275­303.



                                             32
Buser, Thomas and Huaiping Yuan, "Do Women Give up Competing More Easily? Evidence
 from the Lab and the Dutch Math Olympiad," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 2019, 11 (3), 225­252.

  , Muriel Niederle, and Hessel Oosterbeek, "Gender, Competitiveness, and Career Choices,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1409­1447.

Caliendo, Marco, Deborah Cobb-Clark, and Arne Uhlendorff, "Locus of Control and Job
 Search Strategies," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (1), 88­103.

Charness, Gary and Uri Gneezy, "Strong Evidence for Gender Differences in Risk Taking,"
 Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2012, 83 (1), 50­58.

  , , and Alex Imas, "Experimental Methods: Eliciting Risk Preferences," Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization, 2013, 87, 43­51.

Conlon, John J., Laura Pilossoph, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar, "Labor Market
 Search with Imperfect Information and Learning," Working Paper 2018.

Cox, James C. and Ronald L. Oaxaca, "Direct Tests of the Reservation Wage Property,"
 Economic Journal, 1992, 102, 1423­1432.

Crosetto, Paolo and Antonio Filippin, "A Theoretical and Experimental Appraisal of Four
 Risk Elicitation Methods," Experimental Economics, 2016, 19 (3), 613­641.

Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy, "Gender Differences in Preferences," Journal of Economic
 Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 1­27.

Davidson, Russell and Jean-Yves Duclos, "Statistical Inference for Stochastic Dominance and
 for the Measurement of Poverty and Inequality," Econometrica, 2000, 68 (6), 1435­1464.

DellaVigna, Stefano and M. Daniele Paserman, "Job Search and Impatience," Journal of
 Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (3), 527­88.

  , Attila Lindner, Balazs Reizer, and Johannes F. Schmeider, "Reference-Dependent Job
  Search: Evidence from Hungary," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1969­2018.

Dittrich, Marcus and Kristina Leipold, "Gender Differences in Time Preferences," Economics
 Letters, 2014, 122 (3), 413­415.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, J¨           urgen Schupp, and
 Gert G. Wagner, "Risk Aversion, Risk, and the Duration of Unemployment," Journal of the
 European Economic Association, 2011, 9 (3), 522­550.

Donna, Javier D. and Gregory F. Veramendi, "Gender Differences within the Firm: Evidence
 from Two Million Travelers," Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, "Sex Differences and Statistical Stereotyping
  in Attitudes Toward Financial Risk," Evolution and Human Behavior, 2002, 23 (4), 281­295.



                                            33
   and , "Sex and Risk: Experimental Evidence," in Charles Plott and Vernon Smith, eds.,
  Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Vol. 1, Elsevier, New York, 2008a.

  and , "Forecasting Risk Attitudes: An Experimental Study Using Actual and Forecast Gamble
  Choices," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2018, 68 (1), 1­17.

Faberman, Jason, Andreas I. Mueller, Ay¸  seg¨
                                             ul S¸ ahin, and Giorgio Topa, "Job Search
  Behavior among the Employed and Non-Employed," Working Paper 23731, National Bureau of
  Economic Research August 2017.

  , Andreas Mueller, and Aysegul Sahin, "Job Search and the Gender Wage Gap," Working
  Paper June 2020.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becke, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and
  Uwe Sunde, "Global Evidence on Economic Preferences," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2018, 133 (4), 1645­1692.

  , Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David B. Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "The Preference
  Survey Module: A Validated Instrument for Measuring Risk, Time, and Social Preferences," IZA
  DP No. 9674 2016.

Feinberg, Robert M., "Risk Aversion, Risk, and the Duration of Unemployment," The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 1977, 59 (3), 264­271.

Flabbi, Luca, "Gender Discrimination Estimation in a Search Model with Matching and Bargain-
  ing," International Economic Review, 2010, 51 (3), 745­783.

  and Andrea Moro, "The Effect of Job Flexibility on Female Labor Market Outcomes: Esti-
  mates from a Search and Bargaining Model," Journal of Econometrics, 2012, 168 (1), 81­95.

Flinn, Christopher, Petra Todd, and Weilong Zhang, "Personality Traits, Job Search and
  the Gender Wage Gap," HCEO Working Paper Series 2020-010 2020.

Hansen, Benjamin and Drew McNichols, "Information and the Persistence of the Gender
 Wage Gap; Early Evidence from California?s Salary History Ban," NBER Working Papers 27054,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Holt, Charles A. and Susan K. Laury, "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects," American
 Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1644­1655.

Kahn, Lisa, "The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad
 Economy," Labour Economics, 2010, 17 (2), 303­316.

Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas Mueller, "Job Search and Job Finding in a Period of Mass
 Unemployment: Evidence from High-Frequency Longitudinal Data," Working Paper, Princeton
 University, Department of Economics, Center for Economic Policy Studies 2011.

McGee, Andrew D., "How the Perception of Control Influences Unemployed Job Search," In-
 dustrial and Labor Relations Review, 2015, 68 (1), 184­211.



                                             34
   and Peter McGee, "Search, Effort, and Locus of Control," Journal of Economic Behavior &
  Organization, 2016, 126 (Part A), 89­101.

Morchio, Iacopo and Christian Moser, "The Gender Pay Gap: Micro Sources and Macro
 Consequences," Working Paper April 2020.

Neumark, David, Roy J. Bank, and Kyle D. Van Nort, "Sex Discrimination in Restaurant
 Hiring: An Audit Study*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 08 1996, 111 (3), 915­941.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, "Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men
 Compete Too Much?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1067­1101.

Noonan, Mary C., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul Courant, "Pay Differences among the
 Highly Trained: Cohort Differences in the Sex Gap in Lawyers? Earnings," Social Forces, 2005,
 84, 853­72.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz, "The Short- and Long-Term
 Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 2012, 4 (1), 1­29.

Oyer, Paul, "Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for Economists," Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (3), 143­160.

Pannenberg, Markus, "Risk Attitudes and Reservation Wages of Unemployed Workers: Evidence
 from Panel Data," Economics Letters, 2010, 106, 223­226.

Pissarides, Christopher A., "Risk, Job Search, and Income Distribution," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1974, 82 (6), 1255­67.

Reuben, Ernesto, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar, "Preferences and Biases in Educa-
 tional Choices and Labor Market Expectations: Shrinking the Black Box of Gender," Economic
 Journal, 2017, 127, 2153­2186.

Rothstein, Jesse, "The Lost Generation? Scarring after the Great Recession," Working Paper
 2019.

Shurchkov, Olga and Catherine C. Eckel, "Gender Differences in Behavioral Traits and Labor
  Market Outcomes," in Susan L. Averett, Laura M. Argys, and Saul D. Hoffman, eds., The Oxford
  Handbook of Women and the Economy, Oxford University Press, 2018, pp. 481­512.

Spinnewijn, Johannes, "Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with Biased
  Beliefs," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (1), 130­167.

Steel, Piers, "Arousal, Avoidant and Decisional Procrastinators: Do They Exist?," Personality
  and Individual Differences, 2010, 48 (8).

Vesterlund, Lise, "The Effects of Risk Aversion on Job Matching: Can Differences in Risk
 Aversion Explain the Wage Gap?," Working Paper 1997.

Wee, Shu Lin, "Delayed learning and human capital accumulation: The cost of entering the job
 market during a recession," 2016. Unpublished manuscript.

                                             35
Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar, "Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human
 Capital, and Gender*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 133 (1), 457­507.

   and , "Human Capital Investments and Expectations about Career and Family," Working
  Paper, 2019.

Xiao, Pengpeng, "Wage and Employment Discrimination by Gender in Labor Market Equilib-
 rium," Working Paper 2020.




                                         36
                                                         Figure 1: CDF of Job Acceptance Timing, By Gender




                                                 1
                                                 .8
            Proportion Accepted a Job

                                                 .6
                                                 .4
                                                 .2




                                                                                                            KS p-val: 0.005
                                                 0




                                                         -10          -5              0                 5                   10
                                                                           Months Since Graduation

                                                                               Male            Female

Note: The figure plots the proportion of males and females who accepted a job in each month
relative to the month of graduation (indicated as 0). Months since graduation = 9 and -9 includes
individuals who accepted a job 10 or more months after or before graduation, respectively.



  Figure 2: Cumulative Mean Accepted Offer by Months Since Graduation and Gender
                                                 90000




                                                                                                          Male Slope: -926.7***
                                                                                                        Female Slope: -585.1***
            Cumulative Mean Accepted Offer ($)

                                                 80000
                                                 70000
                                                 60000
                                                 50000




                                                         -10          -5              0                 5                   10
                                                                           Months Since Graduation

                                                                               Male            Female

Note: The figure plots the cumulative mean accepted offer as a function of months since graduation
separately for males (solid blue line) and females (dashed red line). Months since graduation is
defined relative to the month of graduation (indicated as 0). The 95% confidence interval bands
are based on bootstrapped standard errors.



                                                                                 37
                                               Figure 3: Comparative Statics in Risk Aversion and Biases in Beliefs

                                0.32                                                                                0.32


                                 0.3                                                                                 0.3


                                0.28                                                                                0.28
     reservation wage




                                                                                         reservation wage
                                0.26                                                                                0.26


                                0.24                                                                                0.24


                                0.22                                                                                0.22


                                 0.2                                                                                 0.2


                                0.18                                                                                0.18


                                0.16                                                                                0.16


                                0.14                                                                                0.14
                                       2   4    6    8    10   12   14   16   18   20                                      2   4   6   8    10   12   14   16   18   20


                                                         (a)                                                                               (b)
                                 0.5                                                                                0.36
     probability of searching




                                                                                         probability of searching




                                                                                                                    0.34
                                0.45



                                                                                                                    0.32

                                 0.4


                                                                                                                     0.3


                                0.35

                                                                                                                    0.28



                                 0.3
                                                                                                                    0.26




                                0.25                                                                                0.24
                                       2   4    6    8    10   12   14   16   18   20                                      2   4   6   8    10   12   14   16   18   20


                                                         (c)                                                                               (d)
Note: This figure shows how reservation wages (Panels a and b) and the probability of searching (Panels c and d)
change over the job search period as risk aversion varies (left two panels) and biases vary (right two panels). The
                                                                                                     ¯ = 10 and the
scale on the x-axis (in months) matches the timing in the model, where the graduation date is set to T
model begins at t = 1, 9 months before graduation. For these numerical exercises, we use the estimated parameter
values for males;  and µ1 vary around their respective estimated male values as depicted above.




                                                                                        38
             Figure 4: Gender Difference in Beliefs Bias ­ Cross-Cohort Comparison

                                                                Female                                                                                               Male



                   .000025




                                                                                                                              .000025
                                                                                          KS p-val: 0.123                                                                                        KS p-val: 0.001
                                                                                              N real: 266                                                                                            N real: 219
                                                                                           N expect: 479                                                                                          N expect: 431


                   .00002




                                                                                                                              .00002
                   .000015




                                                                                                                              .000015
         Density




                                                                                                                   Density
                   .00001




                                                                                                                              .00001
                   5.000e-06




                                                                                                                              5.000e-06
                   0




                                                                                                                              0
                               0                      50000          100000              150000                                             0             50000         100000                 150000
                                                                 Earnings                                                                                           Earnings


                                                                      2017-2018 Realization                                                     2018-2019 Expectation

Note: The distribution of expected earnings is constructed based on the earnings expectations (in
2017 dollars) reported by students from the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts. Earnings expectations
were elicited during the in-class survey that was conducted in the senior or junior year. The
distribution of realized (actual) earnings is based on the first year earnings of the accepted offer of
the previous cohorts of graduating students (i.e. 2017-2018 cohorts).




       Figure 5: Gender Difference in Beliefs Bias ­ Within Individual Comparison

                                                                      Female                                                                                      Male
                                         .00003




                                                                                                                                   .00003




                                                                                            KS p-val: 0.000                                                                            KS p-val: 0.000
                                                                                                     N: 229                                                                                     N: 164
                                                                            Mean Diff. (Expect-Real): $4566                                                            Mean Diff. (Expect-Real): $6902
                                         .00002




                                                                                                                                   .00002
                               Density




                                                                                                                    Density
                                         .00001




                                                                                                                                   .00001
                                         0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                  0           50000      100000          150000                                                 0        50000       100000         150000
                                                                      Earnings                                                                                    Earnings


                                                                                Realization                                                         Expectations

Note: The sample is restricted to individuals for whom we have data on both earnings expecta-
tions and realizations. The figure plots the distribution of the difference between ex-ante earnings
expectations and ex-post earnings expectations separately by gender. Earnings expectations and
realizations are in 2017 dollars.




                                                                                                              39
     Figure 6: Relationship Between Timing of Job Acceptance and Risk Preferences




                                                                                                                                           .25
                                                         .5
                                                                                                  Coef: 0.108                                                                            Coef: 0.015*
                                                                                                   N: 1359                                                                                N: 1359




                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                   .2
               Mean Month of Accepting An Offer




                                                                                                                     Share Accepting Job  6 Months
                                                                                                                            After Graduation
                                                         -.5




                                                                                                                                   .15
                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                         -1.5




                                                                                                                                           .05
                                                         -2




                                                                1         2       3       4       5        6                                            1        2       3       4       5       6
                                                                     Willingness to Take Risk (Average)                                                     Willingness to Take Risk (Average)


Note: Each graph is a binned scatter plot of a measure of the timing of job acceptance on the
survey measure of risk preferences. The y-axis for the left panel plots the mean month of accepting
an offer (defined relative to the month of graduation) while the y-axis for the right panel plots the
share accepting a job within six months of graduation. The willingness to take risks is the average
of two survey questions that ask respondents to rate their willingness to take on financial risks and
daily risks. Both risk questions are measured on a 1 to 6 scale.


           Figure 7: Accepted Earnings, Timing of Search, and Risk Preferences
                                                                                                                                           80
                                                  .9




                                                                                                  Coef: -0.044**                                                                         Coef: 1.976**
                                                                                                   N: 452                                                                                 N: 1359
                                                                                                                                           75
               Share Starting Search Before Graduation
                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                     Mean First Year Earnings
                                                                                                                             (1,000s)
                                                                                                                                65
                                  .7




                                                                                                                                           60
                 .6




                                                                                                                                           55
                                                                                                                                           50
                                                  .5




                                                            1           2        3       4       5         6                                            1        2       3      4        5       6
                                                                    Willingness to Take Risk (Average)                                                      Willingness To Take Risk (Average)


Note: This figure shows binned scatter plots of share of students starting search before graduation
(left panel) and total accepted earnings in the first year (right panel) on the survey measure of risk
preferences. The willingness to take risks is the average of two survey questions that ask respondents
to rate their willingness to take on financial risks and daily risks. Both risk questions are measured
on a 1 to 6 scale.



                                                                                                                40
      Figure 8: Relationship Between Timing of Job Acceptance and Biased Beliefs
                                  3




                                                                                                     Coef: 0.015**
                                                                                                       N: 393
                                                 2
                  Mean Month of Accepting An Offer
                 -2     -1       0-3     1




                                                     -50        0                  50                100             150
                                                           Overoptimism: [(Expect - Realized)/Realized]*100%

Note: This figure is a binned scatter plot of the month of job offer acceptance (defined relative to the
month of graduation) on the individual-level measure of the extent of biased beliefs. This measure
of overoptimism is defined as the difference between expected and realized earnings as a percentage
of realized earnings. We can only construct this for the 2018 and 2019 graduating cohorts for whom
we have data on both earnings expectations and realizations. To account for outliers, we winsorize
the top and bottom 2.5% of the overconfidence measure.




                                                                              41
      Figure 9: Ex-Ante Reservation Earnings, Risk Preferences, and Overoptimism
                                70




                                                                                                                     80
                                                                              Coef: 1.419***
                                                                                                                                                                Coef: 0.128***
                                                                                N: 591                                                                           N: 83
                                65




                                                                                                                     70
             Ex-Ante Reservation Earnings




                                                                                                  Ex-Ante Reservation Earnings
                                 60




                                                                                                                      60
                       (1,000$)




                                                                                                            (1,000$)
                  55




                                                                                                       50
                                50




                                                                                                                     40
                                45




                                                                                                                     30




                                            1      2        3        4        5          6                                    -50        0           50         100        150
                                                Willingness to Take Risk (Average)                                           Overoptimism: [(Expect - Realized)/Realized]*100%


Note: This figure is a binned scatter plot of reported ex-ante reservation earnings (expressed in 2017
dollars) from the in-class survey on risk preferences (left panel) and overconfidence (right panel).
For risk preferences, we use all available data from students who completed the in-class survey
and answered the reservation earnings question. These students are expected to graduate between
2018 and 2021. For overconfidence, we are limited to students for whom we have data on earnings
expectations and realizations. To account for outliers, we winsorize the top and bottom 2.5% of
reservation earnings and the overconfidence measure. We also restrict the sample to students with
reservations earnings above $10,000 and whose reported reservation earnings are lower than their
expected earnings.




                                                                                             42
                                                  Figure 10: Model-Generated Gender Earnings Gap
                                     1.25

                                                                                                     data
                                                                                                     model

                                            1.2




                                     1.15
             gender gap




                                            1.1




                                     1.05




                                             1
                                                   2    4    6    8    10   12    14   16       18      20
                                                                        month
Note: The scale on the x-axis (in months) matches the timing in the model, where the graduation
               ¯ = 10 and the model begins at t = 1, 9 months before graduation. The solid black
date is set to T
line plots the model-generated gender earnings gap, which is the ratio of the cumulative accepted
male compensation to the cumulative accepted female compensation. The dotted black line plots
its empirical counterpart.

        Figure 11: Model-Generated Cumulative Share who have Accepted a Job
                                             1

                                                                                            data-men
                                            0.9                                             model-men
                                                                                            data-women
                                            0.8                                             model-women
                cumulative share accepted




                                            0.7


                                            0.6


                                            0.5


                                            0.4


                                            0.3


                                            0.2


                                            0.1
                                                   2    4    6    8    10   12    14   16      18      20
                                                                        month
Note: The scale on the x-axis (in months) matches the timing in the model, where the graduation
               ¯ = 10 and the model begins at t = 1, 9 months before graduation. The dotted lines
date is set to T
plot the empirical cumulative share of males (blue) and females (red) who have secured a job, while
the solid lines plot the model-generated share of males (blue) and females (red) who have secured
a job by some date.


                                                                       43
                                               Figure 12: Counterfactual Gender Gaps
                                     1.2

                                                                                       data
                                    1.18                                               model
                                                                                       no exploding offers
                                    1.16                                               perfect information

                                    1.14


                                    1.12
                       gender gap




                                     1.1


                                    1.08


                                    1.06


                                    1.04


                                    1.02


                                      1
                                           2    4    6     8    10           12   14     16     18     20
                                                                     month


                                                                                                               ¯ = 10
Note: The scale on the x-axis (in months) matches the timing in the model, where the graduation date is set to T
and the model begins at t = 1, 9 months before graduation. The solid black line plots the model-generated gender
earnings gap, which is the ratio of the cumulative accepted male compensation to the cumulative accepted female
compensation. The black dotted line plots its empirical counterpart. The red dashed line plots the counterfactual
gender gap assuming students have perfect information about the offers they will receive. The blue line plots then
counterfactual gender earnings gap from eliminating exploding offers. Note that, because the optimal strategy in this
model is never to accept an offer within the first period, there is no gender gap depicted for t = 1.




                                                                44
            Table 1: Sample Characteristics of Graduates
                                      All     Men     Women    p-value
Observations                         1359      622      737
Age                                 22.58    22.78     22.42   0.001
                                    (2.00)   (2.04)   (1.95)
White/Caucasian                     50.9%    53.6%    48.6%    0.071
Black/ African American              4.3%     3.2%     5.2%    0.078
American Indian                      0.4%     0.6%     0.1%    0.124
Hispanic/ Latino                    11.1%    10.6%    11.6%    0.526
Asian/ Pacific Islander             33.3%    32.0%    34.4%    0.352
Born in U.S.                        75.3%    76.4%    74.4%    0.392
Father BA+                          78.0%    80.2%    76.1%    0.281
Mother BA+                          74.4%    74.3%    74.5%    0.950
GPA                                  3.32     3.31     3.33    0.199
                                    (0.34)   (0.35)   (0.33)
Concentration:
Accounting                          17.1%    18.8%    15.6%    0.118
Entrepreneurship                     3.8%     4.7%    3.0%     0.105
Finance                             50.4%    65.4%    37.7%    0.000
General Management                   2.7%     2.7%     2.7%    0.983
International Management             5.9%     2.1%     9.1%    0.000
Law                                  9.3%    7.2%     11.0%    0.017
Management Info. Systems            19.1%    20.4%    17.9%    0.241
Marketing                           26.2%    13.8%    36.6%    0.000
Operations & Tech. Mgmt.            10.9%     9.8%    11.8%    0.239
Organizational Behavior              3.9%     1.9%     5.6%    0.001
Cohort:
2013                                11.0%    11.3%    10.7%    0.753
2014                                10.6%    11.4%     9.9%    0.368
2015                                10.4%    10.1%    10.7%    0.723
2016                                14.9%    17.2%    13.0%    0.031
2017                                14.5%    14.0%    14.9%    0.625
2018                                21.2%    21.2%    21.2%    0.980
2019                                17.4%    14.8%    19.5%    0.021
Perceived Relative Ability (1-5)     3.90     4.01     3.80    0.000
                                    (0.81)   (0.84)   (0.76)
Risk Tolerance (1-6)                 3.49     3.83     3.19    0.000
                                    (1.22)   (1.20)   (1.16)
Percent High Risk ( 5)              15.4%    22.8%     9.1%    0.000




                                   45
    Table 2: Summary Statistics: Initial Job Characteristics and Search Behavior
                                                   All        Men       Women      p-value
Observations                                      1359        622        737
First Job in U.S.                                95.1%       93.5%      96.6%      0.038
Currently Employed Full-Time                     94.4%       94.2%      94.6%      0.774
Industry:
Accounting                                       9.3%        7.4%        11.0%     0.023
Advertising/Marketing                             8.9%       5.3%        11.9%     0.000
Consulting Services                              12.7%       13.3%       12.1%     0.484
Cons. Products/Retail                            9.3%        5.6%        12.5%     0.000
Entertainment Media                               1.9%        1.8%        2.0%     0.721
Financial Services                               24.3%       30.7%       18.9%     0.000
Government/Education                              2.4%       2.7%         2.2%     0.503
Health                                            3.2%        2.7%        3.7%     0.335
Other                                            27.8%       30.3%       25.7%     0.060
First Year Total Pay                            $61,708     $65,352     $58,633    0.000
                                                (20,832)    (23,567)    (17,647)
Current Job Total Pay                           $66,954     $72,186     $62,680    0.000
                                                (27,879)    (33,201)    (21,736)
Interned for First Job                           28.6%       29.3%       28.1%     0.613
Referral Helped                                  25.0%       31.0%       20.5%     0.007
Month Accept Offer                                -0.48       0.02        -0.89    0.005
                                                 (6.00)      (6.26)      (5.73)
Accept Before Grad                               56.6%       52.4%       60.1%     0.004
Accept Job within 6 mo. of Grad                  89.3%       85.9%       92.1%     0.000
Time Given to Consider (wks.)                      2.37       2.44         2.32    0.352
                                                 (2.27)      (2.20)      (2.33)
Number of Offers                                   1.70       1.71         1.69    0.636
                                                 (0.95)      (0.95)      (0.95)
Rejected Any Offer                               42.6%       43.4%       41.9%     0.582
Search Behavior (2018/2019 cohorts only)
Observations                                        524         224        300
Month Start Active Job Search                      -3.96       -3.26      -4.49    0.082
                                                  ( 7.42)     ( 7.54)    ( 7.30)
Total Number of Applications                       75.22       94.67      60.72    0.002
                                                ( 118.28)   ( 147.32)   ( 88.37)
Offers Per 100 Applications                        13.86       11.67      15.50    0.088
                                                 ( 23.48)    ( 22.71)   ( 23.95)
Hours Spent Searching Per Week                      9.61       10.30       9.10    0.120
                                                  ( 8.05)     ( 7.97)    ( 8.09)
Proportion of Jobs Underqualified                  25.43       26.97      24.28    0.124
                                                 ( 18.40)    ( 18.17)   ( 18.52)
Usefulness of Career Center in Search (1-5)         2.41        2.19       2.57    0.002
                                                  ( 1.26)     ( 1.23)    ( 1.26)




                                           46
                    Table 3: Gender Differences in the Timing of Job Acceptance
                               Hazard Model                                          OLS
                     Accept Offer within 6 mo. of Grad.                        Month Accept Offer
                       (1)        (2)          (3)                         (4)        (5)         (6)
Female               1.227***      1.288***        1.241***            -0.912***      -1.130***      -0.847***
                      (0.067)       (0.079)         (0.079)             (0.328)        (0.331)        (0.328)

Basic Controls                         X                X                                  X                X
Industry FE                                             X                                                   X
Mean                   0.893         0.893           0.893               -0.477         -0.477         -0.477
R2                                                                        0.006         0.157          0.202
N                      1359          1359             1359                1359           1359           1359
Note: Basic controls include cohort fixed effects, major fixed effects, GPA, dummy for US-born, and
fixed effects for race, father's education, and mother's education. Industry controls include fixed effects
for 19 industry groups. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. ***significant at the 1% level,
**5% level, *10% level.



                                        Table 4: Learning Process
                                                    Baseline          Mid-Search         Realizations
                                                  Expectations       Expectations
        A. Full Sample
                                      Mean            73,938              68,079            66,918
        Men                           Median          67,098              62,305            65,389
                                      N                431                  97               203

                                      Mean            64,746              55,374            59,917
        Women
                                      Median          61,395              54,174            59,430
                                      N                479                 122               267
        B. Consistent Sample
                                      Mean           73,876.79          64,912.58         58,609.51
        Men                           Median         66,619.18          62,305.44         54,122.28
                                      N                  93                 93                52

                                      Mean           60,228.09          54,781.33         54,357.87
        Women
                                      Median         58,518.78          53,685.78         53,295.34
                                      N                 116                116                77
        Note: Both samples include individuals from the 2018 and 2019 graduating cohorts. Baseline
       only includes those without jobs at the baseline survey. Final realizations only include those who
       had a job by the post-graduation survey. The full sample include all individuals who responded
       to the survey indicated. The consistent sample includes only individuals who answered both
       the baseline and mid-search surveys, had not accepted a job by the mid-search survey, and
       revised their expectations by less than 100 percent.



                                                      47
                               Table 5: Gender Gap in Accepted Earnings
                               Dependent Variable: Accepted Earnings in the First Job
                         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)                        (7)
Female               -6719***      -4542***      -3687***      -4106***      -2826**        -2095      -2579*
                      (1147)        (1146)        (1148)        (1157)        (1326)       (1344)      (1357)
Risk Tolerance                                    1505***                                 1422***
                                                   (453)                                   (541)
Risk Tol.  5                                                    3609**                                  2220
                                                                (1621)                                 (2092)
Controls                               X              X             X            X            X           X
Add. controls                                                                    X            X           X
Mean                   61708         61708         61708         61708        61708        61708       61708
R2                     0.026         0.170         0.178         0.174        0.578        0.582       0.579
N                      1359          1359           1359          1359         1359         1359       1359
Note: The dependent variable is total accepted earnings in the first year in 2017 dollars. Basic controls
include cohort fixed effects, major fixed effects, GPA, dummy for US-born, and fixed effects for race, father's
education, and mother's education. Additional controls include fixed effects for industry (19 groups), city,
and weekly hours of work. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***significant at the 1% level, **5%
level, *10% level.




                                                      48
                                  Table 6: Model Parameters
Parameter         Description                                                      Value

                  discount rate                                                    0.996
                  variance log offer                                               0.307
                  mean cost of search (utils)                                     435.643
b                 value of leisure                                                 0.018
                  returns to search                                                0.269

                                                                             Men        Women
    
µ                 mean log offer                                            -1.114      -1.213
µ                 expected log offer                                        -0.030      -0.369
                  =implied bias in wages (% dev.) at grad                   22.403       8.392
                  risk aversion                                             1.912        2.009
                  learning rate                                              0.187       0.261


                            Table 7: Counterfactual Gender Gap
                                          Mean Gender Gap (%)            Tg - 8      Tg
        Data                                    14.787                   15.925    13.686

        Gender gap predicted by:
        Model                                        13.512              14.725    12.428
        perfect information                          10.098              10.023    10.166
        2-month offers                                8.036               8.036     8.037
        Note: The gender earnings gap is defined as the difference in male and female earn-
       ings as a percentage of female earnings (i.e. ( w
                                                       wf
                                                         m
                                                           - 1)  100%). The table reports the
       mean gender gap as well as the gender gap 8 months before graduation (Tg - 8) and
       at graduation (Tg ) in the data, under the baseline model, and based on two different
       counterfactual simulations. Under perfect information, individuals are assumed to
       have perfect information about mean offers (i.e. µt = µ ). Under 2-month offers,
       individuals are allowed to hold onto the offer for an additional month.




                                                49
A      Appendix: Other Potential Explanations
A.1     Patience/Time Discounting
The process of searching for a job involves intertemporal trade-offs. In particular, job seekers face
substantial immediate costs ­ e.g. looking for job opportunities, sending our resumes, preparing
for interviews ­ and delayed rewards. Standard job search models with exponential discounting
imply that patience (or lower willingness to discount future benefits and costs) should be positively
correlated with search effort, reservation wages, and accepted wages (DellaVigna and Paserman,
2005). Some of the observed gender differences in job acceptance timing and accepted earnings
may thus be consistent with greater patience on the part of men.
    To examine this issue, we included a question in the current student survey to obtain an
individual-level measure of patience. We use a similar qualitative measure of patience as Falk et al.
(2018), based on the survey question: "On a scale of 1 to 7, how would you rate your willingness to
give up something that is beneficial for you today in order to benefit more from that in the future?"
Similar to the risk measure, since very few individuals picked the lowest possible value on the
Likert scale, we combine the lowest two values and rescale the responses to be between 1 and 6.
Consistent with Falk et al. (2018), we find that males are slightly more patient than females in our
sample (4.37 vs. 4.10, p = 0.022).48 The relationship between patience, job acceptance timing,
and earnings is shown in Figure A.6. As observed in the left panel of Figure A.6, we find that
individuals who are more patient, if anything, accept jobs earlier rather than later. The estimated
relationship, however, is small and not statistically significant.49 Turning to the right panel of
Figure A.6, patience appears to be positively (but insignificantly) related with accepted earnings.
Taken together, these findings suggest a limited role for gender differences in patience in explaining
the overall empirical patterns.

A.2     Procrastination
Next, we consider the possibility that the observed gender differences in job search behavior are
driven by male students' greater tendency to procrastinate. We use three questions from the
Irrational Procrastination Scale (Steel, 2010), an instrument developed by psychologists to measure
an individual's degree of procrastination. In particular, respondents are asked to indicate the extent
to which they feel that each of the following statements applies to them on a 1 (not true of me) to
7 (always true of me) scale: (1) I often find myself performing tasks that I had intended to do days
before; (2) I often regret not getting to tasks sooner; (3) I work best at the "last minute" when the
pressure is really on. We create an index that aggregates the responses to the three questions by
first standardizing the responses to each of the questions to have mean 0 and standard deviation
1. The index is the average of the normalized responses for the three questions, re-standardized to
have an overall mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.
     Using this index, men are more likely to procrastinate than women (the gap is 0.2 standard
deviations, p = 0.032). Among the students in our sample, if anything, those who score higher on
  48
      By contrast, using a hypothetical online choice experiment with more than 1,000 participants where subjects
chose between hypothetically receiving 100 pounds in one month vs. a difference amount in 13 months, Dittrich and
Leipold (2014) find that men are more impatient than women.
   49
      If anything, more patient individuals also start searching for jobs earlier, but this association is weak and impre-
cisely estimated.



                                                           50
the procrastination index report having accepted their job earlier, although the association is not
statistically significant. Procrastination is positively (but insignificantly) correlated with accepted
earnings (see Figure A.7). Overall, these findings suggest that male students' greater tendency to
procrastinate is unlikely to be a key driver of the observed patterns.

A.3    Rejection Aversion
Another alternative explanation is that women may accept jobs earlier than men because they
are rejection averse. While we are not aware of any work that systematically documents gender
differences in rejection aversion, there is an emerging literature that suggests that women tend
to be more averse to negative feedback (e.g. Buser and Yuan, 2019; Avilova and Goldin, 2018).
While we cannot fully dispel this alternative mechanism, we provide some suggestive evidence that
rejection aversion is unlikely to be a first-order explanation. First, we find that a large share of
males and females in our sample reject jobs, and the gender difference in the likelihood of rejecting
a job is small (43.4% of men vs. 41.9% of women rejected at least one offer, p = 0.582). Therefore,
it is not the case that women are simply accepting any job. If women are more rejection averse
than men, we might expect women to be more likely to apply to jobs for which they (think they)
are overqualified; however, in the data, we observe that both genders apply at fairly similar rates
to jobs for which they are overqualified. Furthermore, we find that over time, job search behavior
does not appear to change differentially by gender. Women who accept earlier are not more likely
to be over-qualified for the job relative to women who accept later (see Table A.8). Therefore, there
appears to be no evidence, at least in our data, that women are more rejection averse than men in
job search.




                                                  51
B   Appendix: Figures and Tables

                         Figure A.1: Importance of Having a Job by Graduation
                      Mean (men): 4.24
                      N (men): 303

                 .6
                      Mean (women): 4.38
                      N (women): 311
                      p-val (mean diff)=0.078
                 .4
                 .2
                 0




                               1                       2                  3                4           5
                                                How important is it to have a job before graduation?

                                                                 Male               Female

     Note: The figure plots the distribution of male and female responses to the following question that
     was asked to students as part of the in-class survey: "On a 5-point scale, how important is it to you
     that you have a job lined up before the end of your senior year (that is, before you graduate)?"




                                                                      52
Figure A.2: Cumulative Gender Gap in Mean Accepted Offer by Months Since Graduation
                                                25000




                                                                                                  Slope: -341.6**
                                                                                      Slope (w/ Controls): -338.0**
            Cumulative Gender Gap in Earnings

                                                20000
                                                15000
                                                10000
                                                5000
                                                0




                                                        -9   -6    -3          0          3          6           9
                                                                    Months Since Graduation

                                                                  No Controls           With Controls

Note: The figure plots the cumulative gender gap in mean accepted earnings as a function of
months since graduation. Controls include cohort fixed effects, major fixed effects, GPA, dummy
for US-born, and fixed effects for race, father's education, and mother's education. Months since
graduation is defined relative to the month of graduation (indicated as 0). The 95% confidence
interval bands are based on bootstrapped standard errors.




                                                                          53
Figure A.3: Cumulative Gender Gap in Mean Accepted Offer by Months Since Graduation
(Including Job Controls)
                                         20000




                                                                                               Slope: -198.9
                   Cumulative Gender Gap in Earnings

                                              15000
                     net of controls (demo and job)
                      5000         10000 0




                                                       183   221   159        293        245   148         55


                                                       -9    -6    -3          0          3    6           9
                                                                    Months Since Graduation

       Note: The figure plots the cumulative gender gap in mean accepted earnings as a function of months
       since graduation net of controls for demographic and job characteristics. In addition to the demo-
       graphic controls listed in Figure A.2, additional controls include job industry fixed effects, dummies
       for job amenities such as flexible work hours, sick leave, childcare benefits, maternity/paternity
       leave, and expected earnings growth over the next 12 months in the job. Months since graduation
       is defined relative to the month of graduation (indicated as 0). The 95% confidence interval bands
       are based on bootstrapped standard errors.




                                                                         54
        Figure A.4: Gender Difference in Beliefs Bias ­ Cross-Cohort Comparison

                                                                                 Females                                                               Males
                                  1                                                                                                   1



                                  .8                                                                                                  .8
             Cumulative Density




                                                                                                                 Cumulative Density
                                  .6                                                                                                  .6



                                  .4                                                                                                  .4



                                  .2                                                                                                  .2



                                  0                                                                                                   0
                                                        0                    50000      100000     150000                                  0   50000      100000   150000
                                                                                     Earnings                                                          Earnings


                                                                                                 2017-2018 Realization
                                                                                                 2018-2019 Subjective Expectation
                                                                                                 2018-2019 Population Beliefs

Note: The distribution of expected earnings is constructed based on the earnings expectations (in
2017 dollars) reported by students from the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts. Earnings expectations
were elicited during the in-class survey that was conducted in the senior or junior year. The
distribution of realized (actual) earnings is based on the first year earnings of the accepted offer of
the previous cohorts of graduating students (i.e. 2017-2018 cohorts). Population beliefs for the 2018-
2019 graduating cohorts are elicited using the following question: "Consider those [males/females]
who started working full-time immediately after graduation. What do you think their starting total
annual salary (in dollars) was, on average?"


   Figure A.5: Relationship between Ex-Ante Earnings Expectations and Realizations
                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                Coef: 0.189***
                                                                                                                                                  N: 393
                                  Actual First Year Earnings (1,000s)
                                     40            6020         80




                                                                        20           40         60         80        100        120        140                      160
                                                                                          Expected First Year Earnings (1,000s) (Baseline)

Note: This figure is a binned scatter plot of accepted earnings in the first year on students' ex-ante
earnings expectations elicited in the baseline "Survey of Current Students." Both measures are in
2017 dollars.



                                                                                                            55
               Figure A.6: Job Acceptance Timing, Earnings, and Patience




                                                                                                                                  80000
                                       2.5
                                                                                              Coef: -0.213                                                                            Coef: 1918
                                                                                               N: 453                                                                                  N: 453




                                       2            1.5
                      Mean Month of Accepting An Offer




                                                                                                                                          70000
                                                                                                                      Mean First Year Earnings
                            0       .5       1




                                                                                                                    60000
                    -.5                -1




                                                                                                                                  50000
                                       -1.5




                                                          1        2       3       4        5              6                                      1        2       3       4        5            6
                                                                Time Preferences: Patience (1-6)                                                        Time Preferences: Patience (1-6)


Note: The sample includes individuals from the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts. This figure graphs
the binned scatter plot of the month of job offer acceptance (defined relative to the month of
graduation) (left panel) and accepted earnings (right panel) on the survey measure of patience.
Patience is measured using the following question "On a scale from 1 (not willing at all) to 7 (very
willing), how would you rate your willingness to give up something that is beneficial for you today in
order to benefit more from that in the future?" Due to the small number of responses for the bottom
two options, we combine them into a single category and re-scale the responses to the question to
be between 1 and 6. The patience question was fielded to a subset of the "current student" sample.



            Figure A.7: Job Acceptance Timing, Earnings, and Procrastination
                                                                                                                                  80000
                                       2.5




                                                                                            Coef: -0.118                                                                            Coef: 1236
                                                                                              N: 453                                                                                 N: 453
                                       2            1.5
                      Mean Month of Accepting An Offer




                                                                                                                                          70000
                                                                                                                      Mean First Year Earnings
                            0       .5       1




                                                                                                                    60000
                    -.5                -1




                                                                                                                                  50000
                                       -1.5




                                                          -2         -1          0         1               2                                      -2         -1          0         1             2
                                                               Procrastination Index (Standardized)                                                    Procrastination Index (Standardized)


Note: The sample includes individuals from the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts. This figure graphs
the binned scatter plot of the month of job offer acceptance (defined relative to the month of
graduation) (left panel) and accepted earnings (right panel) on the procrastination index. The
procrastination index is constructed using three questions from the Irrational Procrastination Scale
(Steele, 2010) and is standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. See text for details in
the construction of the index. The procrastination questions were fielded to a subset of the "current
student" sample.



                                                                                                               56
                         Figure A.8: Objective Function and Parameter Estimates




Note: The x-axis varies around our estimated parameters (above and below by 20%). The vertical red lines show
where our estimated parameters lie, while the black curve plots the model objective.




                                                        57
              Table A.1: Sample Sizes for Survey of "Current" Students
                                                          Number of Observations

Took All Three Surveys                                               319
Took All Three Surveys, 2018 Cohort                                  152

Took Base and Post-Grad                                              466
Took Base and Mid-Search                                             454
Took Mid-Search and Post-Grad                                        323

Took Base and NOT Post-Grad                                          502
Took Post-Grad and NOT Base                                          87

Have Data on Baseline Expectations and Realizations                  393
Have Data on Baseline Expectations                                   910
Have Data on Realizations                                            515

2018 Cohort                                                          492
2019 Cohort                                                          563




                                        58
                                     Table A.2: Responses Across Waves
                                                  Baseline      Baseline + Mid      Baseline + Final       All Three
                                                    (1)               (2)                  (3)                (4)
    Observations                                    968               454                  466                319

           Female                                   0.530           0.588**               0.577*            0.596**
             Age                                    20.75            20.73                 20.74              20.74
                                                    (0.87)           (0.76)                (0.76)            (0.78)
             GPA                                     3.25             3.27                  3.27              3.28
                                                    (0.34)           (0.35)                (0.33)            (0.34)
           Cohort     2018                          0.418            0.463                 0.459             0.476*
                      2019                          0.582            0.537                 0.541             0.524*
             Race     White                         0.413            0.392                 0.399             0.395
                      Black                         0.034            0.046                 0.039              0.047
                      American Indian               0.003             0.002                0.004              0.003
                      Hispanic                      0.116            0.152*                0.146            0.160**
                      Asian                         0.404            0.385                 0.391              0.379
    Born in U.S.                                    0.598            0.630                0.650*             0.655*
    Father BA+                                      0.738             0.701               0.677**            0.685*
    Mother BA+                                      0.730            0.693                 0.695              0.690
   Concentration      Accounting                    0.150            0.154                 0.148             0.166
                      Entrepreneurship              0.036            0.020*                0.032             0.019
                      Finance                       0.537            0.487*               0.485*            0.455**
                      General Management            0.020            0.009                 0.013            0.000**
                      Intl Management               0.052            0.070                 0.069              0.075
                      Law                           0.070            0.079                 0.071             0.066
                      Mgmt Info. Systems            0.219             0.247                0.247             0.266*
                      Marketing                     0.251            0.280                 0.273              0.285
                      Ops. & Tech Mgmt              0.089             0.104                0.092              0.113
                      Org Behavior                  0.028            0.035                 0.030              0.041
  Risk Tolerance                                     3.53           3.35***                 3.44            3.27***
                                                    (1.14)           (1.15)                (1.13)            (1.13)
       Perceived
Rel. Ability (1-5)                                   3.77              3.9                 3.80               3.80
                                                    (0.79)           (0.78)               (0.77)             (0.77)
        Expected
    Total Pay ($)                                  69,099            68,372               68,357            67,945
                                                 (27506.73)        (26675.54)           (24796.33)        (24233.23)
  Note: The table reports the means and standard deviations of the background characteristics of the students from
  the 2018-2019 graduating cohorts who responded to various components of the "Survey of Current Students" as
  indicated in the columns. The stars indicate the p-value of the difference in means for the respective sample relative
  to the mean for students who responded to baseline survey (i.e. Column (1)). ***significant at the 1% level, **5%
  level, *10% level.




                                                         59
                       Table A.3: Response Rates Based on Administrative Data
                      Cohort:                                     2017      2018    2019

                      Cohort Size (based on admin data)            852      802      736

                      Share Post Graduate Survey                  0.27      0.31     0.31

                      Share Baseline Survey (in-class)                      0.49     0.65

                      Post Grad Survey | Baseline                           0.50     0.48

                      Mid | Baseline                                        0.52     0.47

                      All three                                             0.17     0.23

                      Baseline | Post Grad Survey                           0.78     1.00
  Note: The administrative data covers all students enrolled in the BU undergraduate business program in the
  Spring before graduation for the 2017 and 2018 graduating class and the Fall before graduation for the 2019
  graduating class. A "cohort" in the administrative data is defined as students who are projected to graduate in
  the Spring, Summer, or Fall of the given year.



                              Table A.4: Who Responded to the Surveys?
                      Questrom Population (2018­2019)                           Sample
                      Male Female       Difference                   Male     Female Difference            p-value
                       (1)    (2)           (3)                      (4)        (5)      (6)              (6) - (3)
Female                                    0.500                                    0.529                    0.165

Foreign Student        0.31       0.35             -0.04             0.29         0.26        0.03          0.83

GPA                    3.16       3.25            -0.09***           3.16         3.26      -0.10***        0.80

Credit Hours          16.03       16.12            -0.09            16.40      16.43         -0.03          0.86

Finance                0.42       0.67            -0.25***           0.38         0.67      -0.28***        0.40

Marketing              0.34       0.13            -0.21***           0.36         0.13      -0.23***        0.39

No. Observations                          1538                                      865
  Note: The table reports the mean characteristics between the 2018­2019 cohort of Questrom students and the
  sample of survey respondents separately by gender. Columns (3) and (6) report the male-female difference for
  the population and sample, respectively. Column (7) reports the p-value of the difference in the male-female gap
  between the population and the sample. ***significant at the 1% level, **5% level, *10% level.



                                                      60
         Table A.5: Summary Statistics of All Respondents vs. Analysis Sample, By Gender
                                                                          Full sample         Accepted
                                                                        Men     Women       Men     Women     p-value
                         Observations                                    744      869        622      737
                                 Age                                   22.56     22.30     22.78     22.42     0.459
                                                                       (2.02)   (1.92)     (2.04)   (1.95)
                                  Race    White/Caucasian              51.2%    46.2%      53.6%    48.6%      0.990
                                          Black/ African American       3.3%     4.5%       3.2%     5.2%      0.631
                                          American Indian               0.7%     0.1%       0.6%     0.1%      0.906
                                          Hispanic/ Latino             10.8%    11.0%      10.6%    11.6%      0.715
                                          Asian/ Pacific Islander      34.1%    38.2%      32.0%    34.4%      0.640
                         Born in U.S.                                  72.3%    69.6%      76.4%    74.4%      0.836
                         Father BA+                                    75.0%    72.2%      75.9%    72.5%      0.858
                         Mother BA+                                    71.4%    71.0%      71.4%    72.0%      0.756
                                GPA                                     3.29      3.32      3.31      3.33     0.766
                                                                       (0.35)   (0.33)     (0.35)   (0.33)
                        Concentration     Accounting                   17.9%    16.3%      18.8%    15.6%      0.548
                                          Entrepreneurship              5.2%     3.3%       4.7%     3.0%      0.875
                                          Finance                      65.9%    37.9%      65.4%    37.7%      0.936
                                          General Management            2.4%     2.9%       2.7%     2.7%      0.690
                                          International Management      2.7%     8.9%       2.1%     9.1%      0.633
                                          Law                           8.2%    10.7%       7.2%    11.0%      0.561
                                          Management Info. Systems     19.4%    18.5%      20.4%    17.9%      0.562
                                          Marketing                    13.3%    35.9%      13.8%    36.6%      0.946
                                          Operations & Tech. Mgmt.      9.3%    11.6%       9.8%    11.8%      0.878
                                          Organizational Behavior       2.0%     5.1%       1.9%     5.6%      0.676
Accepted Job Offer to Work after Grad                                  83.6%    84.8%                          0.507
                               Cohort     2013                          9.8%     9.7%      11.3%    10.7%      0.862
                                          2014                          9.8%     8.6%      11.4%     9.9%      0.881
                                          2015                          9.3%     9.9%      10.1%    10.7%      0.989
                                          2016                         15.9%    12.0%      17.2%    13.0%      0.912
                                          2017                         14.0%    14.8%      14.0%    14.9%      0.978
                                          2018                         21.8%    23.7%      21.2%    21.2%      0.517
                                          2019                         19.5%    21.3%      14.8%    19.5%      0.309
       Perceived Relative Ability (1-5)                                 3.99     3.78       4.01     3.79      0.833
                                                                       (0.85)   (0.76)     (0.84)   (0.76)
                        Risk Tolerance                                  3.82      3.20      3.83     3.19      0.713
                                                                       (1.20)   (1.15)     (1.20)   (1.16)
              Percent High Risk ( 5)                                   22.8%     9.0%      22.8%     9.1%      0.959
 Note: The table compares the mean characteristics between the full sample of respondents and those who accepted a
 job by gender. The last column reports the p-value of a statistical test of the comparison of the gender difference in
 means between the two samples (full sample vs. accepted sample).




                                                      61
                                  Table A.6: Gender Gap in Log Earnings
                               Dependent Variable: Log Accepted Earnings in the First Job
                         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)
Female               -0.097***      -0.058***      -0.046**     -0.050***       -0.039*       -0.029        -0.035
                      (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)      (0.018)        (0.021)      (0.022)       (0.022)
Risk Tolerance                                    0.021***                                   0.020**
                                                   (0.007)                                   (0.008)
Risk Tol.  5                                                     0.059**                                    0.038
                                                                 (0.024)                                   (0.030)
Controls                                X             X              X             X             X           X
Add. controls                                                                      X             X           X
Mean                   10.98          10.98         10.98         10.98         10.98           10.98      10.98
R2                     0.021          0.179         0.184         0.182         0.604           0.607      0.605
N                      1359           1359          1359          1359          1359            1359       1359
Note: The dependent variable is the natural log of total accepted earnings in the first year (in 2017 dollars). Basic
controls include cohort fixed effects, major fixed effects, GPA, a dummy for US-born, and fixed effects for race,
father's education, and mother's education. Additional controls include fixed effects for industry (19 groups),
city, and weekly hours of work. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***significant at the 1% level, **5% level,
*10% level.




                               Table A.7: Gender Gap in Reservation Earnings
                                                Dependent Variable: Reservation Earnings
                            (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)                 (7)      (8)
Female                   -3232***     -2579**     -2872***     -2182**    -1873*        -1363      -1528     -1017
                          (1077)       (1080)      (1068)       (1066)    (1138)       (1132)     (1118)    (1111)
Risk Tolerance                        1133**                   1188**                  1141**               1165**
                                       (525)                    (518)                   (542)                (533)
Overconfidence (%)                                 124***      126***                             142***    143***
                                                    (36)        (37)                               (32)      (33)
Controls                                                                    X            X           X        X
Mean                      54071        54071       54071       54071      54071        54071       54071     54071
R2                        0.014        0.023       0.039       0.048      0.136        0.143       0.162     0.170
N                          591          591         591         591        591          591         591       591
Note: The dependent variable is ex-ante reservation earnings in 2017 dollars. Basic controls include cohort fixed
effects, major fixed effects, GPA, dummy for US-born, and fixed effects for race, father's education, and mother's
education. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***significant at the 1% level, **5% level, *10% level.




                                                          62
                                Table A.8: Qualification By Acceptance Month
                                                       Accept Offer            Accept Offer            p-value
                                                       Before Grad             After Grad

             Prop. Apps.       Over Qualified                  18.4                20.1                 0.280
 All
 [452]                         Qualified                       58.3                52.4                 0.005
                               Under Qualified                 23.2                27.5                 0.014

             Prop. Apps.       Over Qualified                  18.5                19.3                 0.724
 Men
 [193]                         Qualified                       58.2                50.7                 0.021
                               Under Qualified                 23.3                29.9                 0.011

             Prop. Apps.       Over Qualified                  18.4                20.8                 0.266
 Women
 [259]                         Qualified                       58.4                53.8                 0.098
                               Under Qualified                 23.2                25.4                 0.335
 Note: This table reports the average proportion of jobs that individuals applied to for which they felt that they were
over-qualified for, had the right qualifications for, and were under-qualified among those who accepted a job before
graduation (first column) and after graduation (second column). These means were reported for the full sample, and
separately by gender (as indicated in the rows). The last column reports the p-value of the difference in means across
individuals who accepted a job before and after graduation.




                                              Table A.9: Model Fit
                                                                   Men              Women
                   Moment                                      Data Model         Data Model
                   cumulative mean accepted offer
                     t=1                                     0.412     0.410      0.354     0.357
                     slope                                  -0.005     -0.004    -0.003     -0.003
                   expected salary
                     t=2                                       0.385   0.361      0.337     0.321
                     t=8                                       0.338   0.348      0.307     0.314
                   cumulative share accepted
                     t=1                                       0.106   0.106      0.121     0.121
                     t = 10                                    0.539   0.566      0.599     0.636
                   probability of searching
                     t=1                                       0.159   0.261      0.161     0.297
                     t = 10                                    0.386   0.357      0.394     0.424
                  Note: The timing reported in this table matches the model where t = 1 refers to
                 9 months before graduation and t = 10 is the month of graduation.




                                                          63
