                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TAX EVASION, EFFICIENCY, AND BUNCHING IN THE PRESENCE OF ENFORCEMENT
                               NOTCHES

                                       Daniel M. Hungerman

                                        Working Paper 28826
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28826


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2021




Thanks to the editor and anonymous referees for helpuful suggestions. Thanks also to Teja
Konduri and especially to Vivek Moorthy for excellent research assistance. The author declares
that he has no relevant or material interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Tax Evasion, Efficiency, and Bunching in the Presence of Enforcement Notches
Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 28826
May 2021
JEL No. H21,H26

                                         ABSTRACT

A recent literature has studied bunching at notches in tax systems; but work on the implications
of bunching for welfare has been limited. We consider a setting where there are discrete changes
in the enforcement of tax compliance at certain levels of reported income, creating notches that
can lead to bunching. We find that greater levels of bunching can be associated with greater tax
efficiency. A simulation exercise demonstrates that notches with greater bunching can be
associated with higher welfare than notches with less bunching, and that a tax system with
bunching at a notch can generate higher overall social welfare than a revenue-equivalent no-
evasion linear tax.


Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3056 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu
1.      Introduction

     Many tax systems feature notches that discretely change the levels of the choice sets
agents face. A recent literature in economics has studied these notches and the propensity
of agents to bunch around them. Work in this area has frequently concluded that bunching
in reported (as opposed to earned) income is an important driver of bunching behavior.
Kleven (2016), in a survey of bunching results, writes that "in contexts in which bunching is
likely to require real earnings responses, the observed amount of bunching is very small (or
zero) in elasticity terms," but that "in contexts in which evasion and avoidance responses
are feasible, observed bunching can be large."
     While bunching in reported income has been shown to be empirically important, less
work has explored the implications of this behavior for tax efficiency. This paper shows that
the implications can be potentially non-standard. We consider a simple model of taxation
where the government enforces (or tries to enforce) truthful reporting up to some level of
income (e.g., an amount verified by a third party), and tolerates evasion thereafter. This
creates a level of reported income where the benefits of evasion discretely change (cf. Carrillo,
Pomeranz, and Singhal, 2017). This is denoted an enforcement notch or, simply, a notch.
     In the simplest version of the model, a government can, by tolerating evasion around
the notch, raise tax revenue with an increase in proportional income tax that creates no
distortion; this holds even if the tax in question is distortionary in a no-evasion world, if
earned income is unobservable and the government's ability to audit is imperfect, and if the
act of evasion creates costs that are pure loss. The key to the analysis is the discrete change
in the cost of evasion created by the notch, but if the notch coincides with a change in the
marginal tax rate (a tax kink), then the findings are potentially stronger since combining
the two effects could induce more taxpayers to bunch at the notch.
     We then turn to a setting with individuals reporting income across a range of values
above and below the notch, derive a simple expression for the welfare effects of a change
in the tax rate, and derive a corresponding optimal tax rate for a given enforcement notch.

                                               1
The welfare effect of a change in the tax rate differs from that in, for example, Chetty
(2009), because here the relevant weights used for taxable income and actual earned income
differ across different ranges of reported income. The welfare effects depend critically upon
the amount of bunching at the notch, where more bunching implies greater efficiency. A
simple simulation exercise demonstrates that for a given distribution of productivity, notches
that create greater bunching can be associated with higher welfare than notches with less
bunching. The simulations also show that a tax system with an enforcement notch that
creates bunching can generate higher overall social welfare than a revenue-equivalent no-
evasion linear tax.
   An implication of this study is that one cannot use observed bunching in an empirical
setting to surmise, even in a first-order sense, the efficiency effects of an enforcement notch.
In many settings it is intuitive that more bunching means less efficiency. For example, if
bunching in response to taxation reflects real behavior, then more bunching may represent
greater elasticities of earnings to taxation (as discussed in Saez, 2010), so that more bunching
means taxes are more distortionary. Or, if bunching reflects evasion or avoidance, then more
bunching means more evasion/avoidance, and that is usually also regarded as inefficient.
The conclusions in this setting are different.
   Moreover, the intuition here for how notches can be associated with welfare gains differs
from, for example, Slemrod (2013) and Sallee & Slemrod (2012), where the focus is on how
the inability of notches to mimic the marginal incentives created by (in their model) optimal
linear taxes can lead to welfare losses. This paper makes a not-mutually-exclusive but
essentially opposite point, which is that removing marginal incentives will in some settings
promote efficiency. In this sense, this paper is somewhat similar to Blinder and Rosen (1985),
who note that removing the marginal incentives in a proportional tax system by instead using
a notch could be socially beneficial.
   But the analysis here differs importantly from Blinder and Rosen's work as well. Their fo-
cus primarily concerns inducing demand in a certain good, and they note that bunching could


                                                 2
counteract the welfare benefits they consider. This paper obtains a different result by con-
sidering a setting with evasion. But simply introducing evasion in the standard notch/kink
framework of taxation will not produce the results here. Lockwood (2020) undertakes such a
study; he shows that sufficient-statistic taxation results do not extend to cases where notches
are present, and that this result is robust to allowing evasion. His analysis concludes that
bunching at notches lowers welfare. The difference is that his notches are generated by tax
rates, rather than enforcement.
       Other papers have suggested that discrete changes in tax enforcement may be beneficial.1
For example, Bigio and Zilberman (2011) show that a resource-constrained tax authority
might in some cases use a threshold as part of an optimal monitoring strategy, and Rein-
ganum and Wilde (1985) argue that audit thresholds can induce truthful reporting at low
cost. The present paper attests to the potential benefits of an audit threshold but, unlike
these prior papers, our model does so without appealing to the value of truthful reporting
or the costs of enforcement. We thus conclude that the efficiency of a tax system can de-
pend crucially upon how tax compliance is enforced, and moreover that the implications of
bunching at a notch can depend importantly on the nature of the notch itself.
       The next section illustrates the main results using a simple model of income taxation.
Section 3 presents results from a simulation, and the final section concludes.



2.        The Model

2.1.      The Basic Model

       The analysis begins with the simplest case of a distortionary tax and will briefly depict
outcomes in the model without a notch; these outcomes follow from prior studies. Consider
   1
    A large recent literature has discussed the empirical and theoretical importance of tax evasion and tax
enforcement, with work covering topics such as measuring tax evasion (e.g., Artavanis, Morse, Tsoutsoura,
2016), the efficacy of efforts to encourage compliance (Meiselman, 2018), and understanding the costs of
evasion (Litina and Palivos, 2016); see Alm (2018) for a survey.




                                                    3
an agent with preferences over consumption c and labor l:


                                             u(c, l) = c - (l)                                             (1)


                                                                                                    
where  is the disutility of labor. Denote the marginal disutility of labor as  (l) =                l
                                                                                                      ,   with
              
 > 0 and      l
                   > 0, so that the marginal cost of labor is positive and increasing.2 Labor
effort earns wage rate w and is taxed at rate t so that preferences are maximized subject to:


                                             c = y + wl - twl                                              (2)


where y is unearned income. Maximizing (1) subject to (2) produces an optimal choice of
labor supply:
                                           l =  -1 (w(1 - t))                                              (3)

so that taxes are distortionary. Following (e.g.) Chetty (2009), consider a social welfare
function that maximizes the sum of this money-metric utility function and tax revenue:


                             W (t) = {y + wl - twl - (l )} + twl .                                         (4)


The term in braces represents maximized utility and it is subject to the envelope condition,
but this is not true for the term outside the braces. The change in welfare from changing
the tax rate is:

                      dW (t)                  dl           -1
                             = - wl + wl + tw    = - w2 t     < 0.                                         (5)
                       dt                     dt          l

Now suppose that actual labor income wl is unobserved; instead the agent reports income
   2
     Aside from matching the models used in some prior studies (so that the results here can be directly
compared), the use of quasilinear preferences in (1) has several benefits: it features money-metric utility, it
equates compensated and uncompensated elasticities, and it makes the main derivations transparent. But
it is not critical for the main point of the paper and, in the Appendix, the main result is derived for general
preferences.



                                                      4
wlr . We assume to start that the act of evasion does not exhaust any resources, but an agent
who reports lr = l faces a probability of detection p(l - lr ), with p  0, p  0. If detected,
the agent must pay unreported taxes plus a fine F (l - lr ); we assume F  0, and F  0.
The penalty function for evasion is:


                       z (l, lr , t) = p(l - lr )[tw(l - lr ) + F (l - lr )].             (6)


Now the agent solves
                           max y + wl - twlr - z (l, lr , t) - (l)                        (7)
                           l, lr


noting from (6) that zl + zlr = 0, the first order conditions produce: l =  -1 (w(1 - t)),
which matches (3): the ability to evade does not affect the distortionary impact of taxes
on labor supply. It follows that the ability to evade also does not affect the overall welfare
effects of taxation.
   Comparing this to the presumably unobtainable outcome from simple lump-sum taxation:
suppose that instead of an income tax, the government could impose a lump-sum tax  that
could not be evaded, so the budget constraint (2) became c = y + wl -  . In this case the
optimal choice of labor (denoted l  ), the welfare function (W ( )) and its derivative with
respect to  are:
                                         l  =  -1 (w)                                     (8)

                            W ( ) = {y -  + wl - (l )} +                                  (9)

                                   dW ( )
                                          = - 1 + 1 = 0.                                 (10)
                                    d


2.2.   Evasion with Notches

   Now we will suppose that the government's efforts to deter evasion change discretely for
a certain exogenously given level of income, wln . To begin with, and to make the basic
intuition as transparent as possible, we assume that if individuals report income such that


                                                 5
wlr < wln , that is, lr < ln , then any evasion is detected with certainty and subsequently
they must pay all taxes owed and a fine. If they instead report lr  ln , they pay taxes on
reported income and any evasion will go undetected. The cost of evasion thus discretely
changes at the notch wln .
       As this is the central novel feature of the analysis, it merits a few comments. First, the
extreme simplicity of the above notch, and in particular the unrealistic assumption that for
a certain range of reported income the government can perfectly identify evasion, eases the
presentation but will be relaxed momentarily. Second, while the main focus of this analysis
is conceptual, it is worth noting that this type of notch resembles assumptions made in some
prior work as well as components of real-world tax policy. Regarding the former, Saez (2010)
presents his own model of agent behavior to explain his bunching results; similar to here,
his model assumes that there is an audit trigger based on whether reported income falls
below a certain level and that this trigger acts as a constraint on reported income. Saez's
analysis is primarily concerned with matching his empirical results rather than implications
for tax efficiency. However, in the Appendix, we derive a similar result with Saez's model
and compare it to the result derived here.3 Keen and Slemrod (2017), who present a model
of tax enforcement, also note that many components of enforcement may be non-continuous
and give discrete changes in audit probability as an example.
       Further, discretely changing the costs of evasion at a certain level of income is an intu-
itively simple and readily applicable idea. Some real-world tax systems feature such changes;
for example the IRS employs the Automated Underreporter (AUR) program which can no-
tify taxpayers if the IRS detects underreporting, for instance by reporting earnings below
those reported by a third party (National Taxpayer Advocate, 2017). The results below also
involve the idea of agents bunching in reported income at discrete changes in the tax system,
and as noted several papers have produced empirical evidence of this behavior--e.g., Car-
   3
    See section 2C of Saez's paper for his model. Seaz's model, as well as the analysis motivated by his
model in the Appendix, takes third-party reported income as given, but assumes one can vary the reporting
of other (called "informal" by Saez) earnings.



                                                   6
rillo, Pomeranz, and Singhal (2017) looking at bunching in reported income at agent-specific
values based on third party-reporting, and Almunia and Lopez-Rodriqguez (2018) looking
at an economy-wide income-based threshold faced by firms.4 Here, the amount wln could be
thought of as applying idiosyncratically to each individual (e.g., the amount reported on a
W2 or 1099 form for US income taxation) or a change that coincides with a bracket; in our
model of one agent they are similar and the exploration of factors that could create mean-
ingful differences between agent-specific and system-wide notches is a topic left for future
work. Since evasion here is not enforced for some ranges of income, the notion of evasion
becomes similar to avoidance, that is, the legal reduction of taxable income given a certain
level of earned income. But the term evasion seems more appropriate since the behavior in
question crucially will invoke a discrete penalty beyond a certain threshold.
       The enforcement notch as described above will matter only for an individual who chooses
an earnings level l  ln . If l < ln , the individual will always report truthfully (to avoid the
fine) and the analysis in that case follows from section 2.1. Further, the notch here lowers
the price of labor l as labor increases, so that the choice set is non-convex and it is possible
that an individual would be indifferent to choosing a certain spot above the notch versus
below. However, there will never be more than one optimal choice of l that is above ln . For
the moment we will assume that the agent optimizes by picking a labor outcome l > ln ; we
consider a case with multiple agents and various choices of l later on.
       The agent now maximizes:


                              max y + wl - twlr - z (l, lr , t) - (l)                                (11)
                               l, lr



where z (l, lr , t) = tw(l - lr ) + F (l - lr ) for lr < ln , and zero otherwise. Supposing that this
individual chooses an optimum l > ln , what can we say about lr ? First, the individual will
never choose lr < ln ; it would be better to set lr = l and avoid the fine. But the individual
   4
    Also related are changes in enforcement based on changes in the use of presumptive taxes or the use of
particular tax regimes at certain levels of reported income; Agostini (2016) gives some examples.



                                                    7
will similarly never choose lr > ln ; by lowering reported income the individual can lower
                                                                       
their tax payment at no cost. The individual will consequently choose lr = l n .5
       Given this, we consider the first order condition for actual labor l:


                                         w - zl -  (l) = 0.                                          (12)


But for l > ln , zl = z = 0, so that (12) becomes:


                                            l =  -1 (w).                                             (13)


There will be no deadweight loss from taxation. This does not depend upon the linearity of
the tax system; a nonlinear tax function t(wlr ) producing a corner solution in lr would yield
the same equations (12) and (13).
       Moreover, for individuals reporting at the notch, this holds if evasion is costly to the
taxpayer and if the government's enforcement of tax compliance is imperfect, although both
costly evasion and imperfect enforcement could induce an individual to no longer report at
the notch and then the effects of taxes could vary. To see this, we will first allow the act of
evasion to be costly, and then further allow enforcement to be imperfect.
       Suppose first that the act of evasion consumes taxpayer resources g (l - lr ), where g is a
positive function increasing in the amount of evasion l - lr . The consumer solves


                         max y + wl - twlr - z (l, lr , t) - g (l - lr ) - (l)                       (14)
                         l, lr



with first order conditions
                                    l : w - zl - gl -  (l) = 0                                       (15)
   5
    Similar intuition comes from inspecting first order condition of (11) with respect to lr , which is
-tw - zlr = 0. For lr < ln the function zlr = -tw + Flr so that the left-hand side of this first or-
der condition is always positive. For lr > ln the condition becomes -tw = 0, so that the left hand side is
always negative. The optimal choice of lr is thus at the notch.




                                                    8
                                 lr :   - tw - zlr - glr = 0.                                (16)

Again the individual will choose to report lr  ln , so that z = 0. There are two possible
cases. For the first case, the costs of evasion are sufficiently low so that the individual
selects lr = ln . Then (16) does not hold and (15) becomes  (l) + gl (l - ln ) = w, which
implicitly defines the optimal choice l so that taxes are still efficient. The second case is
      
that lr > ln . In this case, lowering lr incurs costs glr that are high enough to discourage so
much evasion that the individual reaches the notch. Then the first order condition in (16)
becomes -tw - glr = 0. Noting this and the fact that -gl = glr , the first order condition for
l in (15) becomes l =  -1 (w(1 - t)), which matches (3) in the simple distortionary case.
   Suppose next that the penalty function is p(l - lr )[tw(l - lr ) + F (l - lr )] for lr < ln and
zero otherwise. The optimization problem is still given by (14), and the first order conditions
can still be expressed by (15) and (16), but the there are now three cases to consider. First,
if the probability of detection is sufficiently low the agent may choose to evade more income
than the amount necessary to reach the notch. Second, the individual may choose to report
income at the notch. Third, if the marginal cost of evasion gl is high enough, then the agent
may choose a reported income level above the notch. One can summarize the three cases,
and the discussion to this point, as follows:

Proposition 1. Consider a taxpayer choosing income wl and reported income wlr , with
wage rate w, and facing an enforcement notch wln . The possible solutions are:
   A.) Reported income is below wln , taxes are distortionary and the optimal choices are
given by:
                  wl = w -1 (w(1 - t)),           
                                                wlr = wl - wgl-1 (tw + zlr ).                (17)

   B.) Reported income is above wln , taxes are distortionary and the optimal choices are
given by:
                      wl = w -1 (w(1 - t)),           
                                                    wlr = wl - wgl-1 (tw)                    (18)

   C.) Reported income equals wln , taxes are not distortionary and the optimal choices are

                                                9
implicitly given by:
                                 (l ) + gl (l - ln ) = w,          
                                                                 wlr = wln                               (19)

The solutions in Proposition 1 are derived in the Appendix but follow simply from applying
the earlier discussions of (6) & (7) and (12) & (13) to the first order conditions in (15) &
(16). Intuitively, the result builds upon an insight from Saez (2001), who notes that in a
nonlinear system with discrete changes in the the tax treatment of income, inframarginal
components of the tax system can be modeled as wealth effects. The combination of evasion
with an enforcement notch produces such a setting.
    We make three other observations. First, with an interior solution of lr in cases A and
B in the proposition, the taxpayer equates the gain in tax evasion with the marginal cost of
evasion, and an interior solution for l equates the gain in greater l with the gain in greater lr .
But in case C, the notch eliminates the relation between the marginal gain and marginal cost
of evasion, so that the tax rate no longer matters at the margin for either choice variable.
    Next, the analysis highlights a potentially unexpected feature of a bracket-based tax
system, which is that by offering a change in tax rates that coincides with a change in the
enforcement notch, one could affect the overall efficiency of the tax system by inducing corner
solutions at a notch.6
    Finally, the proposition shows that the effects of taxation vary by reported income, which
is observable to the tax authority. The next subsection applies this result to a setting of
heterogeneous agents reporting a range of income amounts, and considers welfare effects of
taxation.
   6
     More precisely, suppose that the government introduced a tax kink so that for wlr  wln the tax
rate became tn > t. Based on equation (16), an interior solution for lr means that, in the pre-tax-kink
setting, -tw - glr = -tw + gl > 0 when lr = ln . For a sufficiently high post-kink tax rate--specifically, for
tn  gl (l - ln )/w--it will be possible to (all else equal) induce this person to report income at the notch.




                                                     10
2.3.    Heterogeneity and Welfare Effects

    A tax authority with an enforcement notch would likely observe individuals reporting
different levels of income, so that all three of the above cases could apply. Suppose then that
a tax authority, with an enforcement notch at wln , collects tax revenue from a population of
individuals whose size is normalized to unity, and suppose that individuals' disutility of labor
can now be given by (l, ), where  is an exogenous parameter that affects the disutility of
labor. The marginal disutility of labor is  (l, ). Based on the  that individuals privately
observe, individuals choose a level of labor l and report income wlr to the tax authority.
This is essentially a special instance of the more general set of solutions given in (17) (18)
(19) in the prior section, so the solutions there continue to apply for a given individual.
    We will make no assumptions about how exactly  maps into optimal solutions of l and
 
lr , as it turns out that such assumptions are not necessary for deriving the welfare effects
of taxation.7 We will however assume (a) for a given  all individuals will choose to report
income under the notch, on the notch, or above the notch (ie those with a given  do not
"split" across these solutions) and (b) that any change in taxes is sufficiently small so that it
does not induce people to switch from (e.g.) reporting income under the notch to reporting
income above the notch.8
    The distribution of  across individuals is given by H, so that Prob(  x) = H(x). The
probability mass function (PMF) of  is given by h(), representing the mass of individuals
associated with a given disutility level . We will denote the distribution of s associated
with individuals reporting income under the notch as hu (). That is, hu () = h() for all
s associated with reported income under the notch, and zero for all other s. Similarly,
let the distribution of  for individuals at the notch be hn (), and the distribution of  for
   7
     Moreover, even if we specified a particular functional form for (l, ), the relationship between  and
the optimal choices of l and lr would still depend the (unspecified) cost-of-evasion function g .
   8
     In Appendix Section A5 we consider an example where individuals initially reporting income above
the notch respond to an increase in the tax rate by bunching. Individual utility falls by more when a
notch necessitates bunching after a tax increase, but in this case the presence of the notch yields greater
social welfare. The intuition here can thus extend to the case of such switchers. Moreover, the numerical
simulations in Section 3 also allow for switching in reported income above, below, or onto the notch.


                                                    11
reported incomes above the notch be ha ().
   The PMF distributions h(), hu (), hn (), and ha () are all unobservable to the tax au-
thority. The observable distribution of reported incomes is given by G (x), so that Prob(wlr <
x) = G (x). Let the fraction of individuals reporting taxable income at the notch be given by
 . Then G (wln ) is the fraction of individuals who report income at or below the notch, and
removing  from this group G (wln ) -  leaves the fraction reporting strictly under the notch.
Lastly 1 - G (wln ) is the fraction reporting strictly above the notch. Thus the distribution
of  and reported income are related, as                     hn () =  , and                 hu () = G (wln ) -  , and
   ha () = 1 - G (wln ).
   Let W (t) denote the social welfare from taxing a given individual:


                        
   W (t) = {y + wl - twlr - z (l , lr
                                                              
                                      , t) - (l , ) - g (l - lr )} + z (l , lr
                                                                                         
                                                                               , t) + twlr                       (20)


where again braces indicate that the envelope theorem applies. The social welfare function
for all individuals can then be given as:


                W(t) =                W (t)hu () +              W (t)hn () +              W (t)ha ().            (21)
                           lr   <ln                  lr   =ln                  lr   >ln


                           
   Denote taxable income wlr as TI for each individual, and wl as LI (labor income), and
denote the weighting term µ = (tw - gl )/tw. Then the following proposition shows the
marginal effect of a change in the tax rate on social welfare:

Proposition 2. Let the fraction of individuals below, above, and bunching at the notch ln be
given by G (wln ) -  , 1 - G (wln ) , and  , respectively. Then the change in social welfare
from a change in the tax rate is:

dW(t)                     dLI           dTI                                                             dTI
      = t G (wln ) -  E µ     + (1 - µ)                           lr < ln + t 1 - G (wln ) E                  lr > ln
 dt                        dt            dt                                                              dt
                                                                                                                 (22)

The derivation is given in the Appendix. Expression (22) is the sum of two terms, one for the

                                                           12
group of individuals reporting income under the notch and one for the group of individuals
reporting above. Each term depends upon the overall size of the group, and the group's
expected value of the welfare effect from a change in the tax rate. Further, the welfare
effects depend upon how taxable income TI and, for one group, labor income LI respond to
the change in the tax rate.
    The expression (22) is shrinking (getting closer to zero) in the fraction  of individuals
who report income at the notch. All else equal, the welfare costs of increasing taxes are
smaller when bunching is greater. An important takeaway from (22) is thus that one cannot
use observed bunching in this empirical setting to surmise the efficiency effects of an en-
forcement notch. An increase in bunching holding all else equal is similar to what Lockwood
(2020) calls the aggregate-bunching response but (as noted before) his analysis considers a
different type of notch and suggests that efficiency falls as bunching increases.
    Intuitively, the proposition is like an example of the theory of second best: given a
distortionary tax, adding another distortion (from the enforcement notch) may be efficient
(I thank a referee for noting this).9 Figure 1 illustrates the intuition of the welfare effects
for an individual who chooses earnings above the notch and facing a tax increase from t to
t . Increases in after-tax income above lr are nonlinear because of g ().10 The initial optimal
choice of this consumer, for tax rate t, is given at bundle A, with associated reported taxable
        A
income lr .
    Suppose that taxes increased to t , but that the individual continued to report the original
amount of taxable income. Then the individual's budget line would be given by the new
lower line with slope 1 - t below reported income and the dashed line that has a kink at the
          A
original lr . Above reported income, this dashed line is parallel to the original curved line­it
is akin to a lump sum tax. However, an increase in the tax will change taxable income to
 A
lr . (Taxable income will fall; this follows from equation (16)). For a "large" change in t
   9
     Similar intuition can also apply to situations with tax evasion and expenditure decisions; Hungerman
(2014) considers such a case.
  10
     Both l and lr are chosen together; in this figure different values of real income l > lr are depicted for a
given value of reported income lr .


                                                      13
the new choice of labor income will also be distorted at A , although for small changes in t
this behavioral response does not impact welfare from the envelope theorem. The change in
taxable income from the move in lr however is not negated by any envelope-style argument
and this is the source of distortion for these individuals in (22).
   One might be interested instead in an increase in bunching that reflected an increase in
                                                                                dLI dTI
income elasticities. Greater elasticities would likely increase both  and the    dt  dt
                                                                                          terms,
making the overall relation between bunching and efficiency ambiguous. Moreover, policy-
induced changes in the amount of bunching might be generated from (a) moving the location
of a notch or (b) eliminating a notch, and in both of these cases it is again unclear whether
the intuition of (22) could continue to hold. We undertake an empirical exercise that explores
these extensions below. The simulation also allows changes in both reported and actual labor
supply, reflecting both possible sources of distortion shown in Figure 1.
   Next, the expression (22) resembles the derivation in Chetty (2009) (see his equation 23),
where the welfare effects of taxation are a weighted average of taxable and earned income
and the weights depend upon the ratio of the marginal private cost of evasion gl and the
tax rate t. As in that paper, the weights for the group below the notch occur because
these individuals do not equate the marginal cost of hiding, gl , with the tax rate. But here,
and unlike in Chetty's derivation, the role of these weights depends critically upon whether
reported income is above or below the notch. The difference between the two models comes
from the asymmetric treatment of the transfer function z . Notably, however, if the tax
authority were able to estimate the change in labor income and weights µ, it would be
straightforward to apply the results in Proposition 2 across individuals since the expression
differs in taxable income, which is observed. The expression in Proposition 2 also obtains, for
high income earners above the notch, the result in Feldstein (1999) that welfare is a function
of taxable income alone, and this holds even in the presence of transfers and costly evasion
and no matter what the marginal cost of evasion is. However, the result here is different in
the sense that in this setting evasion can be associated with an increase in taxes that creates


                                               14
no deadweight loss, even though for the marginal dollar earned the evasion rate is 100%.


2.4.      The Optimal Tax Rate

       This normative result extends to deriving an optimal tax rate. Suppose that a dollar of
government spending is worth 1 +  dollars of private income. Assume  > 0, so that social
welfare matches (21) except each individual's tax revenue is weighted by .


 ~ (t, ) = {y + wl - twl - z (l , l , t) - (l , ) - g (l - l )} + z (l , l , t)+ twl (1+ ) (23)
 W                      r          r                        r             r         r




Using (23) in the social welfare expression (21),11 consider the choice of t that sets the
first order condition to zero.12 Let i                      ¯i
                                     t = -E[dTI/dt][(1 - t)/TI ] represent the elasticity of

                                                                                       ¯i
average taxable income with respect to the tax rate, evaluated for group i  {u, n, a}; TI
is average taxable income in i. The elasticity term i is the same but uses labor income
instead of taxable income. The taxable income elasticity for all individuals is given by
                      ¯ , where TI
t = -E[dTI/dt](1 - t)/TI        ¯ = E[TI]. Lastly, define t
                                                          i
                                                            as the ratio of taxable
income for group i over taxable income for all taxpayers and i as the ratio of labor income
for group i over taxable income for all taxpayers. The following proposition then gives the
optimal tax rate:

Proposition 3. The optimal tax rate t that maximizes social welfare is given by:

                         t                     
                            
                             =                                                                     (24)
                        1-t    µ u u + (1 - µ) u  u    a a
                                               t  t +  t  t +  t



The proof is in the Appendix. This optimal tax equates the marginal benefit of a dollar of
revenue with its marginal cost. The marginal cost depends upon how distortionary taxes
  11
    Weighting the penalty function by  complicates the analysis but does not change the intuition.
  12
    We thus allow endogenous responses to changes in t (outside of the braces) and allow individuals to
reach corner solutions in taxable income (ie bunch at the notch), but maintain the assumption that small
tax changes do not induce individuals to start or stop bunching in taxable income. Below we consider a
simulation that allows agents to change their labor supply across the notch as tax rates change.



                                                  15
are across different groups of income, weighted by the income shares of these groups. The
final term in the denominator, weighted by , which does not have a corresponding term
in the welfare expression in (22), reflects the fact that changes in taxation not only affect
distortion but also directly affect tax revenue.
       The greater the fraction of income reported by those bunching at the notch, all else
equal, the smaller the share of income in the non-notch groups, so that the  terms in the
denominator will shrink and the optimal tax rate will grow. Suppose µ = 0 and that for
those above and below the notch i
                                t = e; these hold if the marginal cost of evasion equals its

private benefit for those under the notch and if all taxpayers away from the notch have the
same tax-price elasticity in taxable income. Then the Appendix shows that (24) simplifies
further to:
                                       t            
                                          
                                           =       n
                                                                                                        (25)
                                      1-t    e(1 - t )(1 + )
      n
where t is the ratio of taxable income for those at the notch over taxable income for all
                                                                                n
taxpayers. The larger is the share of income from those bunching, the larger is t and the
higher is the optimal tax rate as the marginal cost of increasing the tax rate declines. With no
          n
bunching, t = 0 and the right-hand-side expression simplifies to the familiar /[e(1 + )].13
       The results of this section thus show that higher levels of bunching can be associated with
smaller-in-absolute-value welfare costs of taxation and higher optimal levels of taxes. The
following section considers an empirical exercise that (a) illustrates this intuition in a simple
setting (b) does so while allowing individuals to relocate around a notch in response to a
change in the tax rate (c) compares the use of a notch to a no-notch no-evasion world and
(d) for a given group of taxpayers, compares different notches that create different amounts
of bunching.
  13                          n
    Real-world estimates of t   could generate meaningful changes in the optimal tax condition in (25). Best
et. al (2015) show that low-rate firms in their data display double the density they should near a kink
(apparently through evasion), with roughly 25% of firms locating near the kink. See panel B of their Figure
                            n
3, and row 2 of Table 2. If t  = .25, (25) would consequently be 1/(1-.25) =1.33 times larger in size than in
                          n
a no-evasion case where t = 0. They find even larger bunching behavior for some other types of firms.




                                                     16
3.      A Simulation

     We illustrate and expand on the above results with a simulation. Preferences are given
                                                   1+1/e
                                               l
by iso-elastic utility u(c, l) = c -   1+1/e   
                                                           . The parameter e is the elasticity of labor
with respect to (1 - t) in the no-notch, no-evasion world.
     We proceed in several steps. First, for each of 1,000 individuals we draw a parameter
of the disutility of work  from a log-normal distribution where the underlying normal
distribution has mean µ = 0; and standard deviation  = .5. Second, we set the wage rate
to unity and for a given notch we calculate the optimal decisions for each individual using the
simple case of perfect detection of evasion below the notch and no detection of evasion above,
as in (11). Since the choice set is non-convex, we calculate possible solutions under each
piece-wise linear component of the choice set and then select the feasible solution providing
the greatest utility. Third, we calculate total tax revenue given each individual's solution,
   
twlr = R noting that for some individuals (those earning below the notch) reported income
                                                                           
will be actual labor supply. Social welfare is W (t) =  V (, w, t, e) + twlr               where V is
indirect utility. In the no-notch no-evasion case, each person pays taxes of twl = twwe (1 -
t)e . To make the two settings revenue equivalent, while accounting for endogenous taxable
income, we use the revenue R calculated above and solve twwe (1 - t)e = R for t; call
the smallest non-negative t that solves this equation t . The final step is to solve for each
individual's optimal choice in a no-notch, no-evasion case with tax rate t , and calculate
social welfare in this no-notch no-evasion setting, W 0 (t) =  V (, w, t , e) + t wl .
     Table 1 reports simulation outcomes for several different sets of parameter values. Panel
A reports for each simulation the ratio of social welfare with the notch over no-notch social
welfare, W/W 0 . Panel B reports the corresponding revenue-equivalent no-evasion tax t
values, Panel C reports for each simulation the fraction of taxpayers earning income above
the notch (when the notch is in effect) and thus bunching in reported income, and Panel D
reports the social welfare values in the notch case alone, W . Each row in each panel uses a
different notch-based tax rate, ranging from 0.1 to 0.7.

                                                    17
   In the first column of each panel we choose the elasticity e = .25 (as in Saez, 2001) and
set the notch value at ln = .5. Looking at Panel A, for each row in the first column the ratio
is greater than 1, indicating greater social welfare in a setting with an enforcement notch
relative to a no-notch, no-evasion, revenue-equivalent setting.
   The first column of Panel B shows the corresponding t values. All values of t are
lower than the notch-based tax rates, as one would expect--the t values are applied to all
earnings, while the notch-based tax rates will only be applied to earnings at or below the
notch, so that with inelastic labor supply, a lower tax rate can be applied to a larger tax
base while generating the same revenue. Often the t values are about half as large as the
tax rate with the notch. For example, the last entry in column 1 of Panel B shows that,
compared to a notch system with a tax rates of 0.7, a system with no evasion could raise
the same revenue with a tax rate of 0.331. The last entry in Panel A shows that in this case
the notch system provides 1.42% higher social welfare. Panel C reports the fraction earning
income over the notch. The fraction reporting income over the notch is high but, as shown
momentarily, efficiency gains from a notch are still possible even when the fraction earning
over the notch is lower. Column 1 of Panel D (and all other columns of the panel) show that
as t increases, all else equal, welfare in the notch setting unsurprisingly falls.
   In the second column of each panel, we increase the elasticity of labor supply to .5, which
Gruber and Seaz (2002) report as the elasticity of taxable income (while arguing that the
elasticity of real income is lower, so that .5 represents a strong upper bound for e). The
relative efficiency of the notch increases further compared to the ratios in column 1. The
values in column 2 of Panels B and C are reasonably close to those in column 1. The results
in column 2 indicate that, given similar values of t as in column 1, the greater elasticity of
labor supply leads to greater distortion from taxation and greater efficiency gains from using
the notch.
   Column 3 uses the parameter values from column 2, except the value of the notch has
been increased to 0.8. As the notch increases, the number of taxpayers below the notch


                                               18
grows (Panel C). Not only do these individuals prefer the no-notch system with its lower t ,
but deadweight loss from these individuals will be smaller in the no-notch system as well.
Nevertheless, column 3 of Panel A makes clear that the social gains from using a notch
are actually larger in this case. Here, for a given tax rate under the notch t will increase,
and the notch-based cost of increasing distortion for low earners shrinks and the benefit of
reducing distortion for high earners grows, so that the social gains from using a notch in
A are larger in column 3 than in the other columns despite the fact that the number of
individuals actually above the notch is smaller.
   Columns 2 and 3 utilize the same preferences so that one can compare notch-based
welfare between them in Panel D. There are three takeaways from comparing columns 2 and
3. First, in both settings notch-based welfare is higher than no-notch welfare (Panel A).
Second, column 2 both has higher levels of bunching (as shown in Panel C) and higher levels
of notch-based welfare (Panel D); this shows that greater bunching can be associated with
greater welfare, holding preferences and the underlying distribution of productivity constant,
expounding on the intuition from (22) earlier. Lastly, even though column 2 consistently
has higher notch-based welfare than the results in column 3, as noted above its welfare gains
relative to a no-notch setting are smaller. Increases in bunching can be associated with both
greater welfare and with greater welfare relative to no-notch taxation, but the two concepts of
"greater welfare" are distinct. Moreover, for these two columns, the differences in the amount
of bunching seen in the last few rows of Panel C are similar, but the differences in utility
in the last few rows of Panel D vary greatly. One cannot examine the amount of bunching,
or compare the amount of bunching in two settings--even for settings where preferences
and the underlying distribution of productivity are constant--and draw conclusions about
welfare.
   In summary, Table 1 illustrates that notches can not only lead to greater efficiency under
marginal changes in tax rates, but that a system allowing evasion with an enforcement-
induced notch can generate higher welfare than a revenue equivalent system with no evasion


                                              19
and no notch. We leave further empirical work on the implications of notches to the future,
and discuss other issues for future research in the conclusions.



Conclusions

   This paper considers bunching in reported income at enforcement notches that create
discrete changes in the cost of tax evasion, and shows that the welfare effects of taxation can
be increasing with the amount of such bunching. We find that efficiency costs of taxation
are closer to zero the greater is bunching, all else equal, and that optimal taxes can be higher
the greater is bunching. A general formula for the welfare effects of taxation in this case
depends not only upon taxable and labor income, but also on whether reported income is
above or below the notch. A simulation shows that a change in the location of a notch that
leads to higher bunching can lead to higher social welfare, and social welfare can be greater
in a system with bunching and evasion than in a revenue equivalent no-notch, no-evasion
world. This paper builds on and provides novel intuition behind an observation in Section
4 of Slemrod (2013) that "general statements about the welfare effects of notches cannot be
made."
   This paper also has implications for several other topics related to evasion and enforce-
ment in the presence of notches. For example, evasion may involve issues of "horizontal
equity" whereby efforts to distort matter more in some professions or for some individuals
than others. The result here is obtained by allowing evasion for relatively high earners--those
earning above the notch. In that sense, the intuition here, which is driven by the single-agent
case, is an example of an equity-efficiency trade off. But if notches are taxpayer-specific, then
it might be possible for the intuition here to apply in a way that does not sacrifice equity for
efficiency. Considering a case of individual-specific notches (such as from third-party report-
ing, if such amounts are taken as given), an implication of the analysis here would be that
taxes are less distortionary as more taxpayers report income matching third-party-reported



                                               20
income.
   However, some people may always report income truthfully, in which case the results
here would suggest that (as in the standard evasion story) the presence of evasion could shift
additional tax burden onto truthful reporters. The model here, moreover, assumes that the
enforcement system is common knowledge and that evasion is essentially sanctioned for high
levels of income; making such a setting explicit could change individuals' views of the tax
system itself: a system built upon tacit approval of evasion could lead to lower tax morale
or regard for the tax authority in general. Similar ideas are raised in Frey (1997), see also
Luttmer and Singhal (2014). Further, over time a tax authority that has promised to allow
full evasion beyond a certain level of reported income may be tempted to surprise taxpayers
with an unannounced audit. A tax authority using an enforcement notch would have to
consider its ability to commit to the notch.
   In an important sense the notches in the analysis here are the mirror image of those con-
sidered in some prior work, where bunching responds to an increase (rather than a decrease)
in costs from passing some threshold: a higher marginal tax rate (Saez, 2010); higher aver-
age tax rates (Kleven & Waseem, 2013), or the cap on a tax credit (Hungerman & Wilhelm,
2021). The marginal-cost-decrease from crossing the threshold here leads to a non-convex
budget set. One might wonder in this case why there would be any bunching at all; the
analysis here highlights that such notches may in fact generate bunching in reported in-
come (similar in spirit to the observations in Klevin, 2016) and consequentially both lead to
bunching and lead to important effects on welfare. Interpreting bunching depends upon the
nature of the notch.
   It has been pointed out to me that the evasion story here resembles the famous result
of Mirrlees' model (1971) that in an optimal income tax system the top earner should face
a marginal tax of zero. The analysis here does rely on individuals above the notch facing
a zero marginal tax rate. It is known that Mirrlees' result is local, but that is not the case
here. This paper provides a different, and non-local, rationale for allowing de facto zero


                                               21
marginal tax rates for high earners in a nonlinear tax system.
   An implication of this paper is that evasion is not always the same as distortionary
behavior, and that evasion may combine in complex and unexpected ways with the tax
system. Large recent literatures have explored the potential importance of bunching and the
importance of evasion. The results here suggest that future work should carefully consider
how these two phenomenon may interact.



References
 [1] Agostini, Claudio. 2016. "Small Firms and Presumptive Tax Regimes in Chile: Tax
     Avoidance and Equity." Working paper.

 [2] Alm, James. 2018. "What Motivates Tax Compliance?" Economic Surveys June: 1-36.

 [3] Almunia, Miguel, and David Lopez-Rodriguez. 2018. "Under the Radar: the Effects of
     Monitoring Firms on Tax Compliance." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
     10: 1-38.

 [4] Artavanis, Nikolaos, Adair Morse, and Margarita Tsoutsoura. 2016. "Measuring Income
     Tax Evasion Using Bank Credit: Evidence From Greece." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics : 739-798.

 [5] Best, Michael, Anne Brockmeyer, Henrik Kleven, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Mazhar
     Waseem. 2015. "Production versus Revenue Efficiency with Limited Tax Capacity: The-
     ory and Evidence from Pakistan." Journal of Political Economy 123: 1311-1355.

 [6] Bigio, Saki, and Eduardo Zilberman. 2011. "Optimal Self-employment Income Tax En-
     forcement." Journal of Public Economics 95: 1021-1035.

 [7] Blinder Alan and Harvey Rosen. 1985. "Notches." The American Economic Review 75:
     736-747.

 [8] Carrillo, Paul, Dina Pomeranz, and Monica Singhal. 2017. "Dodging the Taxman: Firm
     Misreporting and Limits to Tax Enforcement." American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics 9: 144-64.




                                            22
 [9] Chetty, Raj. 2009. "Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Sufficient to Calculate Deadweight
     Loss? The Implications of Evasion and Avoidance." American Economic Journal: Eco-
     nomic Policy 1: 31-52.

[10] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. "Salience and Taxation: Theory and
     Evidence." American Economic Review 99: 1145-77.

[11] Feldstein, Martin. 1999. "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax."
     Review of Economics and Statistics 81: 674-80.

[12] Frey, Bruno. 1997. "A Constitution for Knaves Crowds out Civic Virtues." The Eco-
     nomic Journal 107: 1043-1053.

[13] Gruber, Jonathan, and Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. "The Elasticity of Taxable Income:
     Evidence and Implications." Journal of Public Economics 84, 1-32.

[14] Hungerman, Daniel. 2014. "Public Goods, Hidden Income, and Tax Evasion: Some
     Nonstandard Results from the Warm-glow Model." Journal of Development Economics
     109: 188-202.

[15] Hungerman, Daniel, and Mark Wilhelm. 2021. "Impure Impact Giving: Theory and
     Evidence." Journal of Political Economy, 129: 1553-1614.

[16] Keen, Michael, and Joel Slemrod. 2017. "Optimal Tax Administration." Journal of
     Public Economics 152: 133-42.

[17] Kleven, Henrik. 2016. "Bunching." Annual Review of Economics 8: 435-64.

[18] Kleven, Henrik, Martin Knudsen, Claus Kreiner, Søren Pedersen and Emmanuel Saez.
     2011. "Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Den-
     mark." Econometrica 79: 651-692.

[19] Kleven, Henrik, and Mazhar Waseem. "Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Fric-
     tions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan." Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics 128, 669-723.

[20] Litina, Anastasia, and Theodore Palivos. 2016. "Corruption, Tax Evasion, and Social
     Values." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 124: 164-177.

[21] Lockwood, Ben. 2020. "Malas Notches." International Tax and Public Finance 27: 779-
     804.


                                            23
[22] Luttmer, Erzo F. P., and Monica Singhal. 2014. "Tax Morale." Journal of Economic
     Perspectives 28: 149-68.

[23] Meiselman, Ben. 2018. "Ghostbusting in Detroit: Evidence on Nonfilers from a Con-
     trolled Field Experiment." Journal of Public Economics 158: 180-193.

[24] Mirrlees, J.A. 1971. "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation." The
     Review of Economic Studies 38: 175-208.

[25] National Taxpayer Advocate. 2017. Annual Report to Congress, Volume 1.

[26] Reinganum, Jennifer, and Louis Wilde. 1985. "Income Tax Compliance in a Principal-
     Agent Framework." Journal of Public Economics 26: 1-18.

[27] Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. "Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?" American Economic
     Journal: Economic Policy 2: 180-212.

[28] Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates." Re-
     view of Economic Studies 68: 205-29.

[29] Sallee, James, and Joel Slemrod. 2012. "Car Notches: Strategic Automaker Responses
     to Fuel Economy Policy," Journal of Public Economics 96: 981-999.

[30] Slemrod, Joel. 2013. "Buenas Notches: Lines and Notches in Tax System Design."
     eJournal of Tax Research 11: 259-283.




Appendix
A1. General Preferences
   Here we derive the main result from (2.2) for general preferences. The agent maximizes

                        max U (y -  + wl - twlr - z (l, lr , t), l)                  (26)
                        l, lr

where  is a lump sum tax that will be used to derive comparative statics. This yields the
first order conditions:

                                l : Uc (·)(w - zl ) + Ul (·) = 0                     (27)

                                  lr : Uc (·)(-tw - zlr ) = 0                        (28)

                                              24
    Consider a change in the lump sum tax rate  in a world with no evasion. In this case the
first order condition in (27) still holds, with the function z set to zero. Taking the derivative
of (28), we have:

               Ucc (·)(-1 + wl )w + Ucl (·)l w + Ulc (·)(-1 + wl ) + Ull (·)l = 0           (29)

Gathering terms,
                                                 wUcc (·) + Ulc (·)
                                    l =                                                     (30)
                                          w2 Ucc (·)
                                                   + 2wUlc (·) + Ull (·)
                          
Now consider a case with lr = ln , where again by assumption the individual is at a notch so
that (28) does not hold and z = 0. Differentiating (27) with respect to t, we have:

                Ucc (·)(wlt - wln )w + Ucl (·)lt w + Ulc (wlt - wln ) + Ull (·)lt = 0.      (31)

And solving for lt yields:

                                       w2 ln Ucc (·) + wln Ulc (·)
                             lt =                                    = (wln )l              (32)
                                    w2 Ucc (·) + 2wUlc (·) + Ull (·)

and so for a change in the tax rate d = wln dt the two effects will be the same. Thus, we
                                                                                    
once again have that a change in the proportional tax rate t produces no change in lr , and
elicits the same effect on l as does an appropriately sized lump sum tax  .


A2. Derivation for the Saez Model
    Here we will show that it is possible to have efficient taxation in a model akin to the one
used in Sectio 2.C in Saez (2010). That model differs from the model used in this study in
four ways. First, he assumes linear preferences. Second, he introduces fixed costs of both
reporting earned income, denoted qA , and of reporting earned income different from actual
earned income, denoted qM . Third, he assumes earnings do not respond to taxes. Fourth,
he assumes that the tax function is single peaked.
    In Saez's notation, total earnings (which are perfectly inelastic) are w + y , where w is
formal earnings that cannot be evaded, and y is informal earnings that can be evaded. The
individual chooses y^ to report; w is assumed fixed. The individual faces a tax function
-T (w + y^) which is single peaked. We will suppose that this tax function is differentiable in
a parameter t, so that the function is T (w + y
                                              ^, t). Otherwise, we would not have a parameter
to optimize over for social welfare. The individual maximizes:

                     max y + w - T (w + y
                                        ^) - qA 1(^
                                                  y > 0) - qM 1(^
                                                                y = y)                      (33)
                       y
                       ^


                                                       25
(cf. equation 7 in Saez). The only optimal choices would be to report no informal income,
to truthfully report, or to report so that one is at the peak. (Saez proves this.) Suppose we
are at the peak so that the first order condition holds:

                                               T
                                           -     = 0.                                       (34)
                                               y
                                               ^

The welfare function is:

         W (t) = {w + y - T (w + y
                                 ^, t) - qA 1(^
                                              y > 0) - qM 1(^
                                                            y = y )} + T (w + y
                                                                              ^, t)         (35)

As in the text, assume that a change in the parameter t does not induce any "switching," for
example between choosing the be at the peak versus choosing to report all (or no) informal
income. Then the derivative of (35) is:

                             dW (t)    T   T   T dy
                                                  ^
                                    =-   +   +      = 0.                                    (36)
                              dt       t   t   y
                                               ^ dt

where the first two terms cancel and the last term is zero by (34). Thus, the model again
shows that under evasion, the marginal welfare cost of a change in the tax system must be
zero. Note here that the result is obtained not just for a linear tax rate, but for a more
general change in parameters in the face of a nonlinear (but single peaked) tax system.
    The result is worth a second thought, however, as one might observe that in the above
solution there is a discontinuity in the cost of evasion, but this discontinuity occurs away from
the optimal choice of evasion. Here, and unlike in the main analysis in the paper, evasion is
determined by a first order condition rather than by an enforcement notch. The difference
comes from Saez's strong assumption that actual labor supply is perfectly inelastic: in Saez's
model it is actual labor supply that is at a "corner" solution (in that no interior first order
condition characterizes it), while reported labor supply is determined by an interior solution
that, due to single peaked taxes, sets the marginal tax rate to zero. Saez's assumption of
a nonlinear tax system with linear preferences is also the reverse of what is done in the
paper, although any combination of the two that admits a convex solution characterized by
a first order condition independent of a tax rate could suffice. Aside from highlighting the
overlooked importance of enforcement notches, and enforcement more generally in discussions
of taxation and welfare, a benefit of the model used in the main text of this paper is that
it allows taxation to be distortionary in labor supply, whereas by assumption that channel
is shut down in Saez's model. In the Saez model, if reported income equals true income,
then the tax system has no effect (since true income is by assumption fixed) and if reported


                                                26
income is zero, then the tax system creates no deadweight loss but also creates no revenue.
Indeed, in Saez's model, which was not intended for serious consideration of efficiency issues,
if qA = 0 then there will never be deadweight loss from taxation. But both models highlight
how a corner solution in one choice variable and an interior solution in the other can facilitate
an efficient tax system that nonetheless manages to raise revenue.


A3. Proof of Proposition 1
   The first order conditions are

                                      l : w - zl - gl -  (l) = 0                                      (37)

                                      lr :    - tw - zlr - glr = 0.                                   (38)

For part A, gl = -glr and zl = -zlr . This last equality becomes zl = tw - gl using (38).
Plugging this into (37) produces the solution for l in (17). Replacing -glr with gl and
                                                                                
taking its inverse leads to the solution for lr . For part B, the solution for lr is the same as
in A noting zlr = 0. Plugging (38) into (37) produces the solution for l . For part C, lr    
                                                                                              is
            
given and l follows directly from (37). Multiply both sides of each solution by w for the
expressions in the proposition.


A4. Proof of Proposition 2
Differentiating (21) with respect to t yields:

             dW(t)                dW (t) u                   dW (t) n                   dW (t) a
                   =                    h () +                     h () +                     h ().   (39)
              dt     l      <ln
                                   dt          l       =ln
                                                              dt          l       >ln
                                                                                         dt
                        r                          r                          r



The above expression consists of three summations, each taken over different values of .
For each of the three summations, we can write the general expression:

      dW (t) i                               z    z z dl         
                                                             z dlr           dl
            h () =                {-wlr -      }+   +      +       + wlr + tw r hi () (40)
       dt                                    t    t   l dt   lr dt           dt

where the superscript i  {u, n, a} determines whether the summation in question is for
individuals under, at, or above the notch. The expression in (40) simplifies to

                        dW (t) i                   z dl dlr
                                                             z
                              h () =                    +       + tw                    hi ().        (41)
                         dt                        l dt   dt lr



                                                        27
   The evaluation of equation (41) depends upon whether the sum in question is for indi-
viduals reporting income under, at, or above the notch. For those under the notch, where
 
lr < ln , the optimal solutions are given by (17) (where one could write  -1 (w(1 - t)) as
 -1 (w(1 - t), )). By the first order condition for (14), for this group zlr = -tw - glr =
-tw + gl , and zl = -zlr and finally gl = -glr . Then (41) becomes:

                                dW (t) u                    dl             dl
                                      h () =                   (tw - gl ) + r gl hu ().                    (42)
                     lr   <ln
                                 dt          1        <ln
                                                            dt             dt
                                                  r


                                                                                 
   For those at the notch, z = 0 and by (19) we have dl   dt
                                                             = dl
                                                                dt
                                                                  r
                                                                    = 0 so that the summation
equals zero. For those reporting income above the notch, z = 0 and the first order condition
becomes tw = glr . Plugging these results in for all individuals yields:

             dW(t)                    dl             dl                                  
                                                                                       dlr
                   =                     (tw - gl ) + r gl hu () + 0 +                     tw ha ().       (43)
              dt     l          <ln
                                      dt             dt                l         >ln
                                                                                       dt
                            r                                                r



Lastly, while each of the above summations resembles an expected value, as noted above the
PMFs hu and ha do not sum to unity. Re-scaling them to sum to unity (ie, multiplying by
G (ln ) -  over G (ln ) -  , for the first summation) allows us to express (43) as:

dW(t)                     dLI           dTI                                                       dTI
      = t G (wln ) -  E µ     + (1 - µ)                          lr < ln + t 1 - G (wln ) E             lr > ln
 dt                        dt            dt                                                        dt
                                                                                                            (44)
which matches the proposition.


A5.Moving onto the Notch: An Example
    Consider a taxpayer strictly above the notch, so that z (l , lr
                                                                  
                                                                    , t) = 0. The initial tax rate
is t and let w = 1. Let the cost of evasion be quadratic, g (l - lr ) = 1 2
                                                                            (l - lr )2 , and suppose
                                                                             1 (1+1/e)      1 2
labor effort is isoelastic with unit elasticity of supply e so that  = 1+      e
                                                                                 l        = 2 l . The
individual solves:

                                                       1            1
                                      max y + l - tlr - (l - lr )2 - l2 .                                  (45)
                                      l, lr            2            2
The first order conditions are 1 - l + lr - l = 0 and -t + l - lr = 0. Combining yields l = 1 - t
                                                             
and lr = 1 - 2t. Assume an interior optimal choice for lr     , so that t < 1/2. Of course, if the
tax rate increases, labor supply and reported income both fall, but reported income falls by




                                                            28
more. Using the first order conditions (noting l - lr = t), the value function is

                                                            1    1
                    V (l , lr
                            
                              , t) = y + 1 - t - t(1 - 2t) - t2 - (1 - t)2                      (46)
                                                            2    2

                                 = y + 1/2 - t + t2 .                                           (47)

                                                                  
Now introduce a notch ln . For an individual who bunches, lr        = ln and the first order
condition for l in (45) becomes l = 2 1
                                        (1 + ln ). A bunching individual desires labor income
above the notch and reported income below the notch; the first will hold if ln < 1 and the
second if 1 - 2t < ln . The value function now is:

                                       1 ln        1 1 ln          2       1 1 ln    2
                V (l , ln , t) = y +     + - tln -     -               -       +                (48)
                                       2  2        2 2   2                 2 2   2
                                       1 ln        (ln )2
                             = y+        + - tln -        .                                     (49)
                                       4  2          4

It can be shown that (47) > (49); this is omitted for brevity but logically it must be true,
else the individual optimized wrong.
    Consider then an individual initially at an interior solution who faces an increase in taxes
from t to t¯ > t. We will compare a purely-interior case to a case where a notch is present
and the change results in "switching," i.e. bunching at the notch. From the above it follows
that the individual facing the notch who must bunch will be worse off than if they were not
constrained at the notch. But how will social welfare compare between the two cases?
    Begin with the purely-interior case. Social welfare is: V (l , lr              
                                                                          , t) + tlr = y + 1/2 - t2 .
With the higher tax rate, this is simply y + 1/2 - t    ¯ 2 . Next, if the notch is present and the
tax increase induces a person to bunch, initial welfare is the same as before, and after the
                                       ¯) + tln = y + 1/4 + ln /2 - (ln )2 /4.
tax rate change welfare is V (l , ln , t
    A tax rate that induces bunching onto notch ln will thus have higher social welfare than
in the no-notch case if (and only if):

                                                                   ¯ 2.
                           y + 1/4 + ln /2 - (ln )2 /4 > y + 1/2 - t                            (50)

The left-hand side is increasing in ln for ln < 1. Since ln > 1 - 2t¯, the left hand side must
then be greater than what is obtained by substituting 1 - 2t ¯ for ln :

                                                 ¯)/2 - (1 - 2t
   y + 1/4 + ln /2 - (ln )2 /4 > y + 1/4 + (1 - 2t            ¯)2 /4 = y + 1/2 - t
                                                                                 ¯ 2.           (51)

   The equality follows from routine algebra but again logically must be true--if the notch


                                                 29
were set to the initial level of reported income, social welfare will be the same as before.
Thus for "switchers", individual utility falls by more if a notch necessitates bunching after
a tax increase, but the presence of the notch yields greater social welfare.


A6. Optimal Taxation and Proof of Proposition 3
   Consider first the proposition. Social welfare is given by

                              ~ (t, ) =
                              W                          ~ (t, )hi ()
                                                         W                                         (52)
                                          i{u,n,a}    


where

 ~ (t, ) = {y + wl - twlr
 W                      
                          - z (l , lr
                                    
                                      , t) - (l , ) - g (l - lr
                                                              
                                                                )} + z (l , lr
                                                                                        
                                                                               , t)+ twlr (1+ ) (53)

This matches the social welfare function in section 2.3 used to derive equation (22), with an
                     
additional term twlr  for each individual. Using equation (22), then, the first derivative of
(52) can be written:

   ~ (t)
  dW                          LI
         = t G (wln ) -  E µ ddt + (1 - µ) ddt
                                            TI
                                               lr < ln + t 1 - G (wln ) E          dTI
                                                                                    dt
                                                                                         lr > ln
   dt
                                                          
                                   +                 (tw dl
                                                         dt
                                                            r      i
                                                              + wlr )h ()                          (54)
                                       i{u,n,a} 



where the first row is from (22). The second row can be written  TI    ¯ + tE[ dT I ] , where
                                                                                dt
¯
TI =                 i
                 (wlr )h () represents the sum and mean of taxable income for all individuals
     i{u,n,a} 
since the total population is of size unity. Using this, setting (54) to zero, and denoting
G (wln ) as G , we have:

              dLI           dTI                     dTI            ¯ + tE dT I
t G - E µ         + (1 - µ)     lr < ln + t 1 - G E     lr > ln +  TI                               =0
               dt            dt                      dt                    dt
                                                                                                   (55)




                                                30
Define mean elasticities thusly:

                                       dLI        1-t         ¯ u = E[LI|lr < ln ]
                  u = -E                   lr < ln ¯u , where LI
                                        dt         LI
                                       dTI        1-t          ¯ u = E[TI|lr < ln ]
                  u
                  t = -E                   lr < ln ¯ u , where TI
                                        dt         TI
                                       dTI        1-t          ¯ a = E[TI|lr > ln ]
                  a
                  t = -E                   lr > ln ¯ a , where TI
                                        dt         TI
                                       dTI 1 - t       ¯
                   t = -E                    ¯ , where TI = E[TI]                                                     (56)
                                        dt  TI

And define income shares as:
                                                                 ¯u
                                                         (G -  )LI
                                              u =            ¯
                                                             TI
                                                                 ¯u
                                                         (G -  )TI
                                              u
                                              t =            ¯
                                                             TI
                                                                  ¯a
                                                         (1 - G )TI
                                              a
                                              t =             ¯                                                       (57)
                                                             TI

Then the first order condition in (55) can be written as

              -t ¯                                      ¯
                 TI µ u u + (1 - µ) u u   a a    ¯ -  t TI t = 0
                                    t t + t t +  TI                                                                   (58)
             1-t                                     1-t

yielding:
                       t                     
                          
                           =                                                                                          (59)
                      1-t    µ u u + (1 - µ) u u   a a
                                             t t + t t +  t

which matches equation (24) in the proposition.
                        t           
   Equation (25), that 1- t
                            = e(1-n  )(1+)
                                           , follows. First, by construction
                                              t


                                      TIh()                  TIh()                           TIh()
                 (G -  )               G-
                                              +                
                                                                     + (1 - G )              (1-G )       TIh()
 u   n   a                 lr   <ln               lr   =ln                        lr   >ln
 t + t + t   =                                                                                        =           = 1 (60)
                                                       TIh()                                              TIh()

                                                  t                        
so that setting µ = 0 in equation (24) leads to 1-  t
                                                      = eu +e a    = e(1-n      .
                                                           t  t +t        t )+t
                                    n
    Next, we show that t = e(1 - n    ), and the result follows. This can be seen given:




                                                               31
                           dTI 1 - t
              t = -E             ¯
                            dt  TI
                      1-t           dTI
                  =    ¯                h()
                       TI            dt

                      1-t                dTI u                     dTI n                         dTI a
                  =    ¯                     h () +                    h () +                        h ()
                       TI       lr <ln
                                          dt        l          n
                                                                    dt                       n
                                                                                                  dt
                                                        r =l                  l       r >l



                                dTI 1 - t u       ¯u
                                                 TI                              dTI 1 - t a       ¯a
                                                                                                  TI
                  =                   ¯u h  (  )  ¯ +0+                                ¯a h  (  )  ¯
                       lr <ln
                                 dt TI           TI     l                    n
                                                                                  dt TI           TI
                                                                      r >l


                       ¯u
                      TI                         ¯a
                                                TI
                  =    ¯ (G -  )e + 0 +
                      TI                         ¯ (1 - G )e
                                                TI
                     u    a
                  = et + et = e(1 - n ).                                                                    (61)

Plugging this in for t yields the result.




                                                    32
                  Figure 1: Tax Efficiency above an Enforcement Notch




After Tax Income


                                                               A




                                                              A




         slope = 1 ­ t



                                                                  Distortion from change in
                                                                  taxable income w
                         slope = 1 ­ t


                                                           
                           wln                 wA         w                             Income wl,     wl r


  The figure shows the choices made by an individual who earns and reports income above notch wln. The
                                                                 
  initial tax rate is t and initial reported taxable income is    ; income above this amount is evaded. The
  nonlinear cost of evasion results in a kinked budget constraint above reported income. When the tax rate
  increases to t the budget line rotates downward; the dashed segment shows the budget line if the
                                                
  individual were to continue reporting          . Above reported income, this dashed line is parallel to the
                                                         A
  original budget line. The budget line kinked at w        shows the optimal response by the taxpayer in
  reporting income after taxes increase. The movement of the kink is the source of distortion.
                                Table 1: An Evasion- and Notch-Based Tax

                              Panel A: The Ratio of Notch Welfare over No-Notch Welfare

                          e = .25, ln = .5                e = .5, ln = .5             e = .5, ln = .8
                0.1           1.0003                         1.0006                      1.0010
                0.2           1.0011                         1.0026                      1.0041
                0.3           1.0025                         1.0062                      1.0094
Tax Rate        0.4           1.0046                         1.0112                      1.0171
with Notch      0.5           1.0073                         1.0178                      1.0272
                0.6           1.0107                         1.0254                      1.0434
                0.7           1.0142                         1.0341                      1.0657

                                  Panel B: Revenue-Equivalent No-Evasion Tax Rate t*

                          e = .25, ln = .5                e = .5, ln = .5             e = .5, ln = .8
                0.1           0.044                          0.045                       0.067
                0.2           0.090                          0.092                       0.136
                0.3           0.136                          0.140                       0.209
Tax Rate        0.4           0.183                          0.191                       0.285
with Notch      0.5           0.232                          0.244                       0.364
                0.6           0.281                          0.299                       0.450
                0.7           0.331                          0.356                       0.542

                           Panel C: Proportion of Taxpayers Earning Income above the Notch

                          e = .25, ln = .5                e = .5, ln = .5             e = .5, ln = .8
                0.1           0.911                          0.908                       0.647
                0.2           0.907                          0.898                       0.633
                0.3           0.901                          0.889                       0.604
Tax Rate        0.4           0.898                          0.872                       0.575
with Notch      0.5           0.891                          0.852                       0.541
                0.6           0.882                          0.828                       0.518
                0.7           0.869                          0.807                       0.487

                                             Panel D: Social Welfare with the Notch

                          e = .25, ln = .5                e = .5, ln = .5             e = .5, ln = .8
                0.1            894                             745                         744
                0.2            894                             745                         743
                0.3            893                             744                         739
Tax Rate        0.4            893                             742                         732
with Notch      0.5            892                             740                         721
                0.6            890                             735                         706
                0.7            888                             728                         683

Results are from simulations of 1,000 inviduals with iso-elastic quasilinear preferences with labor
elasticity e and with a lognormal disutility of work parameter with  = 0 and  = .5. Panel A shows for
each set of parameters the ratio of social welfare with the notch over revenue-equivalent no-notch
social welfare. Panel B shows the no-notch tax rate. Panel C shows those earning above the
enforcement notch (and reporting income at the notch) when the notch is in place, and panel D shows
aggregate social welfare under the notch alone.
