                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     STOCK MARKET SPILLOVERS VIA THE GLOBAL PRODUCTION NETWORK:
                TRANSMISSION OF U.S. MONETARY POLICY

                                       Julian di Giovanni
                                          Galina Hale

                                      Working Paper 28827
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28827


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We are grateful to Ruth Cesar Heymann, Margaret Chen, Ted Liu and Youel Rojas for expert
research assistance. We thank the authors of Aquaro et al. (2019) for sharing their Matlab code
and Gianluca Benigno, Vasco Carvalho, Mick Devereux, Manuel Garcia-Santana, Rob Johnson,
Andrei Levchenko, Isabelle Mejean, Damian Romero, Michael Weber, Shang-Jin Wei, and
participants at the 2020 NBER Summer Institute's ITM program, 2020 Pacific Basin Conference
at FRBSF, and seminars at the FRBNY, Norges Bank, and USC for helpful comments. Di
Giovanni gratefully acknowledges the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 726168) and the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for
Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563) for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York or any other person affiliated with the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Julian di Giovanni and Galina Hale. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Stock Market Spillovers via the Global Production Network: Transmission of U.S. Monetary
Policy
Julian di Giovanni and Galina Hale
NBER Working Paper No. 28827
May 2021
JEL No. F10,F36,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

We quantify the role of global production linkages in explaining spillovers of U.S. monetary
policy shocks to stock returns across countries and sectors using a newly constructed dataset. Our
estimation strategy is based on a standard open-economy production network model that delivers
a spillover pattern consistent with a spatial autoregression (SAR) process. We use the SAR
model to decompose the overall impact of U.S. monetary policy on global stock returns into a
direct and a network effect. We find that nearly 70% of the total impact of U.S. monetary policy
shocks on country-sector stock returns are due to the network effect of global production
linkages. Our results are robust to changes in the definitions of stock returns and monetary policy
shocks, to controlling for correlates of the global financial cycle, foreign monetary policy shocks,
and to alternative empirical specifications.


Julian di Giovanni
Research and Statistics Group
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
United States
juliandigiovanni@gmail.com

Galina Hale
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Engineering 2, 1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
gbhale@ucsc.edu
1    Introduction

The recent era of globalization witnessed (i) stock market returns becoming more correlated across
countries (Dutt and Mihov, 2013; Jach, 2017), and (ii) greater cross-country trade integration as
firms' production chains have spread across the world (Johnson and Noguera, 2017). While research
has predominantly focused on how financial integration impacts the propagation of shocks across
international financial markets and the resulting impact on asset prices (e.g., via a global financial
cycle, Rey, 2013), real integration also influences these cross-border spillovers. In this paper, we
analyze how the global production network impacts the transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks
to world stock markets.
    To guide our empirical work, we present a conceptual framework that lays out necessary con-
ditions for monetary policy shocks to transmit across countries via the global production network.
In our setting, demand shocks induced by changes in monetary policy propagate upstream from
customers to suppliers. For example, an easing in U.S. monetary policy will lead consumers to
increase their demand of both domestic and foreign goods, which, in turn, will increase demand for
intermediate goods, having direct and indirect effects on all producers' outputs and profits due to
trade in both final and intermediate goods.
    The conceptual framework delivers an empirical specification where the international shock
transmission pattern follows a spatial autoregression (SAR) process. To conduct this analysis, we
construct a novel dataset that combines production linkages information from the World Input-
Output Database (WIOD, Timmer et al., 2015) with firm-level stock returns worldwide, which we
aggregate to the country-sector level. We first exploit these data to document an unconditional
positive correlation between the intensity of production linkages and stock market returns at the
country-sector level. We then merge these data with U.S. monetary policy shocks and use a panel
SAR to quantify the importance of the global production network in amplifying the transmission
of U.S. monetary policy shocks to both domestic and foreign stock markets.
    Our baseline SAR estimation shows that the bulk of the response of global stock returns to U.S.
monetary policy shocks is due to global production linkages. Specifically, the average country-sector
annualized U.S. dollar monthly stock return increases by 2.7 percentage points in response to a one
percentage point expansionary surprise in the U.S. monetary policy rate, with approximately 70%
of this stock return increase due to spillovers via global production linkages. This finding is robust
to conditioning on other variables that may drive a common financial cycle across markets, such
as the VIX, 2-year U.S. Treasury rate, and the broad U.S. dollar index. Our main result is also
robust to different time periods, different definitions of stock returns and monetary policy shocks,
and to controlling for monetary policy shocks in the U.K. and the euro area.
    We build our conceptual framework based on a minimal assumptions. The framework can also



                                                  1
be derived using a static multi-country multi-sector production model that follows the standard
closed-economy setup (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2012; Herskovic, 2018; Richmond, 2019). Unlike many
canonical macro-network models, our framework allows for firm profits, which in turn drive stock
returns.1 To generate monetary non-neutrality, we assume pre-set wages and allow for the possi-
bility of money to be introduced in different ways, for instance, via cash-in-advance constraints, as
in many recent macro-network models (La'O and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020; Ozdagli and Weber, 2020;
Rubbo, 2020).2
       This framework delivers the result that firms in all countries will be affected by a monetary
shock in a given country. The relative magnitude of the shock's impact is proportional to a firm's
production linkages with the rest of the world, which captures the importance of intermediate
products in the firm's production function. Standard models with technological shocks generally
have shocks propagating downstream from supplier to customer via changes in marginal costs.
Our framework differs in that it focuses on how shocks to monetary policy propagate upstream
from customer to supplier given changes in customers' demand induced by the monetary policy
shock. This change in demand impacts firms profits and thus equity returns. We take the global
input-output (IO) matrix as given, both in the model and in our empirical analysis. We view this
assumption as realistic given that we are studying a short-run impact of a demand-side shock and
the level of aggregation (country-sector) that we use in our empirical analysis. Robustness tests
show that our empirical results are consistent with this assumption.
       To conduct our regression analysis, we make use of the 2016 version of WIOD for input-output
data and Thompson Reuters Eikon for stock market information. WIOD provides domestic and
global input-output linkages for 56 sectors across 43 countries and the "rest of the world" aggregate
annually for 2000­14. From Eikon we obtain firm-level stock prices, market capitalization, and
firms' sector classification. Using the market capitalization as a weight, we construct our own
country-sector stock market indexes by aggregating firm-level information to the same industrial
sector level as WIOD for 26 of the countries available in WIOD. The final merged dataset contains
monthly country-sector stock returns and annual input-output matrices. Our baseline analysis uses
the 30-minute window U.S. monetary policy shock measure calculated from Federal Funds futures
data by Jaroci´
              nski and Karadi (2020). Because of the global trade collapse in 2008­09 followed by
the period of unconventional monetary policy, we limit our baseline analysis to 2000­07. However,
our results are robust to other periods.
       Before turning to examining the impact of U.S. monetary policy shocks, we use the raw stock
   1
     For the purpose of our empirical work, we do not need to take a stand on the precise changes in the canonical
model in order to generate profits. In particular, recent work in the literature has motivated firm profits by assuming
constant returns to scale technology in a monopolistic competition setting (e.g., Bigio and La'O, 2020), or with
decreasing returns to scale technology in a competitive market setting (e.g., Ozdagli and Weber, 2020).
   2
     In this framework without dynamics or investments we are abstracting from other channels of monetary policy
transmission summarized in Ozdagli and Velikov (2020).



                                                          2
market and input-output data to show that country-sector cells that are more closely connected in
the global production network also have more correlated stock returns. This observation remains
true even if we exclude same-country cross-sector correlations from the analysis. This empirical
regularity suggests that international input-output linkages may provide an important channel of
shock transmission across global stock markets.
    The theoretical framework delivers a SAR structure for our empirical analysis (LeSage and
Pace, 2009), where spatial distance is represented by the coefficients in the global IO matrix. The
SAR specification we use is different from a standard one in two ways. First, in addition to a
spatial dimension (country-sector in our case), we have a time dimension.3 Thus, we have a panel
spatial autoregression. Second, we estimate country-sector specific coefficients, which is possible
thanks to the time dimension in our panel setting. We estimate this heterogeneous-coefficient panel
SAR model using the maximum likelihood methodology in Aquaro et al. (2019), and approximate
standard errors using a wild bootstrap procedure.
    We find that production networks play a crucial role in transmitting U.S. monetary policy
shocks across global stock returns. This finding is consistent with the Acemoglu et al. (2016) study
that shows that the network-based shock propagation can be larger than a direct effect, as well
as being similar to what Ozdagli and Weber (2020) find for the response of U.S. stock returns to
U.S. monetary policy shocks. Both of these studies focus only on the U.S. in a closed-economy
setting, while ours incorporates global production linkages. By separating the estimates for U.S.
sectors from those of foreign sectors, we show that foreign stock returns respond to U.S. monetary
policy shocks primarily through the network of customer-supplier linkages. Similar to the finding
of Ozdagli and Weber (2020), the network impact of U.S monetary policy shock on U.S. returns
plays a greater role than the direct impact.
    Our results are robust. They are not sensitive to the choice of a specific time period or the
year in which the IO matrix is sampled. This result suggests very limited, if any, endogenous
response of global supply chains to U.S. monetary policy shocks and thus justifies the assumption
of an exogenous trade structure in our theoretical framework. We further show that our results are
robust to replacing nominal U.S. dollar stock returns with excess returns, stock returns expressed
in local currency, and with real stock returns. Our results are also robust to using other definitions
of monetary policy shocks, and to controlling for monetary policy shocks in the U.K. and the euro
area. We find that there are no individual countries or sectors in which the spillover effects are
concentrated. Finally, our results are robust to conditioning stock returns on global financial cycle
correlates: (i) VIX, (ii) 2-year U.S. Treasury rate, and (iii) broad U.S. dollar index.
   3
     Because input-output coefficients do not change much over time, we use a static, beginning-of-period IO matrix.
We are implicitly assuming that market participants react on the intensive margin of production networks, rather
than to the expected changes in production linkages. This assumption is arguably more justifiable at the sector than
the firm level. However, trade patterns have changed over time, so we also experiment by varying the weighting
matrix for different time periods in our empirical analysis and find that results are not sensitive to these changes.


                                                         3
   Our finding of the quantitative importance of the global production network in international
transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks to global stock returns at the sector level contributes
to several strands of the literature. First, our paper contributes to a strand of international fi-
nance literature that focuses on the relative importance of country and sector characteristics in
international asset pricing (see, for instance, Griffin and Stulz, 2001; Bekaert et al., 2009; Lewis,
2011). Our results highlight that the size and location of country-sector production linkages are
key characteristics to consider for better understanding the cross-sectional response of global asset
prices to monetary policy shocks.
   We also contribute to the growing literature on the international transmission of shocks through
production linkages. For example, Burstein et al. (2008), Bems et al. (2010), Johnson (2014), and
Eaton et al. (2016), Auer et al. (2019), among others, model and quantify international shock
transmission through input trade. Baqaee and Farhi (2019b) and Huo et al. (2020) develop theo-
retical and quantitative treatments of the international input network model. Boehm et al. (2019)
and Carvalho et al. (2021) use a case study of the T¯
                                                    ohoku earthquake to provide evidence of real
shock transmission through global and domestic supply chains, while di Giovanni et al. (2018) show
the importance of firms' international trade linkages in driving cross-country GDP comovement.
None of these studies focus on the transmission of monetary policy shocks, nor stock markets'
comovement.
   Our paper also contributes to broader literature on international spillovers of U.S. monetary
policy by documenting and quantifying the importance of real linkages. Wongswan (2006); Ehrmann
and Fratzscher (2009); Ammer et al. (2010); Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020), among many
others, provide evidence which shows that U.S. monetary policy shocks induce comovements in
international asset returns. Most analysis of the spillover channels focuses on bank lending and,
more generally, global bank activity ­ see, among others, Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012); Bruno and
Shin (2015b); Buch et al. (2019) and a survey by Claessens (2017). Another large group of papers
study the impact of U.S monetary policy on international capital flows ­ see, among others, Forbes
and Warnock (2012); Bruno and Shin (2015a); Avdjiev and Hale (2019).
   Much less attention has been devoted to cross-border monetary policy spillovers through real
channels, such as input-output linkages. Br¨
                                           auning and Sheremirov (2019) study the transmission of
U.S. monetary policy shocks on countries' output via financial and trade linkages, and Chang et al.
(2020) study how the transmission of shocks via countries trade linkages impacts asset prices using
information from the sovereign CDS market. The latter two papers differ from our work in that
they focus on total bilateral trade linkages, and thus cannot measure transmission via international




                                                 4
production linkages.4,5
    There is also a growing literature that shows how real linkages across sectors play an important
role in domestic shock transmission (see, among others, Foerster et al., 2011; Acemoglu et al., 2012;
Atalay, 2017; Grassi, 2017; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019a). Pasten et al. (2019) study the transmision
of monetary policy in a production economy, while recent theoretical work on optimal monetary
policy has examined the impact of input-output linkages in setting policy in a closed economy
(La'O and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020; Rubbo, 2020), as well as a small open-economy setting (Wei and
Xie, 2020). Ozdagli and Weber (2020), to which our paper is most closely related, shows that input-
output linkages are quantitatively important for monetary policy transmission to stock returns in
the United States,6 while Herskovic (2018) and Richmond (2019) nest input-output structures into
standard asset pricing models.
    We bridge these different strands of the literature by showing the importance of real linkages in
the international transmission of monetary policy shocks across asset markets. Our main contribu-
tion is to show, on a global scale, the importance of the intermediate trade channel in transmitting
U.S. monetary policy shocks across asset markets, and providing a quantitative estimate of its
contribution as well as transmission pattern on asset prices. That is, we show how U.S. monetary
policy directly impacts domestic stock returns and spills over to the rest of the world via the global
production network.
    We present a stylized conceptual framework of global production model cross-country monetary
policy shock transmission in Section 2, which motivates the empirical model outlined in Section 3.
We then describe our data in Section 4, before presenting our empirical results in Section 5. Sec-
tion 6 concludes.


2     Conceptual Framework

This section provides a conceptual framework to motivate our estimation strategy for studying
the transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks to stock returns internationally via production
linkages. There are three main ingredients required to produce such shock transmission: first,
to have predictions for stock returns, a firm's production technology or the economy's market
structure must allow for positive profits in equilibrium; second, shocks in one country can be
transmitted to firms (and their profits) in other countries; third, monetary shocks must have real
   4
     In particular, these trade flows include trade in both final consumption and intermediate goods, and are measured
in gross output and not value added, which implies potential overstating trade linkages. Further, gross output trade
need not be strongly correlated with intermediates trade. These are well-known problems, and are discussed in
Johnson and Noguera (2017), among others.
   5
     Other papers that study how trade globalization affects asset prices include Brooks and Del Negro (2006) and
Barrot et al. (2019).
   6
     Moreover, Alfaro et al. (2020) and Bigio and La'O (2020) show the importance of production linkages in trans-
mitting sectoral shocks to the aggregate economy.



                                                          5
effects. A wide variety of theoretical frameworks can deliver each of these ingredients and they
can be readily combined into a simple static multi-country multi-sector input-output model, which
allows for monetary policy to have an impact on the real economy. Appendix A presents a simple
multi-country multi-sector production model, which embeds cash-in-advance constraints and sticky
wages.


Technology and Market Structure

To model international dependence at the sector level, we introduce international trade in inter-
mediate goods. To fix notation, assume that the world economy is comprised of N countries and
J sectors. Countries are denoted by m and n, and sectors by i and j . The notation follows the
convention that for trade between any two country-sectors, the first two subscripts always denote
exporting (source) country-sector, and the second subscript the importing (destination) country-
sector ­ i.e., xmi,nj denotes goods produced in country m sector i that are used as intermediate
inputs by sector j in country n.
   A firm in a given sector produces using labor and a set of intermediates goods, which are
potentially sourced from all countries and sectors, including its own. Output for a firm in country-
sector nj , ynj , can then be written as

                                      ynj = znj Fnj (lnj, , {xmi,nj }) ,                              (1)

where lnj is labor used by firms in sector nj , {xmi,nj } is the set representing quantities of intermedi-
ate goods used, znj is a Hicks-neutral technology parameter. Fnj (·) may allow for constant returns
to scale (CRS) or decreasing returns to scale (DRS) production. Note that we have assumed a
representative firm in each country-sector and thus have dropped any firm-specific notation.


Market Clearing

We can express the goods market clearing conditions for every country-sector mi in terms of ex-
penditures, Rmi = pmi ymi , as
                                                                J   N
                              Rmi =         Cmi            +              mi,nj Rnj ,                 (2)
                                         Final goods           j =1 n=1
                                      expenditure on mi
                                      across N countries        Intermediate input
                                                                    expenditure

where pmi is the price received by producers of good mi per unit of output. This condition is
standard and will hold regardless of the underlying economic model. The first term of (2) captures
expenditures on goods produced by country-sector mi that are used for final consumption both
domestically and abroad. This term can be expressed as a function of underlying parameters of
a model, such as households' preferences and their share of income. However, since we ultimately

                                                      6
link movements in final goods' expenditure to exogenous changes in monetary policy, we omit
these details to avoid introducing unneeded notation.7 The second term of the equation captures
expenditure on intermediate inputs, where mi,nj is the input-output coefficient for country-sector
nj purchases of the intermediate good from country-sector mi needed to produce a unit of output
of good nj :
                                                         pmi,n xmi,nj
                                             mi,nj =                  ,
                                                           pnj ynj
and we assume that the law of one price holds across goods in a given sector i, such that pmi,n =
pmi .8 Further, as we are working with a cross-country expenditure system, all prices should be
expressed in a common currency. We set the currency to be the U.S. dollar, and take this currency
choice into account by transforming all countries stock returns to U.S. dollar returns in our empirical
work below.
    Stacking (2) over country-sector cells, we can express the global expenditure system in matrix
form:
                                                  R = C + R,                                                     (3)

where R is the N J × 1 vector of country-sector sales, C captures the N J × 1 vector of final goods'
expenditures, and  is the N J × N J global input-output matrix. Note that this expenditure
system holds regardless of the underlying economic model, and is measured in the data by national
accounting and world input-output data.


Deviations from Steady-State and Stock Returns

We are ultimately interested in studying how monetary policy shocks impact stock returns given
the world input-output network, and study deviations from a steady-state. First, re-arranging (3),
we express revenues as a function of final goods expenditures:

                                                R = (I - )-1 C ,                                                 (4)

where (I -)-1 is the N J ×N J Leontief inverse of the input-output matrix. Second, for any variable
x, define the log deviation from steady-state x = log(x) - log(¯              ¯ exp(x)  x
                                                               x) so that x = x         ¯(1 + x),
      ¯ is the steady-state value of x. Then, holding  fixed,9 we can express (4) in terms of
where x
deviations from steady-state as
                                             R = (I - )-1 R  C ,                                                 (5)
   7
     Appendix A provides a model that yields a structure akin to (2), and demonstrates how changes in modeling
assumptions will impact the derivation of the expenditure system.
   8
     Note that breaking the law of one price by adding iceberg trade costs will do nothing to change the main results
below, so we omit these to keep notation to a minimum.
   9
     Holding  fixed implicitly assumes Cobb-Douglas production. However, given the static nature of the model
and how our empirical estimation strategy, this assumption is not strong and the same results will follow for a more
general CES production structure.



                                                         7
where  represents the Hadamard product, and R is the N J × 1 vector containing the steady-state
                                                                       ¯11
                                                                       C                ¯N J
                                                                                        C
consumption-to-revenue ratio in each country-sector: R =               ¯ 11 , . . . ,
                                                                       R                ¯N J
                                                                                        R
                                                                                               .
       We need to either deviate from perfect competition or from firm CRS production technology
in order to generate positive profits in equilibrium. One standard setup in the macro-networks
literature allows for CRS technology under monopolistic competition, where firms produce unique
varieties and set prices with a constant mark-ups (e.g., Bigio and La'O, 2020). Alternatively, one
can assume that firms produce with DRS in a competitive market structure as in Ozdagli and
Weber (2020).
       To a first-order, changes in firm profits are proportional to changes in firm revenues around
the steady-state: nj  Rnj . In particular, in a monopolistic competitive market where firms
have CRS technology, or in a competitive equilibrium where firms have DRS technology, profits
will be a constant multiple of revenues, where the constant is a function of underlying model
parameters. To ease notation, we assume that firm profits change one-for-one with firm revenues,
so that Equation (5) yields
                                            = (I - )-1   C ,                                                 (6)

where  is a N J × 1 vector of nj profits, and  is the N J × 1 vector containing the steady-state
                                                                    ¯11
                                                                    C             ¯N J
                                                                                  C
consumption-to-profit ratio in each country-sector:  =              ¯11 , . . . , 
                                                                                  ¯N J     .
       In the above framework, domestic households are assumed to fully own domestic firms and
thus have claim to all profits. If we explicitly account for equity ownership, and abstract from
any uncertainty or financial market frictions, innovations to firms' profits pass one-for-one into
domestic stock returns. Specifically, denoting the stock price for a firm in country-sector nj as qnj ,
then the stock return around steady-state is qnj , which is identical to the change in profits around
the steady state: qnj = nj , or in vector-form across all country-sector cells: q =  , where q is the
N J × 1 vector (q11 , . . . , qN J ) . Therefore, following Equation (6), demand shocks will propagate
across country-sectors' stock returns via the global production network:

                                            q = (I - )-1   C .                                               (7)


Monetary Policy Shocks

The real effect of monetary policy has been subject to extensive analysis (see, for example Woodford,
2004; Gali, 2015, for textbook treatments). To generate a real effect, some form of price rigidity
is built into the model.10 In the case of a multi-country framework, assuming wage rigidity across
countries helps simplify the model solution. Money can then be introduced into the model via
different channels, such as cash-in-advance constraints, money in the utility function, or interest
  10
    Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) show that price rigidities are an important determinant of the extent to which
stock returns respond to monetary policy shocks.



                                                       8
rate rules. Such models will predict that deviations in expenditures on final consumption C in
country n around its steady-state are proportional to the monetary policy shock in country n, Mn :

                                                Cn = n Mn ,                                                 (8)

where n  0 depends on steady-state values and the elasticity of consumption growth with respect
to changes in monetary policy.11 Or, if we allow for heterogeneity in sector-level consumption, Cnj ,
responses, we can write (8) at the country-sector level as

                                               Cnj = nj Mn ,                                                (9)

where nj  0 differs from n given households' consumption preferences for country-sector goods.
    Writing (9) for N J country-sector cells in vector form, and combining it with (7), we express
stock returns as a function of monetary policy shocks:

                                            q = (I - )-1  M,                                               (10)

where  is a N J × N matrix that combines the elements of the vector  and the elements of the
N J × 1 vector of elements {nj }, and M is N × 1 vector of countries' monetary policy shocks.
    Considering only shocks to U.S. monetary policy, the element MU S , Equation (10) gives

                                         q = (I - )-1  U S MU S ,                                          (11)

where  U S is a N J × 1 sub-matrix of  containing U.S.-specific elements. We present a simple
model in Appendix A, which embeds cash-in-advance constraints in an open-economy input-output
model to arrive at equations (10) and (11).


Risk and Asset Pricing

The above framework does not account for uncertainty. In particular, we have not taken a stand on
households' risk aversion nor their intertemporal consumption decisions. Doing so opens the door
to other potential impacts of monetary policy shocks on country-sectors' equity returns, besides the
transmission of demand shocks via global production linkages. A key channel of monetary policy
effect to consider is its impact on the stochastic discount factor (SDF) and risk-taking behavior;
thus the pricing of firms' payouts (profits in our framework) by investors.
    In the international context, movements in investors' risk-taking behavior lie at the heart of
the impact of U.S. monetary policy on cross-country asset returns via the global financial cycle
(Bruno and Shin, 2015a; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020). While it is beyond the scope of
  11
     In the cash-in-advance model presented in Appendix A, changes in the money supply map one-to-one to changes
in consumption, so that n = 1.



                                                       9
this paper to formally introduce portfolio decisions into our conceptual framework,12 our empirical
setup must still control for other variables that are correlated with U.S. monetary policy shocks and
that may impact the pricing of firms' profits via changes in the SDF. In particular, changes in the
variables that affect the SDF, such as changes in global risk aversion, may impact equity returns
regardless of the production linkages. To obtain an unbiased estimate of the "demand channel"
impact of monetary policy shocks on equity returns highlighted in our conceptual framework, we
must therefore control for movements in SDF covariates that may be correlated with monetary
policy shocks.


3         Regression Framework

The previous section's framework predicts that a monetary policy shock affects all stock returns in
the amount proportional to their input-output distance from the source of the shock. The empirical
counterpart to this propagation pattern is a spatial autoregression (LeSage and Pace, 2009).
         Specifically, holding the parameters of the model ( and ) fixed, the empirical counterpart of
Equation (11) for a given country-sector observation is

                                       q t = (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t ,                                          (12)

where q t is a N J × 1 vector of stock returns qmi,t for each t.13 The subscript t represents the
year-month in which a U.S. monetary policy shock occurs,14 I is a N J × N J identity matrix, W is
the N J × N J empirical global input-output matrix, and MU S,t is the U.S. monetary policy shock at
time t. This shock measure does not vary across sectors and only emanates from one country, and
thus the regression we run differs from the literature that analyses the propagation of idiosyncratic
shocks across production networks.
         In writing Equation (12) we make two important modifications to the model prediction (Equa-
tion (11)). First, instead of a constant parameter  , we allow the shock impact to vary by country
and sector, thus replacing it with a N J × 1 vector  . Second, we add a set of country-sector specific
"resistance" coefficients to the network transmission mechanism, a N J × 1 vector  ­ diag() indi-
cates a N J × N J diagonal matrix containing the vector  on the diagonal and zeros off diagonal.
The heterogeneous panel SAR setting allows for estimation of country-sector specific estimates of
the coefficients mi and mi of the vectors  and , thanks to the time dimension of our data.15
    12
      For papers that embed a basic production network framework into asset pricing models, see for example, Herskovic
(2018) in a closed-economy setting, and Richmond (2019) for a multi-country setting.
   13
      To see how the SAR setting is analogous to a traditional autoregression, it helps to rewrite Equation (12) as
q t =  MU S,t + diag() Wq t .
   14
      FOMC announcements do not occur every month, and at times multiple times within a month. We only include
in our sample months with FOMC announcements, but the results are robust to including all months. For months
with multiple announcements, we aggregate all announcement by adding up measures of monetary policy shock.
   15
      For completeness we also report estimates where coefficients  and  are constrained to be the same across all
country-sector pairs in Appendix C.


                                                         10
       We allow for country-sector heterogeneity in our estimated coefficients on theoretical and em-
pirical grounds. Theoretically, mi is determined from the parameters of a specific model, such as
the one outlined Section 2 and Appendix A, where households' preferences for different goods or
different competitive structures in different sectors, for example, lead to heterogeneous responses
to U.S. monetary policy shocks across countries and sectors. In practice, these  's cannot be mea-
sured directly and are therefore estimated. Equation (11) assumes that the spatial pass-through of
monetary policy shocks to stock returns is perfect (mi = 1  m, i). This need not be the case in
practice due to factors outside our conceptual framework, such as asset market frictions, which may
add resistance to the shock transmission through the production network (i.e., through W).16 For
this reason we let the data determine the empirical estimate of , again allowing for heterogeneity
in this potential resistance across country-sector cells.17
       Our static model abstracts from any steady-state differences across countries and sectors. While
most of them would not affect our analysis of a temporary monetary policy shock effect on stock
returns, there is one important exception. If countries or sectors differ in their steady-state growth
rates of stock prices, we might erroneously assign these differences to the heterogeneous impact of
the monetary policy shock. Thus, we absorb any country- or sector-level heterogeneity in baseline
stock returns by adding a N J × 1 vector  of country-sector specific intercepts (fixed effects) to
Equation (12). We also add an error term to arrive at the following estimation equation

                                 q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t ,                                        (13)

where  t the N J × 1 vector of errors t = (I - diag() W)-1 ut , where the elements of ut are
assumed to be independently identically distributed. Because of the complex structure of our
model, instead of computing analytical standard errors, suggested for the heterogeneous panel
SAR by Aquaro et al. (2019), we use a wild bootstrap to construct standard errors that are robust
to heteroschedasticity introduced by the structure of heterogeneous SAR in Equation (13). We
describe the bootstrap procedure in detail later in this section.


Measuring Network Effects

The spatial autoregressive model allows us to decompose the total marginal effect of U.S. monetary
policy on equity returns into a direct and network (indirect ) effect. In particular, in contrast with
linear regression models, the coefficient vector  is not equal to the total marginal effect of the U.S.
monetary shock MU S,t on stock returns qmi,t . Instead, applying Equation (12), the N J × 1 vector
  16
     For example, it is well established that momentum plays an important role in pricing stocks globally but is not
generally correlated with macroeconomic shocks (Griffin et al., 2003; Fama and French, 2012).
  17
     Heterogeneity of mi may also be due to financial frictions, such as the liquidity premium, which may vary across
countries and sectors (Amihud et al., 2015).




                                                         11
of total marginal effects is given by

                                        Total  (I - diag()W)-1  ,                                             (14)

where  and  are the estimated vectors of parameters. Specifically, for each country-sector cell,
the total marginal effect of U.S. monetary policy shock includes a direct impact as well as the
sum of all indirect effects resulting from linkages expressed in the input-output matrix W. The
-weighted Leontief inverse matrix, (I - diag()W)-1 , is an infinite sum of all immediate and
indirect production linkages of all lengths. For example, consider an easing in U.S. monetary policy
that raises consumption demand for all goods in the U.S., including Apple's iPhone. Conditional on
U.S. consumers' preferences, Apple's revenues, profits and stock price will rise. Further, to meet the
increased U.S. demand for iPhones, there will be increased demand for firms assembling iPhones in
China, as well for firms in Germany and Korea supplying components to assembly firms in China,
as the initial demand shock propagates up Apple's global production chain. As a result, we would
also expect to see stock prices rising for the Chinese, German, and Korean suppliers that are part
of this production chain, and the size of these increases will be proportional to the importance of
the firms' goods in the production of the iPhone. The Total effect of the U.S. monetary policy
shock accounts for all of such spillovers, as well as the initial impact on Apple.
       There are a number of ways to decompose the Total effect in order to extract the contribution
of the global production network in transmitting U.S. monetary policy across equity markets.
       Our baseline approach follows Acemoglu et al. (2016) and performs the following decomposition:

                                      DirectAAK   ,                                                           (15)
                                   NetworkAAK  Total - DirectAAK ,                                            (16)

where the direct measures are simply equal to the estimated vector of coefficients  , reflecting only
the immediate impact of U.S. monetary policy shocks on stock returns of each country-sector cell.18
All effects intermediated by production linkages included in the network effect.19
       Alternatively, we may follow the textbook approach of LeSage and Pace (2009), where the Total
effect for each mi can be decomposed into a direct and network effects as

                                   DirectLP  diag (I - diag()W)-1  ,                                          (17)
                                NetworkLP  Total - DirectLP ,                                                 (18)

where DirectLP and NetworkLP are N J × 1 vectors. The key aspect of this decomposition is that
in addition to the immediate impact of the shock on the country-sector cell, DirectLP includes
  18
    This corresponds to the pure final demand effect of the U.S. monetary policy shock as derived in the model.
  19
    Given that we are working at the sector level, the DirectAAK will include spillover effects across firms within
the same sector in the same country.


                                                        12
round-trip (indirect) transmission of the shock to each country-sectors' returns back to themselves,
and will thus be larger than DirectAAK . We find that this measure is less appropriate for the
analysis of the network effects at the sector level, because round-trip transmission to the same
country-sector cell likely reflects a different step in the production chain and therefore would not
be attributed to a direct effect in a more disaggregated network.
       Our primary object of interest is not the absolute size but the share of the Network effect in the
Total effect. We calculate this share for each country-sector when we estimate the heterogeneous
SAR model, and present the mean value across country-sector estimates along with corresponding
standard errors.


Reporting and Standard Errors

We present our results by reporting simple average values of  , , Direct and Network effects
across all country-sectors. We also examine the cross-country transmission of U.S. monetary policy
shocks by splitting the effects into domestic and international components. Specifically, we compute
international direct and network effects as simple averages of the elements of Direct and Network
across all the non-U.S. country-sectors. We take simple averages of the elements of Direct and
Network over only U.S. sectors in order to compute the U.S.-only direct and network effects.
       Because the time dimension of our panel is short (66 time periods in the benchmark) relative
to the spatial dimension (an unbalanced panel of 26 countries and 54 sectors with the total of 671
country-sector cells), and our shocks only vary over time, we are concerned that the analytical
standard errors proposed by Aquaro et al. (2019) are unreliable in our setting. Thus, we turn
to a bootstrap approach to compute standard errors. In a standard bootstrap approach one uses
random subsamples of the data to re-estimated a model. This, however, is not an option for our
set-up, because estimates of  and  in the panel SAR strongly depend on the ordering of W and
because MU S,t does not vary across country-sector cells. Thus, for our model the best approach is a
wild bootstrap, in which random perturbations are added to the dependent variable by multiplying
residuals by a random variable drawn from a specific distribution.20
       We compute standard errors using the wild bootstrap procedure with continuous distribu-
tion proposed by Mammen (1993) for each element of  , , Direct, Network, and the share of
Network in Total, as well as for their overall, international, and U.S. average values. To do so,
for each iteration z of the 500 repetitions we replace our dependent variable with a synthetic one
that is equal to the fitted values from the main estimation plus a random perturbation mi,t of the
residuals:
                                                      -1
                              qz
                               t = a + (I - diag(r) W)
                                                                    z
                                                         b MU S,t + t  et ,
  20
    In contrast with the standard residual bootstrap, a wild bootstrap allows for heteroschedasticity (Davidson and
Flachaire, 2008) and is frequently used in heteroschedastic models as well as models with multiple equations.



                                                        13
where N J × 1 vectors a, b, and r are estimates of ,  , and , respectively, and et is a N J × 1
vector of estimated residuals for each t.
         We use a continuous distribution from which we draw z perturbations for each element mi,t of
each vector t
                                      z
                                     mi,t
                               z            1    z
                              mi,t =  +        (vmi,t )2 - 1 ,
                                        2   2
where  and v are drawn from independent standard normal distributions. We then estimate our
regression model replacing true dependent variable with synthetic one and retain estimation results.
Standard deviations of each estimated parameter across 500 repetitions are reported as standard
errors.


4         Data

We source data from two main datasets: the global production network data are from the World
Input-Output Database (WIOD), and the stock market information is from the Thompson-Reuters
Eikon database (TREI). The WIOD provides annual data for input-output linkages across 56 sectors
and 43 countries and a rest of the world aggregate for 1996­2014. For our analysis, we limit the
data to 26 countries with active stock markets and 54 sectors that are connected to each others.21
         From TREI, we obtain end-of-period monthly stock prices, stock market capitalization, and
industrial classification for individual companies. We then construct our own stock return indexes
for the same sector definitions as used in WIOD, using stock market capitalization of the firm as
a weight. This is not straightforward, given that the TREI sector classification uses Thomson-
Reuters Business Classification (TRBC), while the World Input-Output Tables are constructed
under International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) Revision 4. Fortunately, in addition
to TRBC, TREI also reports North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 2007 sector
codes for each firm, which we use to create a crosswalk to ISIC Rev. 4. This then allows us to
aggregate firms' stock market indices into WIOD-based sectors.22 For each of the resulting country-
sector cells we construct monthly stock returns as a log change in weighted average of stock prices of
all firms in that country-sector cell. We then multiply these returns by month-on-month exchange
rate changes vis-`
                 a-vis the U.S. dollar, and annualize the monthly U.S. dollar returns for all our
analysis.23
         Table A1 presents cross-country sector coverage of monthly returns for the months where there
are monetary surprise shocks over 2000­16. Given cross-country differences in size, sectoral spe-
    21
     The remaining two sectors, household production ("T" in WIOD codes) and extraterritorial organization ("U")
are not sufficiently connected to the rest of the network.
  22
     Even with these data, there is not always a 1-to-1 correspondence between the TREI and WIOD codes, and we
rectify such instances in a variety of ways as described in Appendix B.
  23
     We confirm that our results are robust to using domestic currency returns as well as real returns. We do not
explicitly study the effects of exchange rate changes. For the recent discussion of complex relationship between
exchange rates and stock prices, see Karolyi and Wu (2020).


                                                       14
cialization patterns, and stock market depth we see that larger countries (e.g., the United States)
have a larger coverage of sectors, while some countries only cover a few sectors (e.g., Portugal and
Russia). These differences motivate a flexible empirical approach, where we allow for country-sector
fixed effects as well as country-sector specific coefficients for the effect of the monetary policy shock
variable.

4.1      Input-Output Coefficient Construction

The construction of the global input-output matrix using WIOD data is standard and follows
from the literature. We denote countries as m, n  [1; N ] and sectors as i, j  [1; J ]. WIOD
provides information of output produced in a given country-sector and where it flows to; both
geographical and what sector of the economy (including government and households). We first use
this information to build a matrix W, which is N J × N J , where each element wmi,nj represents
the use of inputs from country m sector i as a share of total output of sector j in country n:24
                                                        Salesminj
                                             wmi,nj =             .
                                                         Salesnj

In network terminology, W is the adjacency matrix that gives us direct linkages between each pair
of country-sector cells. Because by construction wmi,nj  [0; 1] and wmi,nj = wnj,mi , the network is
weighted and directed. Note that we use all countries and sectors when constructing the adjacency
matrix, but only exploit the sub-matrix where we have stock returns in the estimation below. This
requires a re-normalization of the matrix for estimation purposes, but all preliminary statistics are
based on manipulating the adjacency matrix without this re-normalization.
      The top row of Figure 1 presents the empirical counter cumulative distribution function (CCDF)
of the weighted outdegree of W for WIOD data, where we use the average input-output coefficients
over the sample period 2000­14. The weighted outdegree for a given country-sector pair mi is
defined as
                                                        N     J
                                             outmi =              wmi,nj ,
                                                       n=1 j =1

and measures how important a given country-sector's inputs are for production use across all
possible country-sector pairs. It is informative to look at this distribution, since a skewed one
implies the potential for shocks to propagate and amplify across the production network (Acemoglu
et al., 2012). Panel (a) plots the distribution using all possible input-output linkages in the world
including both domestic and international linkages in computing the weighted outdegree, while
panel (b) exploits only the international linkages. As it can be seen in both figures, the distributions
are very skewed. The curves were fitted using a Pareto distribution and as can be seen the slopes
of the tail are steep, implying that the distributions are fat-tailed. This finding is along the lines
 24
      Note that it is analogous to mi,nj in conceptual framework.


                                                         15
of what Carvalho (2014) shows for the U.S. economy using detailed input-output tables from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. In comparing panels (a) and (b), it is worth noting that the x-axis
of the two figures are on two different scales. In particular, the international weighted-outdegree
measures tend to be smaller on average than those using the full world input-output table (which
includes domestic linkages) as several country-sector cells are not used as intermediate inputs (or
in very tiny amounts) abroad.
       Next, panels (c) and (d) examine how the outdegree distributions have changed over time.
Specifically, we calculate the correlation of the outmi measures for each year with those of 2000. As
can be seen, both for world linkages in panel (c) and international linkages in (d), the correlation
has been falling over time, indicating a "re-shuffling" of the global production network. However,
the change in correlation has been relatively small, indicating that the cross-country cross-sector
distribution of the importance of key suppliers has not changed dramatically over our sample period.

4.2      Returns Data

We next explore our data and show that there is a relationship between stock return correlations
and input-output linkages. As described previously, a unit of observation in our data is monthly
stock returns in country m and sector i. We express all returns in U.S. dollars to remain consistent
with our conceptual framework, and we also annualize the returns. Because not all sectors are
present in all countries, we have stock indexes for 671 out of possible 1404 country-sector cells for
each month from January 2000 through December 2016.25 Figure 2 presents the distribution of
pairwise correlations between each possible pair of the 671 time series of stock returns. We can see
that most correlations are positive and that the mass of the distribution is between 0 and 0.5.26

Returns and the Input-Output Network

Our main goal is to explore whether stock market correlations are associated with production
linkages. To do so, we first compute a measure of distance between each pair of country-sector
cells. The concept of distance is better defined for binary networks. Thus, for illustrative purposes,
we replace wmi,nj < 0.05 with 0, and the rest of the cells with 1, converting our network into a
binary one. In such a network, the distance between two cells is defined as the length of the shortest
path (geodesic) between them.
       We use this concept of distance for each pair of country-sector cells and compare it to the
correlation of stock returns for this pair of country-sector cells. Figure 3 plots this relationship,
where we compute the average directional distance between any two country-sector cells (i.e., the
  25
     Recall that we have potentially a maximum of 54 sectors and 26 countries. The number of possible country-
sectors is further restricted to insure that W is full rank for estimation purposes, even if stock returns data may exist
for some of these country-sectors.
  26
     We obtain a similar distribution for local-currency returns.



                                                           16
                                              Figure 1. Distribution of Weighted Outdegree for WIOD

The first row of this figure plots the counter cumulative distribution function of the weighted outdegree using the
average of the WIOD annual database over 2000­14. The second row of the figure plots changes in the distribution
of country-sector weighted outdegrees, where the change is measured as the correlation of the vector of each year's
country-sector outdegree measures with the vector of these measures for the year 2000. The panels with World
Linkages are based on the full WIOD table, while the International Linkages panels use only internationally connected
country-sector cells (i.e., we omit the domestic-only linkages across sectors) in constructing the weighted outdegree
measure.

                           1                                                                                          1




                      0.1                                                                                        0.1
   Empirical CCDF




                                                                                              Empirical CCDF
                     0.01                                                                                       0.01




                    0.001                                                                                      0.001

                       0.001          0.01              0.1                 1            10                           1e-08           1e-06         0.0001          0.01           1
                                              Weighted Outdegree                                                                                Weighted Outdegree
                                        (a) World Linkages                                                                           (b) International Linkages


                      1                                                                                          1




                    0.98                                                                                       0.98




                    0.96                                                                                       0.96




                    0.94                                                                                       0.94




                    0.92                                                                                       0.92




                     0.9                                                                                        0.9




                    0.88                                                                                       0.88
                       2000    2002    2004      2006         2008   2010       2012   2014                       2000        2002       2004     2006       2008    2010   2012       2014

                                       (c) World Linkages                                                                            (d) International Linkages




average of mi  nj and nj  mi path lengths). Even though the diameter, the longest distance,
of the input-output network averaged over time is 23, we only plot distances up to 8 because for
any distances longer than that the decline in stock price correlation levels off. The figure's vertical
axis shows the average stock price correlation for all country-sector cell pairs that are at a given



                                                                                         17
                    Figure 2. Correlation of Stock Returns over the Entire Sample

This figure plots the distribution of pairwise correlations of annualized U.S. dollar monthly stock returns over 2000­16
across 26 countries and 54 sectors.




distance from each other in the network, shown on the horizontal axis.
    In panel (a), which uses the full set of country-sector cells, we can see that pairs most closely
connected through input-output linkages exhibit the highest correlation of stock returns (correlation
coefficient of 0.39). The larger is the distance, the lower is the correlation. We can see that it tapers
out just below 0.17 for any distance over 4. Panel (b) shows that a similar pattern holds when we
exclude all domestic sector pairs from the analysis, with highest average correlation of 0.23. This
finding alleviates a concern that our results are driven entirely by domestic input-output linkages
and stock return correlations. We can see that even excluding domestic linkages, the country-
sector cells that are most highly connected exhibit a stronger correlation of stock returns than
those country-sector cells at a greater distance from each other in the global production network.
    These two figures provide prima facie evidence that two sectors that rely more heavily on
each other for the supply of inputs in productions also have more highly correlated stock returns.
However, these bilateral correlations may be driven by numerous transmission channels or shocks,
and are silent on how shocks are transmitted via the overall network.

4.3    Monetary Policy Shocks and Global Financial Cycle Correlates

Our baseline measure of U.S. monetary policy shocks is sourced from Jaroci´
                                                                          nski and Karadi (2020).
They construct a measure of an interest rate surprise as the change in the 3-month Federal Funds
future rate, which they interpret as the expected federal funds rate following the next policy meet-


                                                          18
        Figure 3. WIOD Network Distance of Supply Linkages and the Correlation of Stock Returns

This figure plots correlations of U.S. dollar annualized monthly stock returns over 2000­16 across 26 countries and 54
sectors on the y-axis, across network distance bins based on the direct bilateral supply linkage using the average of
the WIOD annual database over 2000­14. The elements of the IO matrix are defined as country-sector mi's usage of
country-sector nj 's good as an intermediate divided by mi's gross output. The panel with World Linkages is based
on the full WIOD table, while the International Linkages panel extracts the correlation and distance variable for only
internationally connected country-sector cells (i.e., we omit the domestic-only linkages across sectors).

                                          0.4                                                                                            0.23



                                                                                                                                         0.22
 Correlation of Sectoral Stock Returns




                                                                                                 Correlation of Sectoral Stock Returns
                                         0.35
                                                                                                                                         0.21



                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                          0.3


                                                                                                                                         0.19


                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                         0.18



                                                                                                                                         0.17
                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                         0.16



                                         0.15                                                                                            0.15
                                                1   2    3      4       5       6   7   8                                                       1   2       3      4       5       6   7   8
                                                             Network Distance                                                                                   Network Distance
                                                        (a) World Linkages                                                                              (b) International Linkages



ing. The change in the futures rate is calculated in the 30-minute window around the time of the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) press release, which is 2 p.m. East Coast time on the
day of a regular FOMC meeting.27
                                         We explore the robustness of our regression results to conditioning on other correlates of the
global financial cycle, namely the VIX, 2-year U.S. Treasury rate, and broad U.S. dollar index. The
VIX is obtained from Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). The 2-year U.S. Treasury rate and
broad U.S. dollar index are obtained from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (series
H.15 and H.10, respectively). We take the monthly log difference of the VIX and broad U.S. dollar
index and the monthly first difference of the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate before including them in
the regressions below. The VIX and dollar index are common variables used to capture the global
financial cycle (e.g., Bruno and Shin, 2015a; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020), while changes in
the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate captures the overall change in U.S. monetary policy stance as well as
the cost of funding.28
  27
     This measure of monetary surprise shocks is common in the literature, and follows the work of Gertler and
Karadi (2015). Note that we aggregate shocks within months for the (infrequent) months where there are multiple
announcements.
  28
     The 2-year U.S. Treasury rate is a more convenient measure than the Federal Funds rate because it never reached
the zero lower bound and because it is highly correlated with the "shadow" Federal Funds Rate, such as the one
proposed by Wu and Xia (2016), while at the same time being a more transparent measure.



                                                                                            19
         Given potential contemporaneous monetary policy shocks across countries, we check the robust-
ness of our results by including ECB and Bank of England monetary policy shocks constructed by
Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019). To best match the definition we use for the U.S. monetary policy
shock, we use the series that are not decomposed into monetary and non-monetary news. We in-
clude these shocks along with the U.S. monetary policy shock vector in order to control for potential
foreign monetary responses to U.S. monetary policy, and which would be picked up in the network
contribution if omitted. Finally, we also exploit U.S. monetary policy shocks from Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018), Bu et al. (2019), and Ozdagli and Weber (2020) for further robustness checks.


5         Empirical Results

We present our results starting with the baseline least-squares regression to give an idea of the
overall effect of U.S. monetary policy shocks on global stock returns. We proceed with a spatial
autoregression (SAR) to identify the portion of the effect that is due to production network linkages,
and to provide ample evidence of the robustness of our benchmark SAR specification. In particular,
we condition stock returns on the drivers of the global financial cycle and show that our benchmark
results are only minimally affected by this change in specification. Finally, we show that our baseline
direct and network effects are not driven by specific countries or sectors.

5.1        Linear Regression Results

To establish a baseline, we estimate a simple linear regression that ignores any spatial network
effects:
                                          qmi,t =  +  LS MU S,t + mi,t ,                                           (19)

where  represents either a constant or different sets of fixed effects. Effectively, this estimation
strategy imposes the restriction of spatially uncorrelated country-sector cells in the SAR framework
of (13); i.e., setting  = 0. As a result, the network and direct effects are captured in the estimate
 LS .
         The results of the estimation use the Jaroci´
                                                     nski and Karadi (2020) monetary policy shock series
for 2000­07 sample period are reported in Table 1.29 The simple OLS estimate in column (1)
implies that a one percentage point surprise in monetary policy easing results in a 2.7 percentage
points rise in the average country-sector monthly stock return.30 The standard errors increase
substantially when we cluster them at the monthly (t) level, as reported in column (2), which
    29
      The results for other monetary shock measures and other time periods are nearly identical and can be obtained
from the authors upon request. The exception is including 2008, which lowers the magnitude of the effect. Further-
more, because the dependent variable is the stock return, including a lagged dependent variable in these regression
does not alter the results.
   30
      Unless stated otherwise, all our results are in terms of annualized U.S. dollar monthly returns, as discussed above
in Section 4.



                                                           20
should be expected given that the monetary policy shock is being repeated for each country-sector
return in a given time period of the panel. The magnitude of the effect does not change much
whether we control for country, sector, or country-sector fixed effects (column (3)). We use the
(most restrictive) country-sector fixed effect specification as our baseline for the linear regression.
    Keeping in mind that our conceptual framework allows for U.S. monetary policy shocks to
have heterogeneous effects across country-sector pairs, we allow for heterogeneous values of  for
each mi in our estimation procedure. This estimation strategy is possible because of the time
dimension of our data. First, we estimate a random coefficients model with  's varying across
country-sector panels. We find that the avearge coefficient estimate declines slightly, as shown
in column (4). Second, we use a Mean Group estimator (Pesaran and Smith, 1995) with groups
defined as country-sector pairs in column (5). In this case, the average  is somewhat larger than
the random-coefficient estimate (in absolute value), but still smaller (in absolute value) than the
least-squares estimates.
    Finally, to compare our findings with existing country-level analysis, we aggregate the individual
firm stock returns to the country level and estimate a country fixed effects linear regression, which
is reported in column (6). We find that the coefficient for this country-time panel specification is
slightly larger (in absolute value) than the estimated coefficient based on country-sector level data,
but with larger standard errors. Further, the point estimate is in line with other estimates from
the literature (e.g., Ehrmann and Fratzscher, 2009).31 The use of monthly returns is justified by
findings that most of the equity premium resulting from changes in the U.S. monetary policy is
reflected in the first four weeks following the announcement (Bernanke and Kuttber, 2005; Cieslak
et al., 2019) and with at least 3-4 days delay even for U.S. firms (Chava and Hsu, 2019).32
    Table 2 reports least-squares regression results where we split the sample into all foreign coun-
tries (Panel A) and only the United States (Panel B). The overall point estimates for the interna-
tional sample in Panel A are somewhat smaller than the baseline estimates using the whole sample
of Table 1 for the country-setor returns in columns (1)-(5), with the impact of a one percentage
point innovation in U.S. monetary policy moving foreign country-sector returns by approximately
2.5 percentage points. Turning to the country-level returns in column (6), the point estimate is
also similar to the estimate reported in Table 1. Turning to Panel B and the results for the United
States, we see that the point estimates are larger (in absolute value) than the pooled sample's esti-
mates across all specifications, with an estimated impact of a one percentage point change in U.S.
  31
     Ammer et al. (2010), using hourly returns, find the effect that is about twice as large as ours, for both domestic
and foreign stock returns. Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) find, in a much longer sample, an impulse response
that is also about twice as large as ours for the effect of the increase in the federal funds rate on the U.S., U.K., and
German stock indexes.
  32
     Moreover, at least for the cases when monetary policy shocks do not fall on the first day of the month, using
monthly returns side steps the 24 hour pre-announcement drift in the response of U.S. stock returns to FOMC
scheduled announcements documented by Lucca and Moench (2015).



                                                           21
                      Table 1. Least-Squares Regression Estimation: Full Sample

This table reports coefficients from linear regressions where the dependent variable qmi,t is the annualized U.S. dollar
country-sector monthly stock return in columns (1)-(5) and the country market return in column (6), over 2000­07
in months with FOMC announcements, and the independent variable MU S,t is the measure of the U.S. monetary
policy shock taken from Jaroci´  nski and Karadi (2020). There are 49,667 observations in columns (1)-(5), and 1,716
observations in column (6). Standard errors are in parentheses. All coefficients are significant at (at least) the 5%
confidence level.


   qmi,t =  +  LS MU S,t + mi,t

                        (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)                 (5)                  (6)

   MP shock            -2.669      -2.669     -2.74             -2.454              -2.533              -3.110
                      (0.208)     (1.303)    (1.311)           (0.320)             (0.266)             (1.046)
   Constant             0.993       0.993     0.992             0.893                1.013              0.526
                      (0.013)     (0.090)    (0.091)           (0.029)             (0.026)             (0.086)

   Estimator          OLS          OLS       LS          Random coeffs        Mean Group            LS - country
   Fixed effects      None         None      mi            Random                  mi                    m
   St. errors        Regular       Clustered on t        Conventional         Group-specific       Clustered on t



monetary policy impacting the average sector return by approximately four percentage points across
columns (1)-(5), and three percentage points in looking at the overall market return in column (6).
This magnitude of the effect is consistent with the literature (e.g., Ehrmann and Fratzscher, 2004;
Bernanke and Kuttber, 2005; Ozdagli and Weber, 2020).
       The linear regressions do not allow to condition on the network structure and therefore  LS
combines both direct and network effects. We therefore next turn to the spatial autoregression
setup to be able to measure these two effects separately.

5.2      Heterogeneous SAR Results

We now allow for network effects by estimating a spatial autoregression model. We first present
results of the heterogeneous coefficients SAR model in Table 3, where we allow for country-sector
fixed effects following Elhorst (2014).33 We estimate the regression with maximum likelihood
following Aquaro et al. (2019), and bootstrap standard errors for all parameters as well as for
the decompositions, using a wild panel bootstrap with 500 repetitions. Our baseline estimation
table presents both the LeSage and Pace (2009) and Acemoglu et al. (2016) direct and network
decompositions. We then present only the Acemoglu et al. (2016) decomposition for additional
results in order to save space, and because this methodology omits the own-sector round-trip effect
  33
    See Table A3 for results using a homogeneous SAR model. Results in this estimation generally match up with
our baseline heterogeneous estimates.


                                                          22
  Table 2. Least-Squares Regression Estimation: International and United States Sub-Samples

This table reports coefficients from linear regressions where the dependent variable qmi,t is the annualized U.S. dollar
country-sector monthly stock return in columns (1)-(5) and the country market return in column (6), over 2000­07
in months with FOMC announcements, and the independent variable MU S,t is the measure of the U.S. monetary
policy shock taken from Jaroci´  nski and Karadi (2020). Panel A includes all countries except the United States (25
countries in total, 46,357 observations in columns (1)-(5), 1,650 observations in column (6)), and Panel B includes
only the United States (3,310 observations in columns (1)-(5), 66 observations in column (6)). Standard errors are
in parentheses. All coefficients are significant at (at least) the 10% confidence level.


   qmi,t =  +  LS MU S,t + mi,t

                           (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)                 (5)                 (6)

                                               Panel A. Excluding the United States

   MP shock               -2.553     -2.553      -2.625         -2.322              -2.405             -3.114
                         (0.221)    (1.378)     (1.386)        (0.338)             (0.279)            (1.080)
   Constant               1.035       1.035      1.034           0.932               1.054              0.542
                         (0.014)    (0.094)     (0.094)        (0.030)             (0.027)            (0.088)

                                                     Panel B. United States only

   MP shock               -4.308     -4.308      -4.308         -4.068              -4.418             -2.990
                         (0.407)    (0.702)     (0.709)        (0.811)             (0.726)            (0.594)
   Constant               0.411       0.411      0.411           0.371               0.414              0.142
                         (0.026)    (0.074)     (0.074)        (0.037)             (0.030)            (0.054)

   Estimator              OLS         OLS       LS         Random coeffs       Mean Group          LS - country
   Fixed effects          None        None      mi           Random                 mi                  mi
   Standard errors       Regular      Clustered on t       Conventional        Group-specific     Clustered on t



when calculating the direct effect of the transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks to global stock
markets.
    Panel A of Table 3 shows the average values of  and . We report averages across all country-
sectors, for country-sectors outside of the U.S., and for U.S. sectors only. The full distribution of
these estimates are reported in Figure A1. The number of observations corresponds to the number
of country-sector cells that contribute to each average. In Panel B, we report Direct, Network,
and the share of Network in Total across country-sectors using the two approaches discussed
previously. Because the decomposition is conducted at the country-sector level, we report the
averages of Direct, Network, and the share of Network in Total for all country-sectors, for
country-sectors outside of the U.S., and for U.S. sectors only. The full distribution of direct and
network effects is reported in Figure 4.
    The first point to note is that the sum of the estimated Direct and Network effects ­ i.e., the


                                                          23
Table 3. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Baseline Specification and
Decompositions

This table reports results from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregressions (Equation (13)) where the
dependent variable is the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over 2000­07 over months with
FOMC announcements, and the independent variable is the measure of the U.S. monetary policy shock taken from
Jaroci´nski and Karadi (2020). There are 44,286 total observations comprised of 671 country-sectors over 66 months.
LP09 and AAK16 refer to the decomposition methodologies in LeSage and Pace (2009) and Acemoglu et al. (2016),
respectively. Standard errors (in parentheses) are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. All coefficients
are significant at the 1% confidence level.


                   q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                                                Panel A. Coefficient Estimates

                                       Average             Average             Observations

                   Full sample            -0.907               0.632               44,286
                                         (0.094)              (0.028)
                   International          -0.828               0.635               40,986
                                         (0.101)              (0.029)
                   USA                    -1.871               0.585                3,300
                                         (0.271)              (0.044)

                                             Panel B. Total Effect Decomposition

                                     Avg. Direct       Avg. Network          Network/Total

                   Decomposition 1 (AAK16)

                   Full Sample            -0.907               -1.808               0.666
                                         (0.274)              (0.317)              (0.064)
                   International          -0.828               -1.757               0.680
                                         (0.101)              (0.322)              (0.068)
                   USA                    -1.871               -2.430               0.565
                                         (0.271)              (0.442)              (0.080)

                   Decomposition 2 (LP09)

                   Full Sample            -1.214               -1.501               0.553
                                         (0.082)              (0.094)              (0.059)
                   International          -1.151               -1.435               0.555
                                         (0.087)              (0.275)              (0.063)
                   USA                    -1.988               -2.313               0.538
                                         (0.224)              (0.386)              (0.065)




                                                         24
Total effect ­ line up with the least-squares estimates of Table 1 as we would expect. Turning to
our headline result, we find that for the full sample, nearly 70% of the average total effect of the
U.S. monetary policy shock on global stock returns is due to the transmission through production
network using our preferred decomposition method Acemoglu et al. (2016). In fact, we can see from
Figure 4 that network effect is negative for a larger subset of country-sector cells than the direct
effect. This results from the high estimated coefficient of shock propagation, , which is on average
0.63. Interestingly, this average  is less than one, the value implied by our conceptual framework,
due to unmodelled resistance to the transmission of shocks across international stock markets via
the global production network. Further, the network effect also explains over half of the total effect
if we use the LeSage and Pace (2009) decomposition, and shows the robust importance of global
production networks in transmitting U.S. monetary policy shocks in our baseline estimation.
       Computing averages for foreign country-sectors and for the U.S. sectors separately, we can see
the pattern of transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks to stock returns globally. We see a larger
direct effect of U.S monetary policy shock on U.S. sectors that foreign sectors, which is expected.
In terms of transmission via production networks, the share of the network effect for U.S. sectors
is 57%,34 while for foreign country-sectors it is larger, at 68%. These results are very intuitive and
show that production linkages are very important in transmitting demand shocks across sectors,
and, even more so, across countries. In what follows we establish robustness of these findings.

5.3      Robustness Checks

We conduct a number of robustness check for our main result. First, we test for sensitivity of our
findings to the sample time period and to the choice of timing at which the input-output matrix
is sampled. We then return to the benchmark sample period and test for sensitivity of our result
to definitions of stock returns and U.S. monetary policy shocks. We test for potential effects of
monetary policy shocks emanating from other countries (namely, the U.K. and the euro area).
Finally, we evaluate whether any specific sectors or countries are particularly influential for our
results.


Sensitivity to Time Period and Definition of W

So far we have limited our analysis to the 2000­07 time period. Our baseline estimates are based on
this period for three reasons: first, this period includes a full cycle of monetary policy actions but
excludes the effective lower bound period; second, this period ends well prior to the Great Trade
Collapse that occurred during the Global Financial Crisis in 2008:H2­2009:H1; third, this period
does not include the dramatic decline in global stock prices that followed the collapse of Lehman
  34
    Ozdagli and Weber (2020) find a nearly identical magnitude for the network effect and a smaller magnitude for
the direct effect using the same methodology (with a different measure of monetary policy shocks) in a longer sample
with more disaggregated U.S. sectoral data.


                                                        25
            Figure 4. Distribution of Direct and Network Effects across Country-Sectors

This figure plots the distribution of Direct and Network across mi from the estimation of equation Equation (13)
for 2000­07, using Jaroci´nski and Karadi (2020) monetary policy shocks for MU S . The averages of these distributions
are reported in Table 3.




                   (a) Direct (AAK16)                                       (b) Network (AAK16)




                     (c) Direct (LP09)                                       (d) Network (LP09)



Brothers. In our baseline analysis, as in our model, we take the global production network as given,
and therefore we use the input-output coefficients from 2000. It is possible, however, that a rapid
increase in trade globalization and the lengthening of global supply chains in the early 2000s may
affect our results. Therefore, we want to explore the evolution of our results as we vary the time
period and the year from which we sample the matrix W.
    Table 4 reports a variety of robustness checks based on different definitions of W and sample
period coverage. For compactness, we just report the share of network effect across different
variations of the sample for our baseline regression reported in Panel A of Table 3; the full set of



                                                         26
Table 4. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Varying Sample Period and
Weighting Matrix

This table reports networks shares calculated from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregressions (Equa-
tion (13)) where the dependent variable is the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over time
periods indicated in the first column over month with FOMC announcements, and the independent variable is the
measure of the U.S. monetary policy shock taken from Jaroci´ nski and Karadi (2020). Standard errors (in parenthe-
ses) are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. All network shares are significant at the 1% level. Full
regression results are reported in Table A4.


                  q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                  Time period        Year for W              Share of network effect
                                                      Full sample International      USA

                  2000-07           Avg. 2000-07          0.668            0.679          0.588
                                                         (0.056)          (0.060)        (0.068)
                  2000-16                2000             0.748            0.758          0.661
                                                         (0.056)          (0.059)        (0.034)
                  2000-16           Avg. 2000-16          0.765            0.772          0.707
                                                         (0.050)          (0.054)        (0.032)
                  2000-07,09-16          2000             0.723            0.734          0.625
                                                         (0.051)          (0.054)        (0.041)
                  2000-07,09-16     Avg. 2000-16          0.747            0.756          0.670
                                                         (0.052)          (0.055)        (0.043)
                  2000-08,10-16          2000             0.743            0.748          0.693
                                                         (0.044)          (0.046)        (0.059)
                  2000-08,10-16     Avg. 2000-16          0.759            0.762          0.737
                                                         (0.062)          (0.064)        (0.073)



estimates is reported in Table A4. First, we can see that replacing W measured in 2000 with the
average W for 2000­07 does not change the results. This is not surprising given that elements of
W are driven by production technologies and a trade structure that does not change very quickly,
as observed in Figure 1. Second, we extend our time period through 2016.35 We can see that the
share of the network effect increases somewhat in this extended sample, not surprisingly given that
increasing trend in cross-country trade integration and lengthening of global supply chains resumed
following the Great Trade Collapse. However, even in this extended sample, using the average W
instead of W for 2000 does not make much difference.
       These results not only show the stability of our findings over time, but also support the as-
sumption made in the model on the exogeneity of production linkages. At least in the studies
  35
    While WIOD is only available through 2014, we gather information on all other variables through the end of
2016. To compute average W for 2000­16 we simply assume that the WIOD for 2015 and 2016 would be the same
as the average 2000­14 WIOD matrix.



                                                        27
of temporary monetary shocks, it seems to be safe to assume that technological coefficients of
input-output linkages as well as trade patterns do not respond rapidly and can be taken as given.


Alternative Measures of Shocks and Returns

We perform additional tests to check the robustness of our results to alternative measures of stock
returns and U.S. monetary policy shocks. As a baseline for our robustness tests we take the set of
SAR results reported in Panel A of Table 3. In the interest of space, we report only the share of
the network effect in Table 5, with the full regression results reported in Table A5.
   We begin by replacing stock returns, which are measured in terms of U.S. dollars, with excess
returns measured as a difference between annualized monthly USD nominal stock returns and a
change in the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate during the same month, which proxies for the global risk-free
rate. We also replace nominal stock returns expressed in U.S. dollars with nominal stock returns
expressed in domestic currency as well as with real stock returns. To compute real stock returns,
we start with domestic-currency nominal returns and adjust them with domestic inflation rate. We
use last quarter's inflation rate for each observation in our sample in order to avoid incorporating
any response of inflation to U.S. monetary policy shocks into our returns data. We compute real
                           DC )/(1 + inf l                                                      DC
returns as rq mi,t = (1 + qmi,t           m,t-1 ) - 1, where rq mi,t is the real stock return, qmi,t is

nominal return in domestic currency, and inf lm,t-1 is the inflation rate.
   The results are reported in the top three rows of Table 5. We find that across all subsamples
the share of the network effect increases substantially when we consider excess returns, indicating
that changes in the risk-free rate contribute to the direct effect of U.S. monetary policy shocks
to global stock returns, lowering our baseline measure of the share of the network effect. Using
domestic currency returns, real or nominal, produces estimates of the network effect share that are
similar to our baseline results.
   Next, we consider three alternative measures of U.S. monetary policy shocks proposed by Bu
et al. (2019); Nakamura and Steinsson (2018); Ozdagli and Weber (2020) (`BRW', `NS', and `OW',
respectively). We find that the share of the network effect for the U.S. sectors is slightly smaller if
we use `BRW' shocks, but qualitatively our results are very similar to the baseline. Furthermore,
the 67% network share for the U.S. stock returns using the `OW' shock series is similar to the
lower bound found in Ozdagli and Weber (2020), who use longer time series, a different frequency
of stock returns, and a U.S. input-output table with a higher degree of sectoral disaggregation.


Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks

We next control for foreign monetary policy shocks in case they occur in reaction to or in concert
with the U.S. monetary policy surprises. This coincidence of monetary policy actions could lead to
an upward bias in the contribution of the network effect, which would capture the effect of a foreign

                                                  28
Table 5. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Robustness to Returns and
Shock Measures

This table reports the network shares calculated from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregressions (Equa-
tion (13)) where the dependent variable is the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over 2000­07
over months with FOMC announcements, and the independent variable is a measure of the U.S. monetary policy
shock. The first row uses the nominal USD stock returns net of the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate. The second row uses
nominal domestic currency stock returns. The third row uses real equity returns. All first three rows use the `JK'
monetary policy shock from Jaroci´   nski and Karadi (2020). Rows three to six use USD nominal returns but use a
different measure of the monetary policy shock taken from: `BRW' (Bu et al., 2019), `OW' (Ozdagli and Weber, 2020),
and `NS' (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). There are 44,286 total observations comprised of 671 country-sectors over
66 months. Standard errors (in parentheses) are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. All network shares
are significant at the 1% level. Full regression results are reported in Table A5.


                q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                                                                Share of network effect
                Specification                            Full sample International      USA

                Excess returns                               0.799              0.813        0.693
                                                            (0.107)            (0.119)      (0.046)
                Domestic currency returns                    0.678              0.684        0.629
                                                            (0.060)            (0.062)      (0.074)
                Real domestic currency returns               0.665              0.675        0.594
                                                            (0.084)            (0.087)      (0.082)
                USD returns, OW shock                        0.663              0.668        0.606
                                                            (0.050)            (0.052)      (0.103)
                USD returns, NS shock                        0.672              0.678        0.612
                                                            (0.060)            (0.063)      (0.074)
                USD returns, BRW shock                       0.609              0.606        0.655
                                                            (0.102)            (0.104)      (0.122)



country's monetary policy change rather than the spillover from U.S. monetary policy. In particular,
we are able to control for ECB and Bank of England (BOE) monetary policy shocks using measures
constructed by Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019). Controlling for these shocks has implications for both
euro countries and the UK, but also for countries that have deeper production linkages with these
nations than with the U.S., thus potentially impacting our baseline measure of the international
network effect of U.S. monetary policy shocks along several dimensions.
    In particular, we operationalize Equation (10) in a panel SAR model. We do this by extending
(13) to include foreign monetary policy shocks as additional controls:
                                                                          K
                      q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1             MU S,t +            k Mkt    + t ,                   (20)
                                                                         k=1


where each Mkt is a measure the monetary policy shocks of country k (like the U.S. monetary

                                                         29
Table 6. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Summary Results for Foreign
Monetary Policy Shocks

This table reports direct and network effects of U.S. monetary policy shocks and total effects of foreign monetary
policy shocks. These are calculated from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregressions (Equation (13))
where the dependent variable is the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over 2000­07 over
months with FOMC announcements, and the independent variables are measures of the monetary policy shocks in
the U.S. and other countries. There are 44,286 total observations comprised of 671 country-sectors over 66 months.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. This table presents summary
regression results. Full regression results are available upon request.


       q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t +                K
                                                          k=1  k   Mkt + t

                                               Full Sample              International     United States
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)             (4)               (5)
       Direct effect of US MP           -0.877    -0.889    -0.883          -0.804            -1.848
                                       (0.314) (0.317) (0.291)             (0.088)           (0.301)
       Network effect of US MP          -1.974    -1.897    -1.912          -1.863            -2.501
                                       (0.347) (0.357) (0.328)             (0.333)           (0.474)
       Total effect of BOE MP           -0.599              -0.572          -0.644             0.302
                                       (0.274)             (0.293)         (0.196)           (0.408)
       Total effect of ECB MP                      0.014    -0.118          -0.114            -0.165
                                                 (0.247) (0.243)           (0.190)           (0.381)



policy shock term), and  k is a N J × 1 vector of coefficients. We further assume that the error
term follows the same structure as in the baseline regression model (13). This specification assumes
that the additional foreign monetary policy shock variables may impact stock returns both directly
and indirectly via the global input-output matrix.
    Table 6 presents these regression results, where we report total effects of foreign monetary
policy shocks alongside the decomposition of U.S. monetary policy shocks. Looking at the direct
and network effects of U.S. monetary policy in the first two rows, we see that our main results
on the importance of the international network effect of U.S. monetary policy remain unchanged.
In particular, when including all foreign monetary policy shocks the network is share in columns
(3)-(5) is 0.684, 0.699, 0.575, for the full, foreign, and U.S. country-sectors respectively. Meanwhile,
BOE monetary surprises have a significant effect on global stock prices, outside of the U.S., but
the magnitude of this effect is about six times smaller than those of the U.S. monetary policy
shocks. ECB monetary surprises do not appear to have an impact on global stock prices ­ the
point estimates are small in magnitude and are not statistically significant.


Heterogeneity of Estimates

We next explore drivers of the observed heterogeneity in the importance of direct and network


                                                       30
                                             Figure 5. Distribution of Direct and Network Effects across Countries and Sectors

This figure plots averages of Direct and Network across i, plotted for each m and averages across m plotted for
each i from the estimation of Equation (13) for 2000­07, using Jaroci´   nski and Karadi (2020) U.S. monetary policy
shocks for MU S , using Decomposition 1 (AAK16). The overall averages of these distributions are reported in Table 3.
In panel (a), blue labels are for advanced economies, green labels are for emerging economies, and the red label is for
the USA. In panel (b), financial and real estate industries are labeled in red.


                                                                                                  Italy
                                  5




                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A03
                                                                                Russia                                                                                                             C21




                                                                                                                          Country-average network effect
  Sector-average network effect




                                                                                                                                                                                         A01
                                                                                                  China




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                      Austria                                                                        C10-C12C16      E37-E39
                                                                                              FinlandIndonesia                                                                                            E36
                                                                                          Mexico                                                                                                 C20
                                  0




                                                                                        Poland Spain                                                                                     H53      K65 I                  M74_M75
                                                                                                                                                                                                  C24 G45
                                                                                                                                                                                             C23 C17
                                                                                           France                                                                         M69_M70                   F H49
                                                                                    Denmark
                                                                                    Germany Australia
                                                                                             Korea                                                                    C13-C15 A02           C25
                                                                                                                                                                                      C31_C32
                                                                                                                                                                                           H51 H52     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q R_S C22
                                                                                                                                                                                                      G47
                                                                            Canada                                                                                  C18     G46            C29               L68
                                                                                    India Brazil
                                                                                Greece         UK
                                                                                               Japan                                                                              M71 C19 C28
                                                                                                                                                                                  M71C19     K64
                                                                                                                                                                                           P85
                                                                                                                                                                                             K66
                                                                                                                                                                                            D35




                                                                                                                                                           -2
                                                                            USA Taiwan Portugal                                                                              J59_J60                      N
                                                                                                                                                                           H50J61        M72        C30
                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                 Sweden                                                                                           C26
                                                                                                                                                            J62_J63                      J58
                                  -5




                                                                                                                                                                                            C27




                                                                                                                                                           -4
                                                                                                                                                                               M73


                                               Turkey
                                  -10




                                                                                                                                                           -6
                                        -6              -4                 -2                0                   2                                              -6        -4           -2           0              2           4
                                                             Sector-average direct effect                                                                                       Country-average direct effect


                          (a) Distribution across countries, sector averages                                                                         (b) Distribution across sectors, country averages



effects across countries and sectors. Our approach is to analyze the country-sector cross section
of the SAR estimated average direct and network effects. Figure 5 plots the average network
effect against the average direct effect, where panel (a) computes the average across sectors within
countries, and panel (b) computes averages across countries within sectors.
                                  In panel (a), blue labels indicate advanced economies, green labels indicate emerging economies,
and a red label is used for the U.S. We can see that the largest average direct and network effects are
observed for Turkey, although the distance from the rest of the countries is not so large as to cause
concern about undue influence of just one country on overall results. For the rest of the countries,
we do not observe substantial differences between advanced and emerging economies. With the
exception of Italy and Russia, we see a strong positive correlation between direct and network
effects across countries. Finally, the U.S. does not stand out of the pack, with both direct and
network effects tending to be larger than the average country-sector's, but within the distribution
across other countries.
                                  In panel (b) red labels indicate sectors that are related to finance and real estate and blue
labels indicate all other sectors. We can see that there is a positive correlation between network
and direct effects across sectors as well, but it is not as strong as across countries. There are no
sectors that appear to be outliers.
                                  Given the heterogeneity of direct and network effects observed across countries and sectors, a
natural question to ask is what might be the explanations for such heterogenity. First, since the

                                                                                                                     31
shock we analyze initially hits final demand in the U.S., it is possible that the share of output
each country-sector cell exports to the U.S. as a final good would be an important determinant
of the size of both direct and network effects. Next, we consider several possibilities that might
be of concern because they could indicate that our production network proxies for a different
transmission channel. We consider two sector characteristics that might be important for the
transmission of stock market shocks: financial dependence of a sector (based on the extension of
Rajan and Zingales (1998) to non-manufacturing sectors and computed for 2002­06 by Cat~
                                                                                      ao et
al. (2009)) and trade credit dependence of a sector (Fisman and Love, 2003). We consider the
three country characteristics that might affect the transmission of stock market shocks: country
size (measured as log GDP expressed in U.S. dollars), financial openness (measured as a ratio of
the sum of total external assets and liabilities to GDP, from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007)), and
the ratio of the current account to GDP.
   We run regressions of the estimated network and direct effects on our list of covariates, where
we estimate least-squared regressions with country or sector fixed effects and we double-cluster
standard errors on country and sector to account for repeated values of country-specific and sector-
specific explanatory variables. The results of this analysis are reported in Table A7. In interpreting
coefficients it is important to keep in mind that in general both the direct and network effects are
negative, thus a positive coefficient implies a smaller effect of an explanatory variable on spillovers.
None of the estimated coefficient are significant at conventional levels and the explanatory power
of the variables included is minimal, as seen from the low within-R2 s. Thus, the heterogeneity of
the estimated direct and network effects is not driven by variables that might indicate alternative
shock transmission channels.

5.4   The Global Financial Cycle

We next explore the robustness of the global production network demand channel of U.S. mone-
tary policy shocks by controlling for global financial cycle variables, which if omitted may lead to
estimation biases of our baseline direct and network effects. In particular, if these omitted shocks
are correlated with U.S. monetary policy shocks and have a direct effect on global stock returns,
our estimates of the impact of U.S. monetary policy shocks would spuriously attribute some of
their effect to propagation through the production network. In terms of estimation, this would
be reflected in the spacial autoregression coefficients vector  being upwardly biased (in absolute
value).
   There is clear evidence in the literature that global stock prices respond to a global financial
cycle (Chen, 2018; Bruno and Shin, 2015b; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020). Some movements
of the global financial cycle are due to changes in U.S. monetary policy, while others are market
driven. Here we show the robustness of our results to controlling for such shocks. In our analysis


                                                  32
  Table 7. Least-Squares Panel Estimation: Controlling for Global Financial Cycle Covariates

This table reports coefficients from linear regressions where the dependent variable q is the country-sector annualized
U.S. dollar monthly stock return over 2000­07 in month with FOMC announcements. The independent variables
include the measure of the U.S. monetary policy shock taken from Jaroci´     nski and Karadi (2020) (MP shock), the
monthly changes in the VIX index (VIX); the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate (T2y), and the broad U.S. dollar index
(USD). Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. All coefficients on MP shock are statistically significant
at the 1% confidence levels.


                         LS M                         LS
            qmi,t = mi + M P  U S,t + Xt              X    + mi,t

                                             Full Sample                       International   United States
                                 (1)         (2)     (3)               (4)          (5)             (6)

            MP shock            -3.320      -3.514     -3.184         -3.465      -3.339           -4.472
                               (0.888)     (0.875)    (0.903)        (0.848)     (0.872)          (0.710)
             lnVIX              -0.018                                -0.016      -0.016           -0.013
                               (0.003)                               (0.004)     (0.004)          (0.003)
            T2y                             0.551                      0.209      0.220             0.061
                                           (0.383)                   (0.363)     (0.380)          (0.305)
             lnUSD                                   -0.476           -0.438      -0.443           -0.357
                                                    (0.574)          (0.542)     (0.560)          (0.448)
            R2                  0.075       0.069    0.067             0.076       0.074            0.08
            Observations                        49,667                           46,357             3,310
            Cty-sec FE           Yes         Yes      Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes




we focus on three variables that are not highly correlated with each other and are easily available:
changes in the VIX, the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate, and the broad U.S. dollar Index. We conduct
both least squares and SAR analysis and include these variables one at a time and then all together.


Linear Regression Results

Table 7 shows the results of the fixed effects least-square regressions for the full sample as well as
for subsamples of foreign country-sectors and for the U.S. only. In the interest of space, for the
subsamples we only present the results with all three additional control variables included ­ the
results do not vary much if we include them individually.36
       The VIX has been shown to be highly correlated with the global financial cycle and is therefore
likely to affect global stock returns given changes in risk aversion and the behavior of financial
intermediaries. To the extent that some movements in the VIX are correlated with U.S. monetary
policy shocks, our baseline regressions may be attributing some of the effect of the VIX to the
  36
       The full set of regressions is available upon request.




                                                                33
demand-channel effect of the U.S. monetary policy shock that the input-output network captures.
However, when we include the VIX in the regression, we find that the impact of the U.S. monetary
policy shock is not statistically different from the baseline for the full sample as well as the subsam-
ples. Consistent with the literature, increases in the VIX lower stock market returns worldwide, by
about the same amount in the U.S. and in foreign countries.
       Monetary policy can affect stock returns through surprises but it may also have an effect through
the level of interest rates, which would not be necessarily reflected in monetary policy shocks. This
second effect is likely to be reflected in capital flows (Avdjiev and Hale, 2019). According to the
authors, an increase in the policy rate during the lending boom is likely to increase capital flows
worldwide, which would imply increases in stock returns globally. Indeed, we find that an increase
in the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate increases stock returns during our sample period of 2000­07 as
seen in columns (2) and (4)-(6), which corresponds to a lending boom, however, the effect is not
statistically significant. Controlling for the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate does not change much the
impact of the U.S. monetary policy shock relative to the baseline.
       In our baseline analysis we incorporated the effect of exchange rates into stock returns by
expressing them in U.S. dollars. Given that the value of the dollar can be affected by U.S. monetary
policy shocks (Inoue and Rossi, 2019), we want to separate the impact of U.S. monetary policy
surprises that is orthogonal to exchange rate changes from the reaction to the change in the value
of the dollar. To do so, we control for the broad U.S. dollar index in columns (3)-(6). We find that
the value of the dollar does not have a statistically significant effect on global stock returns and
that controlling for the dollar index does not change our baseline results.37 This is not surprising
given our previous robustness tests in which we found the results to be very similar whether we use
USD-based or domestic currency-based stock returns.
       Combining the three additional control variables produces results that are similar to the re-
gression with the VIX only, showing, consistent with the literature, that the VIX is the dominant
correlate of the global financial cycle when it comes to explaining movements in global stock returns.


Heterogeneous SAR Results

In order to condition on the global financial cycle in SAR setting, we conduct a two-step procedure.
The two-step procedure allows for isolating the effect of global financial cycle covariates without
imposing transmission of these shocks through production network. In the first step, we regress
annualized monthly stock returns expressed in U.S. dollars on annualized monthly log changes in
the VIX and the broad U.S. dollar index (USD), and the change in the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate
  37
    The results are very similar if we instead control for each country's bilateral exchange rate vis-`
                                                                                                      a-vis the U.S.
dollar.




                                                        34
(T2y):
                          q t =  + 1  ln VIXt + 2  ln USDt + 3 T2yt + t .                                          (21)

The estimates for this regression using OLS, random coefficients, or Mean Group estimator (Pesaran
and Smith, 1995) are reported in Table A8. For consistency with the rest of our analysis, we allow for
the effects of global financial cycle covariates to vary by country and sector, thus, as a benchmark,
we estimate regression Equation (21) using Mean Group estimator (Pesaran and Smith, 1995),
which allows us to estimate a separate coefficient for each country-sector cell.38
    Residuals from this regression represent the component of stock returns that is orthogonal to
global financial cycle covariates:

                        q X,t = q t - a - c1  ln VIXt - c2  ln USDt - c3 T2yt ,                                    (22)

where a is the estimate for  and c1 - c3 are estimates for 1 - 3 .
    We then use the component of stock returns that is orthogonal to global financial cycle covariates
as our dependent variable in the SAR analysis as follows:

                                q X,t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t .                                          (23)

The results are reported in Table 8.
    Relative to our benchmark results in Table 3, Decomposition 1 (AAK16), we find that both the
direct and network effects are now slightly larger for foreign stock returns and slightly smaller for
the U.S. stock returns. The share of the network effect is unchanged for the U.S. stock returns, but
is slightly lower for foreign stock returns. This finding is consistent with our concern that some of
the global financial cycle effect was reflected in the network effect in our benchmark specification.
The difference between the network share in the benchmark results and in the results in Table 8
is negligible in magnitude and is not statistically significant. Combined with the findings from our
least-square analysis that the total effect of U.S. monetary policy shock is robust to controlling for
global financial cycle covariates, this SAR results confirm that any bias arising from not controlling
for global financial cycle in our benchmark specification is minor.


6     Conclusion

In this paper we quantitatively evaluate the role of the global production network in the propagation
of U.S. monetary policy shocks to stock returns at a sector level worldwide. Basing our analysis on
a simple conceptual framework, which can be derived from a canonical multi-country multi-sector
production network model, we estimate a spatial autoregression in a panel setting that allows for
  38
     The results are nearly identical if we use instead OLS or random coefficient estimators. These results are available
upon request.



                                                           35
Table 8. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Conditioning on the Global
Financial Cycle

This table reports direct and network effects from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregression (Equa-
tion (23)) where the dependent variable is the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over
2000­07 over months with FOMC announcements, after conditioning for the changes in VIX, 2-year U.S. Treasury
rate, and U.S. Broad dollar index. Conditioning is based on the mean-group estimator with first stage reported in
Table A8. Independent variable is the measure of the U.S. monetary policy shock taken from Jaroci´     nski and Karadi
(2020). There are 44,286 observations total comprised of 671 country-sectors over 66 months. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. All coefficients are statistically significant at the
1% confidence level.


         q X,t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                            Avg.       Avg.       Avg. Direct       Avg. Network         Network/Total

         Full sample         -1.001     0.589          -1.001             -1.880                0.653
                            (0.106)    (0.035)        (0.269)            (0.310)               (0.063)
         International       -0.936     0.589          -0.936             -1.848                0.664
                            (0.108)    (0.035)        (0.108)            (0.315)               (0.066)
         United States       -1.796     0.581          -1.796             -2.274                0.559
                            (0.304)    (0.055)        (0.304)            (0.428)               (0.092)



coefficients to vary across countries and sectors. The conceptual framework predicts that country-
sectors which are more closely linked to the U.S. via supply linkages will be more affected by U.S.
monetary policy shocks.
    We find a very robust and quantitatively important role of the production network ­ nearly
70% of the total estimated impact of U.S. monetary policy shocks on global stock returns is due
to production linkages. This finding is not affected by conditioning on the financial channel of
U.S. monetary policy shock transmission studied in the global financial cycle literature. Thus, in
addition to providing a quantitative evidence of the importance of the global production network
in transmitting asset market shocks, we contribute to the growing literature on the spillovers of the
U.S. monetary policy internationally by documenting and quantifying the role of real linkages in
the global transmission of such shocks.




                                                          36
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr, "Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Em-
  pirical Exploration," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, 2016, 30, 276­335.
  , Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "The Network Origins of
  Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, September 2012, 80 (5), 1977­2016.
Alfaro, Laura, Manuel Garc´ ia-Santana, and Enrique Moral-Benito, "On the Direct and Indirect
  Real Effects of Credit Supply Shocks," January 2020. Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics.
Amihud, Yakov, Allaudeen Hameed, Wenjin Kang, and Huiping Zhang, "The illiquidity premium:
 International evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 2015, 117 (2), 350­368.
Ammer, John, Clara Vega, and Jon Wongswan, "International Transmission of U.S. Monetary
 Policy Shocks: Evidence from Stock Prices," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2010, 42
 (s1), 179­198.
Antr`
    as, Pol and C. Fritz Foley, "Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade Finance
 Practices," Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (4), 853­901.
Aquaro, Michele, Natalia Bailey, and M. Hashem Pesaran, "Estimation and Inference for Spatial
 Models with Heterogeneous Coefficients: An Application to U.S. House Prices," October 2019.
 USC Dornsife Institute of New Economic Thinking Working Paper No. 19-07.
Atalay, Enghin, "How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, October 2017, 9 (4), 254­280.
Auer, Raphael A., Andrei A. Levchenko, and Philip Saur´  e, "International Inflation Spillovers
 through Input Linkages," Review of Economics and Statistics, July 2019, 101 (3), 507­521.
Avdjiev, Stefan and Galina Hale, "U.S. monetary policy and fluctuations of international bank
 lending," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2019, 95, 251 ­ 268.
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks:
  Beyond Hulten's Theorem," Econometrica, July 2019, 87 (4), 1155­1203.
  and    , "Networks, Barriers, and Trade," August 2019. mimeo, UCLA and Harvard.
Barrot, Jean-No¨el, Erik Loualiche, and Julien Sauvagnat, "The Globalization Risk Premium,"
  Journal of Finance, October 2019, 74 (5), 2391­2439.
Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang, "International Stock Return Comove-
  ments," The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2591­2626.
Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi, "Demand Spillovers and the Collapse of Trade
  in the Global Recession," IMF Economic Review, December 2010, 58 (2), 295­326.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttber, "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal
  Reserve Policy?," The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3), 1221­1257.
Bigio, Saki and Jennifer La'O, "Distortions in Production Networks," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, August 2020, 135 (4), 2187­2253.
Boehm, Christoph E., Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "Input Linkages and the Trans-
  mission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 T¯
                                                        ohoku Earthquake," The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (1), 60­75.
Br¨
  auning, Falk and Viacheslav Sheremirov, "Output Spillovers from U.S. Monetary Policy: The
  Role of International Trade and Financial Linkages," October 2019. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Boston Working Paper No. 19­15.


                                              37
Brooks, Robin and Marco Del Negro, "Firm-Level Evidence on International Stock Market Co-
  movement," Review of Finance, January 2006, 10 (1), 69­98.
Bruno, Valentina and Huyn Song Shin, "Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary
  Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 71, 119­132.
   and , "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity," Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82,
  525­564.
Bu, Chunya, John Rogers, and Wenbin Wu, "A Unified Measure of Fed Monetary Policy Shocks,"
  2019. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-043.
Buch, Claudia M., Matthieu Bussi`ere, Linda Goldberg, and Robert Hills, "The international trans-
  mission of monetary policy," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2019, 91, 29 ­ 48.
Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda L. Tesar, "Trade, Production Sharing, and the Inter-
  national Transmission of Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55, 775­795.
Caballero, Julian, Christopher Candelaria, and Galina Hale, "Bank linkages and international
  trade," Journal of International Economics, 2018, 115, 30 ­ 47.
Carvalho, Vasco M., "From Micro to Macro via Production Networks," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, Fall 2014, 28 (4), 23­48.
  , Makoto Nirei, Yukiko U. Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "Supply Chain Disruptions: Evi-
  dence from the Great East Japan Earthquake'," 2021. Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics.
Cat~
   ao, Luis, Carmen Pag´
                       es, and Mar´
                                  ia Fernanda Rosales, "Financial Dependence, Fromal Credit
  and Informal Jobs: New Evidence from Brazilian Household Data," 2009. IDB Working Paper
  Series No. IDB-WP-118.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S. Goldberg, "Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission," The
  Journal of Finance, 2012, 67 (5), 1811­1843.
Chang, Jinfan, Huancheng Du, Dong Lou, and Christopher Polk, "Ripples into Waves: Trade
  Networks, Economic Activity, and Asset Prices," July 2020. Mimeo, Chinese University of Hong
  Kong, Princeton, and LSE.
Chava, Sudheer and Alex Hsu, "Financial Constraints, Monetary Policy Shocks, and the Cross-
  Section of Equity Returns," The Review of Financial Studies, 11 2019, 33 (9), 4367­4402.
Chen, Peng, "Understanding international stock market comovements: A comparison of developed
  and emerging markets," International Review of Economics & Finance, 2018, 56, 451­464.
Cieslak, Anna, Adair Morse, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, "Stock Returns over the FOMC
  Cycle," The Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (5), 2201­2248.
   and Andreas Schrimpf, "Non-monetary News and Central Bank Communication," Journal of
  International Economics, 2019, (118), 293­315.
Claessens, Stijn, "Global Banking: Recent Developments and Insights from Research," Review of
  Finance, 09 2017, 21 (4), 1513­1555.
Davidson, Russell and Emmanuel Flachaire, "The wild bootstrap, tamed at last," Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 2008, 146 (1), 162­169.
Devereux, Michael B., Karine Gente, and Changhua Yu, "Production Networks and International
  Fiscal Spillovers," November 2020. NBER Working Paper 28149.
di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean, "The Micro Origins of International
   Business Cycle Comovement," American Economic Review, January 2018, 108 (1), 82­108.


                                               38
Dutt, Pushan and Ilian Mihov, "Stock Market Comovements and Industrial Structure," Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking, 2013, 45 (5), 891­911.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, "Trade and the Global Re-
  cession," American Economic Review, November 2016, 106 (11), 3401­38.
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher, "Taking Stock: Monetary Policy Transmission to Equity
  Markets," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2004, 36 (4), 719­737.
   and , "Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks," Oxford Bulletin of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 2009, 71 (6), 739­759.
Elhorst, J. Paul, "MATLAB Software for Spatial Panels," International Regional Science Review,
  2014, 37 (3), 389­405.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, "Size, value, and momentum in international stock
  returns," Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105 (3), 457­472.
Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love, "Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development, and In-
  dustry Growth," The Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (1), 353­374.
Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson, "Sectoral vs. Aggregate Shocks:
  A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production," Journal of Political Economy, February
  2011, 119 (1), 1­38.
Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock, "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
  Retrenchment," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235 ­ 251. NBER Global.
Gali, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
 Keynesian Framework and Its Applications, 2 ed., Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activ-
 ity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7 (1), 44­76.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Michael Weber, "Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence from the Stock
 Market," American Economic Review, January 2016, 106 (1), 165­99.
Grassi, Basile, "IO in I-O: Size, Industrial Organization, and the Input-Output Network Make a
  Firm Structurally Important," December 2017. mimeo, Bocconi.
Griffin, J. M. and R. M. Stulz, "International Competition And Exchange Rate Shocks: A Cross-
  Country Industry Analysis Of Stock Returns," Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 14 (1), 215­241.
Griffin, John M., Xiuqing Ji, and J. Spencer Martin, "Momentum Investing and Business Cycle
  Risk: Evidence from Pole to Pole," The Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (6), 2515­2547.
Herskovic, Bernard, "Networks in Production: Asset Pricing Implications," Journal of Finance,
  2018, 73 (4), 1785­1818.
Huo, Zhen, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "International Comovement in the
 Global Production Network," February 2020. NBER Working Paper 25978.
Inoue, Atsushi and Barbara Rossi, "The effects of conventional and unconventional monetary policy
  on exchange rates," Journal of International Economics, 2019, 118, 419 ­ 447.
Jach, Agnieszka, "International stock market comovement in time and scale outlined with a thick
  pen," Journal of Empirical Finance, 2017, 43, 115­129.
Jaroci´
      nski, Marek and Peter Karadi, "Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises ­ The Role of
  Information Shocks," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2020, 12 (2), 1­43.
Johnson, Robert C., "Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 39­83.

                                               39
   and Guillermo Noguera, "A Portrait of Trade in Value-Added over Four Decades," The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99 (5), 896­911.
Karolyi, George A. and Ying Wu, "Is Currency Risk Priced in Global Equity Markets," Review of
 Finance, 10 2020. rfaa026.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
  and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004," Journal of International
  Economics, November 2007, 73 (2), 223­250.
La'O, Jennifer and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "Optimal Monetary Policy in Production Networks,"
  July 2020. NBER Working Paper 27464.
LeSage, James and Robert Kelley Pace, Introduction to Spatial Econometrics, 1 ed., New York,
  NY: CRC Press, January 2009.
Lewis, Karen K., "Global Asset Pricing," Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2011, 3 (1),
  435­466.
Lucca, David O. and Emanuel Moench, "The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift," The Journal of
  Finance, 2015, 70 (1), 329­371.
Mammen, Enno, "Bootstrap and Wild Bootstrap for High Dimensional Linear Models," Annals of
 Statististics, 03 1993, 21 (1), 255­285.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and H´
                               el`
                                 ene Rey, "U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle,"
 May 2020. Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.
Nakamura, Emi and J´ on Steinsson, "High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-Neutrality:
  The Information Effect," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 01 2018, 133 (3), 1283­1330.
Niepmann, Friederike and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, "International trade, risk and the role of banks,"
  Journal of International Economics, 2017, 107, 111 ­ 126.
Ozdagli, Ali and Michael Weber, "Monetary Policy through Production Networks: Evidence from
  the Stock Market," May 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 23424.
   and Mihail Velikov, "Show me the money: The monetary policy risk premium," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2020, 135 (2), 320 ­ 339.
Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber, "The Propagation of Monetary Policy
  Shocks in a Heterogeneous Production Economy," 2019. Forthcoming, Journal of Monetary
  Economics.
Pesaran, M.Hashem and Ron Smith, "Estimating long-run relationships from dynamic heteroge-
  neous panels," Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68 (1), 79 ­ 113.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, "Financial dependence and growth," American Economic
 Review, June 1998, 88 (3), 559­586.
Rey, H´
      el`
        ene, "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Indepen-
  dence," 2013. Jackson Hole Conference Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Richmond, Robert J., "Trade Network Centrality and Currency Risk Premia," Journal of Finance,
  2019, 74 (3), 1315­1361.
Rubbo, Elisa, "Networks, Phillips Curves, and Monetary Policy," June 2020. Mimeo, Harvard
 University.
Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, "An
  Illustrated User Guide to the World Input­Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive
  Production," Review of International Economics, August 2015, 23 (3), 575­605.


                                               40
Wei, Shang-Jin and Yinxi Xie, "Monetary Policy in an Era of Global Supply Chains," Journal of
 International Economics, 2020, 124, 103299. NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics
 2019.
Wongswan, Jon, "Transmission of Information across International Equity Markets," The Review
 of Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (4), 1157­1189.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, 1 ed., Prince-
 ton: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia, "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy
 at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, March-April 2016, 48 (2-3),
 253­91.



Appendix A            Theoretical Framework

In this section we provide a model to illustrate the conceptual framework for studying the trans-
mission of U.S. monetary policy shocks to stock returns internationally via production linkages.
The core model is based on the static closed-economy model of sectoral linkages of Acemoglu et al.
(2012). In addition, we incorporate three features in order to study the impact of monetary policy
shocks on stock returns, as in Ozdagli and Weber (2020): (i) firms produce with decreasing returns
to scale and face fixed costs of production, (ii) wages are preset and do not adjust given monetary
shocks, and (iii) consumers have cash-in-advance constraints.
   We take the technology and trade structure as fixed since we are studying the short run.
We make two further assumptions to solve the model analytically. First, we assume that trade
is balanced across countries. Second, we assume that prices in a given sector are equal across
countries ­ i.e., the law of one price holds. See Devereux et al. (2020) who study the cross-country
propagation of fiscal shocks in a similar setup.
   The world is comprised of N countries and J sectors. Countries are denoted by m and n, and
sectors by i and j . The notation follows the convention that for trade between any two country-
sectors, the first two subscripts always denote exporting (source) country-sector, and the second
subscript the importing (destination) country-sector.

A.1    Model Setup

Households.     There is a representative household in each country n, which consumes a bundle
of goods across all sectors i produced across countries m, and supplies labor in country n, ln . Its
maximization problem is
                                              J   N
                                  max                   bmi,n log cmi,n - ln
                                {cmi,n },ln
                                              i=1 m=1
                                                      s.t.



                                                        41
                                        J        N
                                                     pmi,n cmi,n = wn ln + n + fn ,
                                       i=1 m=1

                                                                                      J     N
where bmi,n is a preference parameter for which we assume                             i=1   m=1 bmi,n   = 1. Besides wage
income, the domestic household's income includes aggregate profits, n and aggregate fixed costs,
fn , which firms must pay to produce. Note that in writing the budget constraint we assume
balanced trade. Note that aggregate labor supply, profits, and fixed costs are additive across
                   J                        J                        J
sectors: ln =      j =1 lnj ,   n =         j =1 nj ,     fn =       j =1 fnj .   Maximization yields the standard first-
order conditions, and the consumption-labor trade off: bmi,n wn = pmi,n cmi,n  mi, n.


Technology.       There are j = 1, . . . , J sectors in each country n = 1, . . . , N . Firms in country-
sector nj have the following Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                                                     nj   nj
                                                         ynj = znj lnj  Xnj  ,                                      (A.1)

where znj is a Hicks-neutral technology term, lnj is labor, Xnj is a composite intermediate good,
and nj + nj < 1 implying decreasing returns to scale. Given our focus on monetary policy shocks,
we simplify notation by assuming that znj = 1  nj .
    The composite intermediate good is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of intermediate goods sourced
both domestically and abroad from all sectors. Specifically:
                                                                J    N
                                                                           mi,nj
                                                     Xnj =               xmi,nj  ,                                  (A.2)
                                                               i=1 m=1

where xmi,nj is the amount of sector i's good produced in country m used by country-sector nj
in final production, and mi,nj is the associated input-output coefficient for country-sector nj
usage of the intermediate good from country-sector mi in the aggregate intermediate good, where
  J      N
  i=1    m=1 mi,nj     = 1.39
    Given a competitive market structure with wages preset and prices taken as given by each firm,
profit maximization for country-sector nj is
                                             J       N
                  max           pnj ynj -                 pmi,n xmi,nj - wn lnj - fnj       s.t. (A.1), (A.2),
               lnj ,{xmi,nj }
                                            i=1 m=1

where pnj is the price of the good produced by sector j in country n, {pmi,n } is a vector of prices
of goods sold in country n, wn is the wage in country n, and fnj is a fixed cost of production.40 We
do not model these costs but they may include access to credit or bureaucratic costs, for example.
  39
     We have also solved the model assuming a CES production structure in labor and the aggregate intermediate
good, as well as as CES aggregator underlying intermediate goods. The main results needed to motivate the empirical
approach setup do not change qualitatively. The model solution is available upon request.
  40
     These fixed costs are needed given pre-set wages in order to satisfy the firm-entry condition in steady state.



                                                                    42
Further, we do not differentiate between fixed costs of production and fixed costs of accessing
foreign markets, as is common in the international trade literature.
   Solving the firm's maximization problem we can write profits as

                                       nj = (1 - nj - nj )Rnj - fnj ,                                                  (A.3)

where total revenue Rnj = pnj ynj .


Goods Market Clearing. Global goods market clearing condition for any good mi is given by
                                                N                 J      N
                                       ymi =          cmi,n +                    xmi,nj ,                              (A.4)
                                                n=1              j =1 n=1

where the first term capture final consumption of good mi across n destination countries, and the
second term captures intermediate consumption across nj country-sector destinations. To simplify
                                                                                                        bmi,n
the market clearing condition we first use the household first-order condition,                         cmi,n   = pmi,n ( is
the Lagrange multiplier), and its budget constraint to express consumption as
                                                            J
                                                bmi,n       j =1 (1   - nj )pnj ynj
                                      cmi,n =                                               .                          (A.5)
                                                                 pmi,n
Combining this term and the firm's first-order condition, nj mi,nj Rnj = pmi,n xmi,nj , the market
clearing condition is
                                 J    N                                   J        N
                                           bmi,n (1 - nj )Rnj                          nj mi,nj Rnj
                        ymi =                                 +                                     .                  (A.6)
                                                   pmi,n                                  pmi,n
                                j =1 n=1                                 j =1 n=1

   Next, multiplying (A.6) by pmi , and assuming that the law of one price holds at the cross-sector
level we express revenues in country-sector mi as:
                                  J    N                                     J     N
                        Rmi =              bmi,n (1 - nj )Rnj +                        nj mi,nj Rnj .                  (A.7)
                                j =1 n=1                                 j =1 n=1

   The above equation characterizes a recursive relationship between sectors' revenues across coun-
tries, as well as the the role of different parameters in the model. Note that we are implicitly as-
suming that these revenues are denominated in a common currency. While we do not incorporate
the exchange rate explicitly in this framework, we address this issue in our regression analysis.
   Stacking (A.7) across country-sectors leads to a matrix formulation of the global system of
country-sector revenues:
                                                        J    N
                                 (I - )R =                       bmi,n (1 - nj )Rnj ,                                  (A.8)
                                                      j =1 n=1

where

                  R  (R11 , . . . , RN J ) ,                                                    N J × 1,

                                                            43
                       diag ({nj }) ,                                                   N J × N J,
                                                          
                          11,11 . . .          11,N J
                             .
                             .     ..            .
                                                 .                                      N J × N J,
                                                       ,
                                                       
                             .        .          .
                               N J,11    . . . N J,N J

where  represents the Hadamard product, and  is the global input-output matrix, where each
element of the matrix, mi,nj , is the associated input-output coefficient for country-sector nj usage
of the intermediate good from country-sector mi in nj 's aggregate output.


Money Supply.          We introduce money by assuming that consumers face a cash-in-advance con-
straint as in Ozdagli and Weber (2020); they justify this approach by assuming that firms enter
into trade credit relationships, and thus there is no such constraint in the trade of intermediate
goods.41 Specifically, for a given economy n total final consumption is given by
                         J    N                      J   N             J
                                  pmi,n cmi,n =               bmi,n          (1 - nj )Rnj = Mn ,
                        i=1 m=1                     i=1 m=1           j =1

where Mn is the domestic money supply in country n and we again see the result of our assumption
                                          J         N
of balanced trade. Recalling that         i=1       m=1 bmi,n     = 1, we re-write the cash-in-advance constraints
for country n as
                                                J
                                                    (1 - nj )Rnj = Mn .                                         (A.9)
                                             j =1

Next, substitute (A.9) into (A.8) to arrive at

                                                (I - )R = bM,                                                  (A.10)

where b is a N J × N matrix composed of elements {bmi,n }, and M  (M1 , . . . , MN ) .

A.2       Network Effects of Money Shocks on Global Stock Returns

To determine the impact of money shocks on global stock returns we will examine deviations of
firm profits around their deterministic steady state and only consider a shock to the money supply
of one country n (the U.S.).42
       In particular, for any variable x, define the log deviation from steady-state x = log(x) - log(¯
                                                                                                      x)
            ¯ exp(x)  x
so that x = x         ¯(1 + x), where x
                                      ¯ is the steady-state value of x. Further define  to be a
N J × 1 vector composed of elements {mi },  to be a N J × 1 vector composed of elements {mi },
  41
     This assumption may be more tenuous in the open-economy context given potential frictions in international
trade credit. Given the differences in these frictions across sectors and countries, they can be incorporated in the
model by simply assuming iceberg trade costs (Antr`     as and Foley, 2015; Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr, 2017;
Caballero et al., 2018). The remaining part contributes to heterogeneity across countries and sectors in our regression
analysis.
  42
     In equating stock returns with changes in profits, we apply the efficient market hypothesis.


                                                             44
 to be a N J × 1 vector composed of elements {mi }, and f to be a N J × 1 vector composed of
elements {fmi }. Stacking country-sector profits in (A.3):

                                       = (1 -  - )  R - f .                                    (A.11)

   Log-linearizing (A.11) and using (A.10), we arrive at

                                        = (I - )-1  M,                                         (A.12)
                                                    ¯n
                                             (1-nj )M
where  is a N J × N matrix of elements          ¯nj    bmi,n    .
   Allowing for shocks only to the U.S. monetary supply, write (A.12) as

                                     = (I - )-1  U S MU S ,                                    (A.13)
                                                         ¯ US
                                               (1-U S j )M
where  U S is a N J × 1 matrix of elements        ¯U S j      bmi,U S   .


Appendix B            Linking sector classifications

TREIs data are available under Thomson Reuters Business Classification(TRBC), but the World
Input-Output Tables (WIOT) have been constructed under ISIC Revision 4.
   We take advantage of the fact that TREI reports both 10-digit TRBC activity codes and 6-digit
NAICS 2007 codes for all equity prices. With this information one can use a concordance from
NAICS 2007 to ISIC Rev. 4 to match each firm's information to WIOT codes. In the next step,
one can use the firm-level information from TREI data to construct alternative sector-specific stock
price indices that are consistent with WIOT sector definitions.
   However, a mapping from NAICS2007 to WIOT16 codes (2-digit ISIC Rev 4) is not perfect,
as there can be many-to-many correspondences between NAICS 2007 and ISIC Rev. 4 codes. The
following figure shows an example of a possible `rear' overlapping of NAICS2007 sectors (3-digit
code) in a WIOT2016 code.




   In this example, the WIOT2016 Code B (Mining and quarrying) besides mining and oil sectors,
it also contains the NAICS2007-Food Manufacturing sector. This occurs because the NAICS2007
sector "311942-Spice and Extract Manufacturing" from the Food Manufacturing includes the "min-
ing and processing of table salt" activity, that is classified as a Mining activity in ISIC Rev. 4.




                                                  45
B.1    A reduced version of the NAICS 2007 to ISIC Rev. 4 correspondence

To limit similar occurrences as in the one in the previous example, a new version of the NAICS
2007 to ISIC Rev. 4 correspondence is constructed. The objective is to reduce the number of very
different 4-digit ISIC Rev. 4 sectors per each 6-digit NAICS 2007 sector. With that in mind, the
next steps were followed:

  1. Work only on the set of 6-digit NAICS 2007 codes that (i) have more than one 2-digit ISIC
      Rev. 4 sector, and/or (ii) have more than one WIOT16 sector .

  2. For a single 6-digit NAICS 2007 code, compute the frequency of its corresponding multiple
      4-digit ISIC Rev. 4 sectors. When possible, the following principles were taken into con-
      sideration to assign one single NAICS 2007 code to a single 2-digit sector, the predominant
      sector.

  3. Frequency criteria: If a 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 sector represents more than 60 percent of the
      6-digit NAICS 2007 sector in consideration, it is the called the predominant sector.

   Example: The following example shows the corresponding multiple ISIC Rev. 4 codes for the
single 6-digit NAICS 2007 sector "Paper (except Newsprint) Mill":




   The frequency of the 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 sector "17-Manufacture of paper and paper products" is
75 percent and it is the predominant sector. The other 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 sector, "23- Manufacture
of other non-metallic mineral products", is not predominant and its deleted from the concordance.
Note that for this sector its 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 meaning is very different from the 3-digit NAICS
2007 meaning too ("322-Paper Manufacturing").
   Closest sector criteria: When the frequency criteria is not sufficient, the predominant sector is
chosen by a comparison of meanings between the single 6-digit NAICS 2007 code and its corre-
sponding 4-digit ISIC Rev. 4 codes. Then, the ISIC Rev. 4 sector with the closest meaning to the
NAICS 2007 sector is selected as the predominant sector. The meaning of aggregate codes (3-digit
NAICS 2007 and 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4) helped also to decide, when the comparison of 6-digit NAICS
and 4-digits ISIC Rev. 4 meanings were not clear enough to reach a decision.
   Example: The following example shows the corresponding multiple 4-digit ISIC Rev. 4 codes
for the single 6-digit NAICS 2007 sector "Carbon and Graphite Product Manufacturing"



                                                46
   Although by frequency the two 4-digit (and 2-digit) ISIC Rev. 4 sectors are equally represen-
tative for this NAICS 2007 code, their sector meanings are different. In fact, the 6-digit NAICS
2007 "335991-Carbon and Graphite Product Manufacturing" is closest to the 4-digit ISIC Rev. 4
"2399-Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products n.e.c." than to the 4-digit ISIC Rev.
4 "2790-Manufacture of other electrical equipment" sector. Then, the 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 "27-
Manufacture of electrical equipment" is denominated the predominant sector.
   There was only one exception, NAICS 2007 "337920-Blind and Shade Manufacturing". As it
can be observed below, none of the previous criteria worked; and it was hard coded arbitrarily
based on its 3-digit NAICS 2007 meaning, "Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing", to the
2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 "3100-Manufacture of furniture" sector.




   Once this new NAICS 2007 to ISIC Rev. 4 concordance was finished, it was easy to go from
NAICS 2007 to WIOT16. In the final NAICS 2007-WIOT16 concordance:

   · 1020 correspondences were tagged based on the official NAICS 2007-ISIC Rev. 4 concordance.

   · 37 correspondences were tagged based on the frequency criteria.

   · 122 correspondences were tagged based on the closest sector criteria.

   · 1 correspondence was arbitrarily hard coded.

                                               47
   Table A1 presents cross-country sector coverage of monthly returns for the months where there
are monetary surprise shocks over 2000­14. Given cross-country differences in size, industrial
specialization patterns, and stock market depth we see that larger countries (e.g., the United States)
have a larger coverage of sectors, while some countries only cover a few sectors (e.g., Portugal and
Russia). These differences motivate a flexible empirical approach, where we allow for country-sector
fixed effects as well as country-sector specific coefficients for the effect of monetary policy surprise
variable.
   Table A2 presents coverage of of monthly returns for the months where there are monetary
surprise shocks along the sector dimension. This table shows how the distribution of sector returns
varies across countries. For example, all countries have returns for the `Construction,' `Telecommu-
nication,' and `Financial service activities, except insurance and pension funding' sectors. Mean-
while, sectors like `Forestry and logging,' `Fishing and aquaculture,' and `Repair and installation
of machinery and equipment' have sparse stock returns coverage across countries.




                                                  48
Table A1. Monthly Country Stock Return Coverage for Months with Monetary Surprise Shocks

This table presents information on the number of sectors and observation of monthly sector returns per country for
dates where there are monetary surprise shocks (FOMC meetings or off-cycle meetings) over 2000­16. The data are
constructed by merging stock returns data from TREI with the WIOD classification of sectors.




                            Country               No. Industries      Observations

                            Australia                    38               5,893
                            Austria                      15               2,477
                            Brazil                       17               3,781
                            Canada                       38               5,803
                            China                        47               6,735
                            Germany                      28               4,841
                            Denmark                      17               2,525
                            Spain                        24               3,783
                            Finland                      22               3,410
                            France                       38               5,542
                            United Kingdom               40               5,954
                            Greece                       10               1,943
                            Indonesia                    18               3,220
                            India                        40               5,690
                            Italy                        22               4,370
                            Japan                        45               6,706
                            Korea                        34               6,108
                            Mexico                       14               2,401
                            Netherlands                  20               2,895
                            Poland                       17               3,266
                            Portugal                      8               1,209
                            Russia                        5               1,419
                            Sweden                       29               4,584
                            Turkey                       21               3,887
                            Taiwan                       29               4,675
                            United States                50               6,982




                                                       49
 Table A2. Monthly Sector Stock Return Coverage for Months with Monetary Surprise Shocks

This table presents information on the number of sectors and observation of monthly sector returns per sector for
dates where there are monetary surprise shocks (FOMC meetings or off-cycle meetings) over 2000­16. The data are
constructed by merging stock returns data from TREI with the WIOD classification of sectors.



     Industry                                                                         WIOD code   No. countries   Observations

     Crop and animal production, hunting and related service activities               A01              13            1,614
     Forestry and logging                                                             A02               3             348
     Fishing and aquaculture                                                          A03               6             626
     Mining and quarrying                                                             B                19            2,593
     Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco products                     C10-C12          23            3,174
     Manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel and leather products                    C13-C15          16            2,167
     Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, etc                        C16              10            1,196
     Manufacture of paper and paper products                                          C17              19            2,504
     Printing and reproduction of recorded media                                      C18               8            1,034
     Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products                               C19              20            2,623
     Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products                                   C20              25            3,251
     Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations     C21              20            2,513
     Manufacture of rubber and plastic products                                       C22              18            2,370
     Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products                               C23              18            2,488
     Manufacture of basic metals                                                      C24              24            3,129
     Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment         C25              14            1,724
     Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products                         C26              22            3,036
     Manufacture of electrical equipment                                              C27              16            2,044
     Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.                                    C28              19            2,519
     Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                        C29              20            2,708
     Manufacture of other transport equipment                                         C30              17            2,181
     Manufacture of furniture; other manufacturing                                    C31-C32          17            2,219
     Repair and installation of machinery and equipment                               C33               1              84
     Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply                              D35              22            2,874
     Water collection, treatment and supply                                           E36               6             740
     Sewerage; waste collection, treatment and disposal activities; etc               E37-E39           9            1,111
     Construction                                                                     F                26            3,526
     Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles          G45              12            1,522
     Wholesale trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles                        G46              19            2,537
     Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles                           G47              24            3,136
     Land transport and transport via pipelines                                       H49              17            1,957
     Water transport                                                                  H50               9            1,138
     Air transport                                                                    H51              19            2,318
     Warehousing and support activities for transportation                            H52              19            2,245
     Postal and courier activities                                                    H53               8             796
     Accommodation and food service activities                                        I                19            2,483
     Publishing activities                                                            J58              18            2,358
     Motion picture, video and television programme production, etc                   J59-J60          16            2,104
     Telecommunications                                                               J61              26            3,563
     Computer programming, consultancy and related activities; info; etc              J62-J63          21            2,794
     Financial service activities, except insurance and pension funding               K64              26            3,508
     Insurance, reinsurance and pension funding, except compulsory social security    K65              21            2,613
     Activities auxiliary to financial services and insurance activities              K66              22            2,491
     Real estate activities                                                           L68              23            2,930
     Legal and accounting activities; activities of head offices; etc                 M69-M70          10            1,036
     Architectural and engineering activities; technical testing and analysis         M71              16            2,004
     Scientific research and development                                              M72              13            1,575
     Advertising and market research                                                  M73              10            1,182
     Other professional, scientific and technical activities; veterinary activities   M74-M75           7             848
     Administrative and support service activities                                    N                18            2,248
     Education                                                                        P85               7             831
     Human health and social work activities                                          Q                13            1,445
     Other service activities                                                         R-S              17            2,037




                                                                50
Appendix C               Full Regression Tables and Additional Charts

Here we report additional information about our baseline estimation as well as tables will full
estimation results for all the tables in the paper.


                     Figure A1. Distributions of  and  across Country-Sectors

This figure plots the distribution of  and  across mi from the estimation of equation Equation (13) for 2000­07,
            nski and Karadi (2020) monetary policy shocks for MU S . The averages of these distributions are reported
using Jaroci´
in Table 3.




                          (a) mi                                                  (b) mi




                                                         51
    Table A3. Homogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Baseline Specification

This table reports results from heterogeneous coefficient spatial panel autoregressions where the dependent variable is
the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over 2000­07 over months with FOMC announcements,
and the independent variable is the measure of the monetary policy shock taken from Jaroci´    nski and Karadi (2020).
There are 44,286 total observations comprised of 671 country-sectors over 66 months. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are obtained via wild bootstrap with 500 repetitions. All coefficients are significant at the 1% confidence level.


                 q t =  + (I -  W)-1  MU S,t + t

                                                   Panel A. Coefficient Estimates

                                         Average               Average             Observations

                 No Fixed effects           -2.049               0.656                 44,286
                                           (0.465)              (0.066)
                 Fixed effects              -1.183               0.568                 44,286
                                           (0.237)              (0.030)

                                               Panel B. Total Effect Decomposition

                                        Avg. Direct       Avg. Network          Network/Total

                 Decomposition 1 (AAK16)

                 No Fixed effects    -2.049                      -3.906                0.656
                                    (0.465)                     (0.400)               (0.002)
                 Fixed effects       -1.183                      -1.556                0.568
                                    (0.237)                     (0.182)               (0.002)
                 Decomposition 2 (LP09)

                 No Fixed effects           -2.649               -3.306                0.555
                                           (0.353)              (0.273)               (0.004)
                 Fixed effects              -1.454               -1.285                0.469
                                           (0.225)              (0.153)               (0.003)




                                                          52
Table A4. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Varying Sample Period and
Weighting Matrix

This table presents full regression results for the regressions reported in Table 4. See notes to Table 4.


          q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                                        Avg.      Avg.      Avg. Direct    Avg. Network     Network/Total
                                         (1)       (2)          (3)             (4)              (5)

                                                                  Panel A. Full Sample

          2000-2007, avg. W              -0.885    0.631          -0.885        -1.783            0.668
                                        (0.096)   (0.024)        (0.272)       (0.313)           (0.056)
          2000-2016, 2000 W              -0.554    0.719          -0.554        -1.644            0.748
                                        (0.067)   (0.013)        (0.251)       (0.274)           (0.056)
          2000-2016, avg. W              -0.500    0.728          -0.500        -1.628            0.765
                                        (0.055)   (0.015)        (0.242)       (0.260)           (0.050)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2008     -0.795    0.712          -0.795        -2.069            0.723
                                        (0.085)   (0.016)        (0.297)       (0.324)           (0.051)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2008     -0.713    0.722          -0.713        -2.102            0.747
                                        (0.093)   (0.015)        (0.304)       (0.335)           (0.052)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2009     -0.658    0.696          -0.658        -1.902            0.743
                                        (0.065)   (0.013)        (0.225)       (0.246)           (0.044)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2009     -0.603    0.706          -0.603        -1.902            0.759
                                        (0.068)   (0.023)        (0.293)       (0.315)           (0.062)

                                                            Panel B. International Sample

          2000-2007, avg. W              -0.815    0.634          -0.815        -1.725            0.679
                                        (0.103)   (0.025)        (0.103)       (0.318)           (0.060)
          2000-2016, 2000 W              -0.519    0.725          -0.519        -1.624            0.758
                                        (0.073)   (0.014)        (0.073)       (0.280)           (0.059)
          2000-2016, avg. W              -0.472    0.734          -0.472        -1.593            0.772
                                        (0.060)   (0.015)        (0.060)       (0.265)           (0.054)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2008     -0.736    0.719          -0.736        -2.033            0.734
                                        (0.091)   (0.017)        (0.091)       (0.329)           (0.054)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2008     -0.661    0.729          -0.661        -2.050            0.756
                                        (0.100)   (0.015)        (0.100)       (0.338)           (0.055)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2009     -0.633    0.700          -0.633        -1.879            0.748
                                        (0.070)   (0.014)        (0.070)       (0.247)           (0.046)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2009     -0.584    0.709          -0.584        -1.865            0.762
                                        (0.071)   (0.023)        (0.072)       (0.313)           (0.064)

                                                                  Panel C. USA Sample

          2000-2007, avg. W              -1.744    0.603          -1.744        -2.489            0.588
                                        (0.277)   (0.046)        (0.277)       (0.491)           (0.068)
          2000-2016, 2000 W              -0.972    0.639          -0.972        -1.893            0.661
                                        (0.080)   (0.013)        (0.080)       (0.222)           (0.034)
          2000-2016, avg. W              -0.852    0.655          -0.852        -2.061            0.707
                                        (0.078)   (0.013)        (0.078)       (0.234)           (0.032)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2008     -1.504    0.624          -1.504        -2.509            0.625
                                        (0.135)   (0.020)        (0.136)       (0.299)           (0.041)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2008     -1.348    0.640          -1.348        -2.730            0.670
                                        (0.128)   (0.019)        (0.129)       (0.336)           (0.043)
          2000-2016, 2000 W, no 2009     -0.961    0.655          -0.961        -2.174            0.693
                                        (0.163)   (0.034)        (0.164)       (0.324)           (0.059)
          2000-2016, avg. W, no 2009     -0.838    0.673          -0.838        -2.350            0.737
                                        (0.175)   (0.035)   53   (0.176)       (0.431)           (0.073)
Table A5. Heterogeneous Spatial Autoregression Panel Estimation: Robustness to Returns and
Shock Measures

This table presents full regression results for the regressions reported in Table 5. See notes to Table 5.



   q t =  + (I - diag() W)-1  MU S,t + t

                                        Avg.      Avg.       Avg. Direct      Avg. Network        Network/Total
                                         (1)       (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)

                                                                  Panel A. Full Sample

   Excess returns                        -0.467    0.824        -0.467          -1.859                  0.799
                                        (0.106)   (0.013)      (0.486)         (0.532)                 (0.107)
   Domestic currency returns             -1.018    0.595        -1.018          -2.147                  0.678
                                        (0.112)   (0.043)      (0.365)         (0.408)                 (0.060)
   Real domestic currency returns        -0.926    0.605        -0.926          -1.841                  0.665
                                        (0.103)   (0.065)      (0.383)         (0.428)                 (0.084)
   USD returns, OW shock                 -1.053    0.635        -1.053          -2.070                  0.663
                                        (0.073)   (0.033)      (0.252)         (0.282)                 (0.050)
   USD returns, NS shock                 -1.446    0.634        -1.446          -2.963                  0.672
                                        (0.116)   (0.036)      (0.452)         (0.507)                 (0.060)
   USD returns, BRW shock                -0.845    0.633        -0.845          -1.319                  0.609
                                        (0.122)   (0.036)      (0.343)         (0.380)                 (0.102)
                                                             Panel B. International Sample

   Excess returns                        -0.418    0.823        -0.418          -1.815                  0.813
                                        (0.117)   (0.014)      (0.117)         (0.540)                 (0.119)
   Domestic currency returns             -0.970    0.594        -0.970          -2.100                  0.684
                                        (0.113)   (0.044)      (0.113)         (0.408)                 (0.062)
   Real domestic currency returns        -0.853    0.602        -0.853          -1.776                  0.675
                                        (0.098)   (0.066)      (0.098)         (0.419)                 (0.087)
   USD returns, OW shock                 -1.033    0.639        -1.033          -2.077                  0.668
                                        (0.076)   (0.034)      (0.076)         (0.287)                 (0.052)
   USD returns, NS shock                 -1.405    0.638        -1.405          -2.954                  0.678
                                        (0.125)   (0.037)      (0.125)         (0.516)                 (0.063)
   USD returns, BRW shock                -0.864    0.636        -0.864          -1.331                  0.606
                                        (0.131)   (0.037)      (0.131)         (0.387)                 (0.104)
                                                             Panel C. United States Sample

   Excess returns                        -1.064    0.834          -1.064            -2.403              0.693
                                        (0.111)   (0.008)        (0.111)           (0.463)             (0.046)
   Domestic currency returns             -1.603    0.603          -1.603            -2.723              0.629
                                        (0.255)   (0.048)        (0.255)           (0.540)             (0.074)
   Real domestic currency returns        -1.772    0.634          -1.772            -2.591              0.594
                                        (0.296)   (0.067)        (0.296)           (0.614)             (0.082)
   USD returns, OW shock                 -1.290    0.581          -1.290            -1.984              0.606
                                        (0.275)   (0.043)        (0.275)           (0.400)             (0.103)
   USD returns, NS shock                 -1.950    0.587          -1.950            -3.073              0.612
                                        (0.292)   (0.037)        (0.292)           (0.564)             (0.074)
   USD returns, BRW shock                -0.620    0.593          -0.620            -1.179              0.655
                                        (0.177)   (0.044)        (0.177)           (0.371)             (0.122)
                                                            54
Table A6. Least-squares Regression Estimation: Controlling for Foreign Monetary Policy Shocks

This table reports the least-squares regression including foreign monetary shocks, where the dependent variable is the
annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over 2000­07 over month with FOMC announcements, and
the independent variables are measures of the monetary policy shocks. There are 44,286 total observations comprised
of 671 country-sectors over 66 months. Robust clustered standard errors are in parenthesis. Country-sector fixed
effects are included in all regression. The effect of the U.S. monetary polich shock (Fed shock) is significant at (at
least) 10% confidence level in all regression.


                                            LS M                        LS
                               qmi,t = mi + M P  U S,t + Xt             X    + mi,t

                                                  (1)           (2)      (4)

                                                     Panel A. Full sample

                               Fed shock         -2.738     -2.741      -2.731
                                                (1.320)    (1.299)     (1.305)
                               ECB shock         -0.055                 -0.756
                                                (1.430)                (1.537)
                               BOE shock                    -0.691      -0.225
                                                           (1.518)     (1.460)

                               R2                0.060         0.060   0.060

                                    Panel B. International sample

                               Fed shock         -2.623     -2.625      -2.616
                                                (1.396)    (1.374)     (1.380)
                               ECB shock         -0.030                 -0.826
                                                (1.472)                (1.592)
                               BOE shock                    -0.763      -0.215
                                                           (1.570)     (1.505)

                               R2                0.060         0.060   0.060

                                                Panel C. United States sample

                               Fed shock         -4.290     -4.307      -4.292
                                                (0.728)    (0.720)     (0.733)
                               ECB shock         -0.396                  0.222
                                                (1.136)                (1.031)
                               BOE shock                    0.325       -0.347
                                                           (1.030)     (1.148)

                               R2                0.060         0.060   0.060




                                                          55
             Table A7. Exploring heterogeneity of estimated direct and network effects

This table reports the least-squares regression of the estimated direct and network effect estimates obtained from the
baseline regression equation reported in Table 3, using Acemoglu et al. (2016) decomposition. The unit of observation
is country-sector cell, with 25 countries, 52 industries, 615 observations in all regressions. Final goods exports to the
U.S. are computed using WIOD data and are expressed as a percent of total output of a given country-sector sell that
is imported by the U.S. as final goods. Financial dependence is from Cat~    ao et al. (2009), an extension to Rajan and
Zingales (1998), trade credit dependence is from Fisman and Love (2003), financial openness is computed as a ratio of
the sum of total external assets and total external liabilities to GDP. External assets and liabilities as well as GDP are
from External Wealth of Nations Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), current account (CA) is from IMF's International
Financial Statistics. External assets and liabilities, GDP, and CA are averaged across 2000-2007. Standard errors
double-clustered on country and sector are in parentheses, and none of the coefficients are statistically significant at
the 5% confidence level.



                                                   Direct effect                      Network effect
                                            Directmi =  + Xmi  + mi             Networkmi =  + Xmi  + mi
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)             (4)     (5)         (6)

     Final goods exports to the U.S.          -3.04       -3.15      14.65         7.37      5.11          8.03
                                             (8.36)      (7.26)     (15.20)      (4.21)     (4.41)        (8.02)
     Financial Dependence                     0.213      0.283                    0.300     0.372
                                            (0.644)     (0.660)                 (0.200)    (0.268)
     Trade Credit Dependence                  2.214      3.895                    1.291     3.391
                                            (6.145)     (6.224)                 (3.529)    (3.336)
     Log(GDP)                                 0.374                   0.289       0.383                    0.351
                                            (0.216)                 (0.258)     (0.416)                  (0.386)
     Financial Openness                      -0.134                  -0.123      -0.290                   -0.287
                                            (0.121)                 (0.134)     (0.139)                  (0.139)
     CA deficit /GDP                         -0.263                   -0.74      -7.765                   -8.086
                                            (2.814)                 (3.144)     (5.818)                  (5.659)

     Fixed effects                           none      country       sector      none      country        sector
     Adjusted R2                             0.00        0.02         0.05       0.08        0.55          0.09
     Within R2                                          0.002         0.01                   0.01          0.09




                                                           56
Table A8. First-Stage Residual Regression Estimation: Controlling for Global Financial Variables

This table reports the least-squares regression of the annualized U.S. dollar country-sector monthly stock return over
2000­07 over monthd with FOMC announcements on log changes in VIX and the broad U.S. dollar index (USD), and
changes in the 2-year U.S. Treasury rate (T2y). Standard errors are in parentheses and all coefficients are statistically
significant at the 1% confidence level.


                    q t =  + 1  ln VIXt + 2  ln USDt + 3 T2yt + t

                                         OLS                        RC                       MG
                                         (1)                        (2)                      (3)

                     lnVIX              -0.057                    -0.052                    -0.057
                                       (0.019)                   (0.004)                   (0.003)
                    T2y                 0.037                      0.065                     0.035
                                       (0.395)                   (0.079)                   (0.064)
                     lnUSD              -2.404                    -2.376                    -2.389
                                       (0.599)                   (0.142)                   (0.116)
                    Constant             1.087                     0.983                     1.105
                                       (0.078)                   (0.030)                   (0.028)

                    Observations        49,667                    49,641                   49,641
                    Adjusted R2          0.023
                    Wald 2                                        542.03                   881.78




                                                           57
