                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HETEROGENEOUS GLOBAL BOOMS AND BUSTS

                                       Maryam Farboodi
                                        Péter Kondor

                                      Working Paper 28834
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28834


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We are grateful to Rebekah Dix for research assistance, and to Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Bo
Becker, Fernando Bronner, Markus Brunnermeier, Ricardo Caballero, Willie Fuchs, Mikhail
Golosov, Lars Hansen, Benjamin Hebert, Gregor Jarosch, Arvind Krishnamurthy, John Moore,
Helen Rey; seminar participants at LSE, LBS, Princeton; and participants at the FTG, ESSFM,
SITE Stanford, STELAR and SED workshops for helpful comments. Peter Kondor acknowledges
financial support from the European Research Council (Starting Grant #336585). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Maryam Farboodi and Péter Kondor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Global Booms and Busts
Maryam Farboodi and Péter Kondor
NBER Working Paper No. 28834
May 2021
JEL No. F4,F44,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the heterogeneous boom and bust patterns across countries that emerge as a result
of global shocks. Our analysis sheds light on the emergence of core and periphery countries, and
the joint determination of the depth of recessions and tightness of credit markets across countries.
The model implies that interest rates are similar across core and periphery countries in booms,
with larger credit and output growth in periphery countries. However, a common global shock
that leads to a credit crunch across the globe gives rise to a sharper spike in interest rates and a
deeper recession in periphery countries, while a credit flight to the core alleviates the adverse
consequences in these countries. We explore the implication of the model about credit spreads,
portfolio rebalancing, investment, non-performing debt and concentration of debt ownership
during booms and busts, both in the time series and in the cross-section, and connect them to
existing stylized facts. We further demonstrate how the anatomy of the global economy evolves
as a result of aggregate demand and supply shocks to financing, such as a global saving glut.


Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com

Péter Kondor
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE
Houghton Street
London
UK
p.kondor@lse.ac.uk
1       Introduction
For decades before 2008, boom-bust patterns had been associated almost exclusively with
emerging markets. The pattern -- a boom phase started by poorly regulated financial
liberalization leading to a surge in foreign capital, large credit flows to the non-financial
sector, build-up of debt at low interest rates, and rapidly increasing investment abruptly
turning to a bust phase where interest rates spike and credit flies to safety, triggering a
collapse in output -- has been connected to a large catalog of structural weaknesses in Latin
American, East Asian, and Eastern European economies.
     However, the global financial crisis in 2008 and especially the Eurozone crisis in 2010 have
dramatically exposed similar vulnerabilities in a group of advanced economies. This has in
turn led to a shift in focus on the role of increasingly globalized financial intermediation and
the implied changes in global capital supply.1
     In this paper, we explore how the frictions in global supply of capital determine heteroge-
neous boom-bust cycles across the world. This analysis enables us to explain the emergence
of core and periphery countries and to jointly determine the depth of recessions and tightness
of credit markets across countries. Our model implies that interest rates are similar across
core and periphery countries in booms, with larger credit and output growth in periphery
countries. However, a common global shock that leads to a credit crunch across the globe
gives rise to a sharper spike in interest rates and a deeper recession in periphery countries,
while a credit flight to the core alleviates the adverse consequences in these countries. We
derive further testable implications for portfolio rebalancing, investment, non-performing
debt and concentration of debt ownership, both in the time series and in the cross-section.
Finally, our model illustrates how the configuration of the global economy evolves as a result
of aggregate demand and supply shocks to financing.
     In our framework firms across countries compete for credit from international investors
who cannot perfectly evaluate creditworthiness of firms. Firms in countries where investors
have less trouble recognizing the creditworthy firms choose more stable investment levels,
which in turn leads to less volatility in the credit market and an attenuated boom-bust cycle.
In contrast, in countries where investors have a harder time identifying the creditworthiness
of firms, firms choose a riskier strategy which exacerbates both the boom and the bust by
tightening the credit market.
     Our main observation is that the heterogeneity among boom-bust cycles arises as a
    1
     For instance, see Caballero et al. (2017) and citations therein on the role of global scarcity of safe assets,
Caballero and Simsek (2016) on fickle capital flows, and Avdjiev et al. (2016) on how globalization has
pushed decisions on credit supply outside the boundaries of affected countries, which is a new phenomenon
for advanced economies.


                                                        1
consequence of the interaction between the disparity in firm credit worthiness within country
and difference in effectiveness of investor expertise across countries. In particular, investors
have different degrees of ability in identifying whether a firm is creditworthy or not, i.e. if
the firm's collateral is good or bad. Investor expertise is more important for identifying
creditworthy firms in certain countries, which we refer to as opaque countries.
    As a first step of our analysis, we explore a global productivity shock that affects the
proportion of creditworthy firms in every country symmetrically. We show how investors'
prudence, the type of information that they choose to obtain about firms, is endogenously
determined by the aggregate shock. When there are many creditworthy firms, investors are
bold: the information they obtain identifies some firms who are not creditworthy, whereas
some others are not distinguished from creditworthy ones. Thus investors can avoid missing
out on any good investment opportunities at the expense of extending loans to some bad firms
by mistake. On the contrary, with few creditworthy firms around, investors are cautious: the
information they obtain identifies every firm that is bad, i.e. not creditworthy, but it also
pools some good firms with bad ones. This implies that an investor can avoid financing any
firm that may not repay, although doing so leads them to forgo some profitable investment
opportunities. It then follows that investors lend to different firms in different countries in
different aggregate states. That is, a global productivity shock is mapped to a change in
investors' prudence leading to heterogeneous investment choices across countries. With the
microfoundation of investor prudence at hand, we then focus on the more comprehensive
consequences of a change in this prudence.
    Low-skilled investors, as a rational response to their imperfect information, heavily invest
in opaque countries during booms and rebalance away towards more transparent countries in
busts, consistent with the evidence presented in Gallagher et al. (2018).2 As a result, more
opaque countries are highly exposed to business cycles and suffer large busts, while more
transparent ones have a much lower exposure and only experience a minor decline in output.
Thus, peripheral and core countries emerge endogenously. During booms, firms in periphery
countries enjoy large credit inflows at low interest rates and high growth. However, during
busts, the firms in these countries can obtain new credit only at high rates, if at all, and
their output and credit flows collapse. Instead, international capital floods a group of more
transparent countries at low interest rates, their transparency effectively shielding them from
negative exposure to global capital fluctuations.
   2
    Gallagher et al. (2018) find that a group of money market funds stopped lending only to European
banks, and not to other banks with similar risk in 2011. Ivashina et al. (2015) find evidence that this lead to
significant disruption in the syndicated loan market. These facts are broadly consistent with our proposed
mechanism.



                                                      2
    As such, our model implies a qualitative difference in the functioning of credit markets
between booms and busts. In booms, firms borrow at the same rate in core and periphery
economies. In this state, credit quality is heterogeneous across investor portfolios, and highly
skilled investors derive excess returns by extending credit to higher quality borrowers across
all countries. In contrast, during busts there is a significant spread for borrowing between
firms in core and periphery economies. In this state lenders are cautious, which implies the
same credit quality across their portfolios. As such, highly skilled investors derive excess
returns by lending at higher rates to good but opaque firms in periphery economies. This
picture rationalizes the (sometimes puzzlingly) low premium on emerging market assets
before the East Asian and Russian Crises and assets in the south of Europe before the
Eurozone Crisis (e.g. Kamin and von Kleist, 1999; Duffie et al., 2003; Gilchrist and Mojon,
2018).
    The real investment and output in each country is determined by how firms trade off
investment and liquidity risk management, which is in turn driven by the credit market
conditions they face. This trade-off leads to risky investment decisions by firms in the
periphery: they produce at a high scale during booms (when credit is cheap), at the expense
of abandoning production in busts (when credit is expensive). Therefore, when investors
are bold, both core and periphery economies enjoy a high output. However, when investors
turn cautious, international credit markets become plagued by funding mismatch and the
high exposure countries undergo a drastic output collapse. That is, investors' heterogeneous
investment choices across countries invite differential strategies of firms, which in turn feeds
into investors' decisions, and jointly shape heterogeneous global cycles.
    Our model also suggests that most of the non-performing debt is issued in booms, in
the periphery economies, and is financed by low skilled investors. Moreover, productivity
dispersion among firms obtaining credit is larger in the periphery than in the core, consistent
with the observed increase in the misallocation of capital during the pre-crisis years in the
south of Europe (Reis, 2013; Gopinath et al., 2017).
    The model provides further, yet-to-be-tested predictions about investor portfolio compo-
sitions throughout the cycle. It implies that ownership of debt is most concentrated during
busts, especially in peripheral countries. In addition, the realized return on bonds issued in
booms is higher in the periphery than in the core, and vice-versa in busts.
    We then illustrate how the structure of the global economy evolves as a result of aggregate
demand and supply shocks to financing. We first explore the effect of an aggregate credit
demand shock, akin to the 2020-21 global pandemic. When credit demand increases in all
countries, core countries absorb a larger share of the available capital. Not only is the boom


                                               3
less pronounced everywhere, but also the most opaque countries are more squeezed in a
recession, which leads to a more dramatic collapse in output in the periphery.
    Second, we analyze the consequences of increased capital supply by less sophisticated
investors, which we believe sheds new light on the effects of the global saving glut on invest-
ment cycles as well as safe asset determination. Consistent with the literature on rising global
imbalances (for a review, see Caballero et al., 2017), increased capital supply by low-skilled
investors decreases the yield on bonds in a boom. It also increases the supply of safe assets
as defined by He et al. (2016), but not nearly enough to satisfy the increasing demand for
safe assets in busts. As such, although all countries flourish more in the booms, the capital
imbalance leads to an exacerbated cycle in periphery countries. An interesting commonality
between the two scenarios is that they both have the same adverse effect on the core: the
set of core countries shrinks.
    Finally, our paper provides a novel equilibrium framework to study investment decisions
and equilibrium pricing outcomes in an asymmetric information environment where there is
two-sided heterogeneity. We believe that this is a parsimonious model well-suited to explore
a broader set of questions concerning the interaction among financial institutions and the
spillover to the real economy.

Related Literature. Our paper is the first to show that frictions in the global supply of
capital lead to an endogenous partitioning of countries into low and high exposure groups,
creating heterogeneous global boom and bust patterns. It is related to a large and diverse
body of work that studies international output and credit cycles.
    First, our paper contributes to the extensive literature started by Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997), which generates boom and bust patterns from financial frictions. In this line of work,
a collapse in the value of collateral leads to a tightening of credit constraints in recessions
(e.g. Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Lorenzoni, 2008; Mendoza, 2010; Gorton and Ordonez, 2014).
Our mechanism does not operate via tighter collateral constraints in recessions. Instead, in
the face of an adverse prudence shock, low-skilled investors find it optimal to rebalance their
portfolios towards firms in more transparent countries. As a consequence, on top of the
time-series pattern, we can derive predictions about the cross-sectional differences of real
outcomes across countries.
    There is also a group of papers that connect flight-to-quality episodes to international
risk-sharing.3 For instance, Gourinchas et al. (2017) and Maggiori (2017) argues that since
the US financial sector is less risk averse or less constrained than others, it takes a leveraged
  3
      See Gourinchas and Rey (2014) for a detailed review



                                                     4
position in the global risky asset in booms and deleverages during busts. Given the two-
country representative agent approach of these papers, they are better suited to capture
the characteristics of capital flows between the US and the rest of the world. Instead, we
focus on the detailed interaction between heterogeneous global financial institutions and
local firms. As such, our approach is more useful to explore other dimensions of the data,
such as the real effects of the heterogeneous re-balancing of asset managers, the time-series
and cross-sectional differences in returns, the distribution of non-performing debt, and the
concentration of debt ownership. Therefore, we think of our modeling approach as being
complementary to this literature.
    Another stream of literature studies why sudden stops are more frequent in emerging
market countries. Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) and Rey and Martin (2006) point to techno-
logical differences, while Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999), Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2003), and Broner and Ventura (2016) point to differential incentives for saving in foreign
versus domestic currency, as a consequence of differences in country fundamentals. In con-
trast, we propose a mechanism which implies that heterogeneous patterns can arise within
advanced economies as well, where the technology, the level of human and physical capital,
and the legal-economic-political system are similar.
    Turning to the Eurozone crisis, a series of papers emphasize a wide range of mechanisms
including less stringent credit constraints for large and inefficient firms (Reis, 2013; Gopinath
et al., 2017), the political connections of some banks and firms (Cu~    nat and Garicano, 2009),
compromised structural reforms (Fernandez-Villaverde et al., 2013), the role of downward
wage rigidity (Schmitt-Groh´    e and Uribe, 2016), the role of perceived risk of a eurozone
breakup (Battistini et al., 2014), the interaction between risk-shifting incentives of banks
and sovereigns (Farhi and Tirole, 2016), coordination problems between monetary and fiscal
policy (Aguiar et al., 2015), and the role of private debt expansion (Martin and Philippon,
2017). Our mechanism is complementary to these papers. Furthermore, while the loose
financing conditions and the resulting exante expansion of debt in periphery countries is
exogenous in this stream of papers, our model is able to generate this pattern endogenously.
    We are also related to the literature which connects international capital flows to safe
asset scarcity (He et al., 2016; Caballero et al., 2017; Farhi and Maggiori, 2017). Our model
derives the equilibrium supply and demand for safe assets from informational frictions, a
new element in this literature. As we demonstrate in Section 5.1.3, this approach generates
novel predictions.
    There is also a group of finance papers which rationalizes flight-to-quality in the financial
markets using a Knightian-uncertainty shock (Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2008), fund


                                               5
managers' incentives (Vayanos, 2004), or adverse-selection (Fishman and Parker, 2015). We
add to this literature by explicitly modeling the interaction between flight-to-quality and real
investment decisions, which contributes to the differences in credit cycles across countries.
    Finally, we contribute to the large theoretical literature which studies trading under
asymmetric information. The structure of the credit market in our model builds on Kurlat
(2016), which we generalize in two directions. We first generalize this framework to allow
for heterogeneous credit demand, and then embed the credit market into a macroeconomic
environment to endogenize the credit demand curve. At the heart of our model is the
feedback between the credit market and real investment, and firms' optimal resolution of
the trade-off between investment and liquidity risk management across different states of the
world. As such, both of these generalizations are crucial for our mechanism.4
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our model. Section 3
presents a simplified version of the model to analyze endogenous emergence of prudence as
a function of an aggregate productivity shock. Section 4 characterizes the credit and real
market equilibrium in the full model, while Section 5 explores the testable implications and
predictions of the model in the global economy. Section 6 concludes.


2       Model
Consider a three-period model, t = 0, 1, 2, with a single perishable good. There are two
main types of agents in the model. First, there are firms who invest and produce. They
are located across a continuum of countries. Second, there are international investors who
provide financing for firms. There is also a third group of agents, bankers, whose only role
is to provide a frictionless saving technology to firms. All agents are risk neutral, and there
is no discounting. Agents maximize the expected sum of consumption across all periods.
    We start this section with a description of the components of the model, and then proceed
to the equilibrium definition. Certain modeling choices are discussed in Section 4.2.

Shocks. There is an aggregate shock  that determines the aggregate state(s) with prob-
ability distribution  (). There is also an idiosyncratic liquidity shock  at the firm level.
Let  (1-) denote the iid probability that a firm is (not) hit by a liquidity shock,  = 1
( = 0). Both shocks are publicly observable. Shocks are sequentially realized at t = 1, with
the aggregate shock being realized first.
    4
    Our follow up paper, Farboodi and Kondor (2021), presents a dynamic extension of our framework
showing that endogenous prudence can lead to endogenous economic cycles.



                                                6
Firms and Production Technology. There is a continuum of firms, indexed by j =
(,  ). Firms invest and produce, and are subject to liquidity shocks.
      [0, 1] denotes the opacity of the firm, where  = 0 is the least and  = 1 is the
most opaque firm. Firm opacity relative to the expertise of investors is the source of the
information friction in our model.   {g, b} denotes the (pledgeability) type of the firm,
where g (b) is a good (bad) firm. The type of the firm determines whether investors can
seize part of its output, if the firm is good, or not, if the firm is bad. Thus good firms are
creditworthy.  fraction of all firms are good (1 -  are bad), and  is drawn from distribution
H (). Firms are distributed iid across opacity classes independent of their type.
    Each firm is endowed with one unit of the good in period t = 0, and a technology akin
to Holmstr¨om and Tirole (1998) and Lorenzoni (2008). From every unit of investment that
pays off at t = 2, fraction  takes 2 periods to become productive. As such, bringing a
unit of investment to completion in period t = 2 requires  initial investment into scale of
operation, in t = 0, while the rest can be invested at t = 1 as well. I (,  ) denotes the scale
of operation firm j = (,  ) chooses at date t = 0. The firm saves the rest of its endowment
to period t = 1.
    At t = 1, a fraction  of firms are hit by a liquidity shock  . The liquidity shock is
observable and verifiable by all agents. A firm hit by the liquidity shock has to inject an
extra  per unit of scale of operation it wants to maintain until t = 2. Any unit of investment
that has not received the necessary liquidity injection fully depreciates. i(, ,  ; ) denotes
the investment that firm j = (,  ) with idiosyncratic shock  drives to completion in state
. The scale requirement necessitates

      i(, ,  ; )  I (,  ).                                                                   (1)

The firm finances the date t = 1 share of investment as well as liquidity injection (mainte-
nance cost) from its savings and/or by issuing bonds to international investors.5 At t = 2,
each unit of completed investment produces  units of good, with g  b . In line with
Holmstr¨om and Tirole (1998), we make the following assumption on the production technol-
ogy.

Assumption 1 Continuing with full scale and abandoning production after a liquidity shock
  5
    In general, at t = 1 the firm needs to undertake max{min{(1 -  )i(, , 0; ), i(, , 0; ) -
I (,  )}, 0} additional investment if not hit by a liquidity shock, and i(, , 1; ) + max{min{(1 -
 )i(, ,  ; ), i(, , 1; ) - I (,  )}, 0} if hit by a liquidity shock.




                                               7
are socially positive NPV for both good and bad firms,

                                         1
       > max( + (1 -  ), 1 + ,             ).            = g, b
                                        1-

Banks and Saving Technology. When entrepreneurs save between t = 0 and t = 1,
they do it using a state-contingent saving technology at actuarially fair terms through local
banks. Bankers are competitive, deep-pocketed agents who do not have the expertise to
seize any future income of firms. Thus, they cannot lend to firms. However, firms can save
towards future aggregate or idiosyncratic states with bankers.

International Investors. There is a continuum of investors, indexed by their skill level,
s  [0, 1]. Investors have imperfect and heterogeneous information about firm types, and
higher s investors can acquire higher quality information by conducting a test which we
explain in detail below. Let w(s) denote the measure of investors with skill s  [0, 1].
Each investor is endowed with one unit of the good in period t = 1. Participation in the
international market costs  per unit of applications an investor considers for financing, and
she provides financing to (a selected subset of) firms who demand liquidity at her chosen
interest rate. We call an investor who participates in the international market an active
investor.
    Investors can seize  per unit of investment maintained to date t = 2 only from good
firms. The total credit a firm receives, (, ,  ; ), has to satisfy the pledgeability constraint

      (1 + r(, ,  ; )) (, , ,  ; )  i(, ,  ; ).                                             (2)

Information Friction and Prudence. Each investor chooses the measure of applications
that she wants to consider for financing,  , and has a prior  that a given firm is good.
She uses a test  to gather evidence about the true (pledgeability) type of each firm that
demands liquidity. The information that investor s receives about firm j = (,  ) depends
on her expertise level, s, opacity of the firm,  , and the type of the test the investor uses, .
Let x( ; , s, ) denote this information, given by
                     
                      
                            w.p. 1       if s > 
      x ( ; , s, ) =  g     w.p.         if s                                               (3)
                     
                      b     w.p. 1 -     if s  
                     


where   [0, 1]. That is, the investor observes perfectly whether a firm is good or bad, if
her skill is higher than the opacity of the firm. However, an -test pools  (1 - ) fraction of

                                                8
those applications which are too opaque for the given investor with good (bad) firms. Thus
tests with larger  imply more false positive and fewer false negative mistakes.
    While there is a continuum of tests, for our purposes the two extreme ones,  = 1 and
 = 0, are particularly interesting. We refer to the former as the bold test, and the latter as
the cautious test. Sometimes we refer to the choice of investor's test as prudence of investor
by the following intuition.
    An investor who uses a bold test is a bold investor. Bold investors only make false positive
mistakes: while x = b is conclusive evidence that the firm is bad, x = g might signal a good
firm just as a relatively opaque bad firm. One interpretation is that bold investors are
imprudent: they are interested in not missing out on any good firms, even at the expense of
occasionally lending to bad firms by mistake.
    Alternatively, an investor who uses a cautious test is a cautious investor. Cautious
investors only make false negative mistakes: while x = g is conclusive evidence that the firm
is good, x = b might signal a bad firm or a relatively opaque good firm. One can interpret
this as cautious investors being prudent: they are interested in not lending to bad firms even
at the expense of occasionally missing out on the good ones.6
    After observing evidence x( ; , s, ), each investor picks an acceptance rule (,  ; s, ) 
{0, 1} she will use. The acceptance rule specifies the bonds the investor is willing to finance
with each test, and has to be measurable with respect to her collected evidence x( ; , s, ).
Investors cannot observe, and thus cannot condition their decisions, on the total amount of
credit that a given firm takes on. Let X denote the set of all possible acceptance rules, and
Xs the set of acceptance rules that are feasible for investor s.

Liquidity Shock and Financing At t = 1, a firm j = (,  ) can obtain credit by issuing
bonds on the international market to a subset of investors who are willing to lend to it.
The firm receives one unit of financing per bond and promises to pay back 1 + r(,  ; ) at
date t = 2. The repayment is subject to the pledgeability constraint (2). The interest rate
r(,  ; ) is determined in equilibrium.

Market Structure. At t = 1, many markets open for issuing bonds. Each market m is
defined by an interest rate r
                            ~(m) and it can be active or inactive in equilibrium. The set of
all markets is denoted by M . A market is active if both firms and investors are present in
that market.7
  6
    See Section 4.2 for a discussion.
  7
    The structure of the credit market generalizes Kurlat (2016) by introducing quantities. We provide
details on the methodological contribution in the Appendix.



                                                  9
   Firms can go to as many markets as they desire, and demand  units of credit for the
corresponding interest rate r
                            ~(m) in each market m, such that

        (m, , ,  ; )  ¯ (),                                                                                 (4)

where   ¯ () is a the upper bound for the amount lent out in state .8
     Each investor s chooses (at most) one market m to lend in, the measure of applications
she wants to consider to finance (test)  , and her acceptance rule (,  ; s, ). If there are
investors of multiple skills who offer credit at a given m, the transactions of the least selective
investors, i.e., those with least informative evidence, clears first. The formal definition is
provided in the Appendix.
     Markets do not have to clear. In particular, firms understand that in each state , for each
firm j = (,  ), and each market m, there is an equilibrium measure  (m, , ,  ; ) such that
a firm j demanding  (m, , ,  ; ) credit at market m can raise only  (m, , ,  ; ) (m, , ,  ; ).
We call  (m, , ,  ; ) the rationing function. As such, we define (, ,  ; ), the total
amount of credit raised by firm j , and j 's effective interest r(,  ; ) as follows:

        (, ,  ; )              (m, ,  ; )d (m, , ,  ; ),                                                    (5)
                          M

                          M
                              r
                              ~(m) (m, , ,  ; )d (m, , ,  ; )
       r(, ,  ; )                                             .                                             (6)
                                       (, ,  ; )

    Thus, an investor s who chooses market m with interest rate r ~(m), finances a representa-
tive pool of firms (1) who demand credit in market m, (2) who satisfy investor s acceptance
rule based on her evidence about the firms, and (3) whose demand is not exhausted by
investors less selective than s.
    Finally, equilibrium supply and demand determines the allocation function A, which
assigns a measure A(.; , m, ) to bonds of firms financed by acceptance rule-market pair
(, m) in aggregate state . International investor s choice of how many applications she
wants to test,  , has to satisfy her budget constraint given the allocation function. That is,
the total credit extended by an investor has to at most equal her endowment.
    This market structure allows for many-to-many matching. A given firm might obtain
credit from a group of heterogeneous investors (as described by the rationing function  ), and
a given investor might finance a pool of heterogeneous firms (as described by the allocation
   8
     We set the upper bound  ¯ () just sufficiently high that it is not a binding constraint for the most trans-
parent good firms. This assumption is intuitive since markets should allow for any order that is consistent
at least with the most transparent good firms.



                                                      10
function A).

Countries. Firms are distributed among a unit mass of countries, c  [0, 1]. We assume
that the distribution is iid with respect to the firm pledgeability type  , but not with respect
to the opacity  . Let c = Ec [ ] denote the implied opacity of country c, which is defined
as the average opacity of the firms in that country.
    To isolate our main mechanism, we assume that each country is populated with firms
of a single opacity and no other firms. Thus, we can index the countries by c up to a
random permutation. Since all the firms in country c have the same opacity level, to save
on notation in the reminder of the paper we will use  to index country opacity as well.
    Furthermore, we assume that the mapping between opacity classes and country names is
random, and investors have an uninformative prior about this mapping. Thus, from investor
perspective, all countries are exante identical.9

Firm Problem. At t = 0, each firm chooses at what scale to operate and how much to
save in order to invest later and/or insure the risk of liquidity shock. At t = 1, after the
realization of the aggregate state and the idiosyncratic liquidity shock, each firm can invest
further subject to (1) or submit demand for bond issuance to a subset of markets, taking
each market's interest rate and rationing function as given. The problem of a firm j = (,  )
can be written as



            max           E, [ i(, ,  ; ) - 1 =g (, ,  ; )] - 1                             (7)
 I (,  ), {i(, ,  ; )}, ,
   { (m, , ,  ; )},,m

      subject to constraints (1)-(2), (4)-(6), and firm resource constraint(s).

International Investor Problem. International investors, or experts, arrive in t = 1,
once both the aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks are realized. They have unit wealth and
consume in t = 1, 2. Each investor picks a market, m, and submits her acceptance rule ,
and supply of credit  . Furthermore, each investor uses a test . In section 3 we allow the
investor to choose the test, while in section 4 and for the the following analysis each agent
is endowed with a test  depending on the aggregate state. Thus, the problem of investor s
  9
      See Section 4.2 for a discussion.




                                                11
in aggregate state  can be written as

     max  (1 + r
               ~(m; ))              dA(, g,  ; , m, ) -           dA(, ,  ; , m, ) -  + 1   (8)
    m,,,                     (, )                         (,, )

       s.t.
             Xs

                      dA(, ,  ; , m, )  1
              (,, )


     We end this section with the formal definition of equilibrium.
 Definition 1 [Equilibrium Definition] A global equilibrium is a set of the firm's invest-
ment plan I (,  ), {i(, ,  ; )}=H,L and demand function for credit { (m, , ,  ; )}=H,L ,
investor's choice of test, (s, ), interest rate r
                                                ~(m; ), and acceptance rule (,  ; s, ), along
with a rationing function { (m, , ,  ; )}=H,L , allocation function A(,  ; , m, ), and in-
terest rate schedule {r~(m; )}=H,L and the corresponding equilibrium credit allocation and
interest rate
{ (, ,  ; ), r(, ,  ; )}=H,L , such that
    (i) each firm's investment plan and demand function are optimal for the firm, given the
        rationing function and the interest rate schedule;

 (ii) each investor's test, interest rate and the corresponding acceptance rule are optimal for
      the investor, given the allocation function and the interest rate schedule;

(iii) rationing function, allocation function, and interest rate schedule are consistent with
      investor and firm optimization.


3      Endogenous Prudence
In this section we characterize the economy when investors choose their test endogenously
in response to an exogenous productivity shock. The characterization includes the implied
information regime, as well as the credit market conditions associated with each information
regime. We show how a relatively small productivity shock can trigger a fragmentation of
the credit market, leading to the dry-up of credit even for good firms in some countries but
not in others.
    The exogenous aggregate shock  determines the fraction of good firms, . In particular,
the aggregate shock takes two values,  = L , H (L < H ), with probability  (L ) = L
and  (H ) = H = 1 - L respectively.

                                                 12
    In order to keep the argument focused, we make a few simplifying assumptions in this
section. Assume the measure of investors w(s) consists of only three mass points s0 , s1 , 1,
where 0 < s0 < s1 < 1. For every other s, w(s) = 0. We refer to the group with skill s0 , s1 , 1
as unskilled, moderately skilled, and highly skilled, respectively. Furthermore, assume that
production does not involve any time to build,  = 0; there is no liquidity shock,  = 0;
investors can seize a unit per investment from good firms,  = 1; and bankers can provide
only non-state-contingent saving technology between periods t = 0 and t = 1.
    Since there is no liquidity shock, argument  drops out of all functions, and will be
suppressed throughout the rest of the section.
    With no time to build,  = 0, and no state-contingent saving each firm chooses to save
its unit endowment to period t = 1 and maximize profits state by state subject to a state-
by-state resource constraint. At t = 1, in each state the firm borrows from international
investors and invests i(,  ; ) to produce in t = 2. Optimization problem (7) simplifies to

      max             i(, , ) - 1 =g (1 + r(,  ; )) (,  ; ) - 1                              (9)
i(, ;),{ (m,, ;)}m

            s.t.     i(,  ; ) = 1 + (,  ; ),                                                (10)
                                    1
                      (,  ; )            ,                                                  (11)
                                r(,  ; )

and constraints (4)-(6). Equation (11) represents the credit capacity of each firm at t = 1.
Intuitively, in period t = 2, investors can seize one unit per unit of investment from good
projects only. As this only covers the principal of the loan, the interest rate repayment has
to be covered by the firm's initial endowment, which implies a down-payment of r(,  ; )
for every unit of credit that the firm receives.
    For good firms, the profitability of implementing their project using borrowed funds is
decreasing in the interest rate r(,  ; ). In fact, there is an interest rate, r  ¯ = g - 1, at
which the project becomes zero NPV for a good firm. Thus for r   ~(m) < r ¯, good firms demand
the maximum allowed      ¯ () as long as their credit constraint (11) is not violated given the
equilibrium function  (m, ,  ; ). Since b > 1 and bad firms do not pay back, they demand
the maximum allowed     ¯ () at any interest rate r
                                                  ~(m), again as long as their credit constraint
is not violated.
    Since investors have imperfect information about the firm type and cannot seize assets
from bad firms, they might not be willing to extend as much credit as firms desire, or might
require a high interest rate which would in turn limit the credit capacity of the firms. In fact,
credit market outcomes critically depends on the information regime implied by investors'
choice of the test, which we characterize next.

                                               13
      To ease the exposition we make the following assumption:10

Assumption 2 Assume
                               
  (i) (1 - H ) <      s1
                           <   s0
                                    < (1 - L ).

 (ii) w(s0 ) is sufficiently large and w(s1 ) and w(1) are sufficiently small such that some
      unskilled investors participate in the credit markets in both aggregate states.
                   
(iii) g  1 + L     s0
                      , i.e. productivity of good firms is sufficiently high compared to the cost
      of testing,.

 (iv) s0  (1 - (s1 - s0 )) (s1 - s0 ).

   The first proposition characterizes investors' choice of test and choice of lending, for each
aggregate shock.

 Proposition 1 [Information Choice and Lending Standards] In both aggregate states,
 = H , L all investors in groups s = s1 , 1 and a fraction of investors in group s = s0 are
active.

  (i) If  = H , all active investors choose the bold test,  = 1, and finance the applications
      for which x( ; , s, 1) = g only. Therefore

               (, g ; si , 1) = 1 , (, b; si , 1) = 1  > si , (, b; si , 1) = 0   si , i = 1, 2

        and

               (, g ; 1, 1) = 1 and (, b; 1, 1) = 0 .


 (ii) If  = L , all investors choose the cautious test,  = 0, and finance the applications for
      which x( ; , s, 1) = g only. Therefore

               (, g ; si , 0) = 1  < si , (, g ; si , 0) = 0  > si , (, b; si , 0) = 0 , i = 1, 2

        and

               (, g ; 1, 0) = 1 and (, b; 1, 0) = 0 .
 10
      The results for other parameters are available form the authors upon request.




                                                     14
    This result reflects a quality-quantity trade-off. For a fixed , the bold test has a lower
rejection rate and a higher lending probability. However, it involves a higher expost default
rate by bad opaque firms, and thus a higher lending cost. Therefore, investors choose to
be bold if and only if the fraction of bad firms in the economy is sufficiently small. The
proposition also shows that every interior test,   (0, 1), is dominated by either the bold or
the cautious test. Hence, an interior test is never the optimal choice.
    This quality-quantity trade-off helps determine the credit market outcome for different
levels of the aggregate shock, summarized in the next proposition.

Proposition 2 [Credit Market Outcome]

  (i) If  = H , there is a single common prevailing interest rate, rH  +(1-     H )(1-s0 )
                                                                                H
                                                                                           <r¯.
                                                                    1
      Good firms raise credit up to their capacity, (, g ; H ) = rH . The credit allocated to
      bad firms is strictly positive, and strictly below their capacity, 0 < (, b; H ) < r1 H
                                                                                              ,
      and increasing in their opacity.

 (ii) If  = L , credit markets are fragmented. There is an interest rate schedule rL ( ) at
      which good firms raise credit. This interest rate is weakly increasing in firm opacity,
                     
                      r
                             if   [0, s0 ]
            rL ( ) =  r
                      ^      if   [s0 , s1 ]
                     
                      r
                      ¯      if   [s1 , 1]
                     

                   
      where r  L    s0
                       r ^r   ¯ = g - 1. Bad firms do not raise any credit, (, b; L ) = 0,
      and credit allocated to good firms (, g ; L ) is decreasing in their opacity,  .

    When there are many good firms, investors are bold. Each investor provides loans for
those firms without conclusive bad evidence. These include all good firms in every country
and bad firms which are sufficiently opaque relative to the investor's skill. In this case there
is a single prevailing interest rate rH at which all bonds are traded, determined by unskilled
investors' zero profit condition. At this rate, unskilled investors are indifferent whether or
not to enter the credit market given the fraction of defaults in their bond portfolio implied
by their bold test. In equilibrium, just enough of them enter to satisfy the credit demand
of all good firms along with the more skilled investors. For moderately and highly skilled
investors, the equilibrium interest rate provides an information rent as they obtain a better
quality loan portfolio than the unskilled investors at the same rate.
    In this equilibrium, good firms demand credit only at interest rates less than rH while
bad firms demand credit at every interest rate. This is rational as good firms can borrow up


                                               15
to their capacity at rH , they are not willing to pay a higher rate. It is also the reason why
no investor wants to deviate to advertise a higher interest rate than rH : they would receive
applications only from bad firms. Nevertheless, some bad firms obtain credit at interest rate
rH as with the bold test, sufficiently opaque bad firms do not produce conclusive evidence
that they are bad for unskilled and moderately skilled investors.
    When only a small fraction of firms are good, all investors choose to be cautious, hence
bad firms cannot raise any financing. At the same time, each investor can only identify good
firms from sufficiently transparent countries relative to her skill. Thus supply of funding
varies for good firms from different countries. It follows that investors with different skills
finance not only a different set of firms, but they do so at different interest rates.
    More precisely, investors with skill levels s = s0 , s1 and 1 lend at interest rates r, r
                                                                                            ^ and r
                                                                                                  ¯ to
good firms with opacity   [0, s0 ],   (s0 , s2 1] and   (s1 , 1] respectively, where r  r       ^ r  ¯
and r < r¯. As a result, credit markets are fragmented in this aggregate state, and countries
are partitioned into three groups:   [0, s0 ] are the most transparent countries whose firms
produce conclusive evidence for being good for all investors.   [s0 , s1 ] are moderately
transparent countries. For these countries, investors have to be at least moderately skilled
to be able to identify the good firms.   [s1, 1] are the most opaque countries, and their
firms can only be identified by highly-skilled investors.
    Good firms from the most transparent countries are financed at a relatively low interest
rate r by unskilled investors only. In fact, this is the minimal interest rate that unskilled
investors are willing to accept given the cost of testing . Any higher rate would be eliminated
by investors' free-entry condition as unskilled capital is abundant. In stark contrast, good
firms from the most opaque countries can only raise financing from highly-skilled investors.
As capital of these investors is in short supply, these investors offer the highest rate which is
accepted by any good firm, r  ¯. Thus good firms in these countries are squeezed and typically
cannot sell bonds up to their credit capacity. Lastly, the following Lemma explains the credit
conditions faced by firms in moderately transparent countries.

 Lemma 1 Good firms in moderately transparent countries   [s0 , s1 ] in state  = L face
the following interest rate r^:
          
                              w ( s1 )
           r
                           if s 1 - s0
                                        rL
              L (s1 -s0 )        w(s1 )         L L
      r
      ^=       w(s1 )
                            if   s1 - s0
                                                  ¯
                                                  r
                                                    , r
            r                    w ( s1 )       L
            ¯               if   s1 - s0
                                            <   r
                                                ¯

   The interest rate for bonds issued by countries of intermediate opacity is intuitive. These
countries have to be served by moderately skilled investors. If these investors have excess

                                                          16
cash, then these bonds pay the same low interest rate as the most transparent bonds, r.
On the other extreme, if funding is in short supply, the intermediate firms can only raise
financing at the maximum interest rate r   ¯. In the intermediate range, there is cash-in-the-
market pricing.
    Proposition 2 and Lemma 1 together enable us to consider the heterogeneity across
countries in recessions with different degrees of severity. A recession that corresponds to a
medium adverse fundamental shock (L not too low) leads to a wide degree of heterogeneity
across countries in the recession: firms in more opaque countries are squeezed while firms in
less opaque countries face much lower interest rates. However, a large drop in fundamentals
(small L ) increases the rate at which firms in less opaque countries can borrow, r, and
decreases the spread across countries, r ¯ - r, making the recession more severe and similar
                                   11
across the spectrum of countries.
    Finally, it is insightful to examine the output in this economy. Equation (10) implies
that the output of a firm (,  ) is simply y (,  ; )   (1 + (,  ; )). Therefore, aggregate
output in a country with transparency  in aggregate state  is

                     Y ( ; ) = g (1 + (, g ; )) + (1 - )b (1 + (, b; )).

Then the following Corollary follows directly from Proposition 2.

 Corollary 1 [Heterogeneous Downturns]

  (i) Aggregate output is higher in the the high state than the low state in every country,

             Y ( ; H ) > Y ( ; L )         .


 (ii) The drop in aggregate output between the high and low state is increasing in country
      opacity. In particular, if Y ( ) = Y ( ; H ) - Y ( ; L ), then

             Y ( )|[0,s0 ] < Y ( )|[s0 ,s1 ] < Y ( )|[s1 ,1]


    The first part of the Corollary is as expected:  = H ( = L ) corresponds to a boom
(downturn) in all countries. The second part is especially central to our analysis. It shows
that while the adverse fundamental shock is the same across countries, its effect is amplified
in opaque countries by the credit market. In particular, while in transparent countries good
  11
    The 2008 Great Recession can be an example of the latter scenario where credit spreads spiked all over
the world.


                                                   17
firms can still borrow a lot at relatively low rates when fundamentals deteriorate, in opaque
countries all firms are severely squeezed. Even the best of the firms can borrow only limited
quantities at very high rates. This makes the recession much more severe in these countries.
    The full model generalizes this economy and explores the two-way interaction between
real investment and credit market outcomes. It provides a novel perspective on why coun-
tries with ex ante similar investment levels end up having radically different output, and
experience dissimilar boom-bust episodes. Furthermore, it allows us to investigate the de-
terminants of set of core and periphery countries and how they evolve as a consequence of
global shocks.


4    Global Equilibrium
The rest of the paper focuses on the two-way feedback between the credit market and real
investment. In order to study this interaction, we modify the economy to have the firm's
scale matter, by setting  = 1. Furthermore, we generalize the measure of investors with
skill s to any differentiable function w(s) with w(s) > 0 and w (s) < 0 over the full support
s  [0, 1].
    To keep the model tractable, instead of deriving investor information choice from first
principles as in the previous section, we introduce the concept of prudence shock as follows.
Motivated by Proposition 1, we assume that in aggregate state  = H all investors are bold,
(s, H ) = 1, and in aggregate state  = L all investors are cautious, (s, H ) = 0. To separate
the effect of the prudence shock, we assume that this is the only aggregate shock in our
economy, hence H = L = . For simplicity, we also normalize the cost of tests to zero,
 = 0.
     = 1 means that no extra investment at t = 1 pays off in the final date, which in
turn implies that firms with no liquidity shock do not participate in the credit market at
date t = 1, i(, , 1; ) = I (,  ). Alternatively, firms hit by a liquidity shock need to
raise i(, , 1; ) in order to have i(, ,  ; ) units of investment producing at t = 2. For
analytical tractability, let  =  . It follows that with perfect information, all good firms
could borrow at 0 interest rate, implying that investors could provide full financing for a
liquidity shock to good firms. Finally, since every participant in the credit market has  = 1,
we will suppress  from all of the functions throughout the rest of the paper.
    Firm optimization problem (7) can be written as




                                             18
                    max                      (1 - ) I (,  ) +   - 1 =g  i(,  ; ) - 1
        I (, ),{i(, ;)} ,{ (m,, ;)},m
                                         
                                                                                            (12)
                                                               r(,  ; )
                             s.t.       I (,  ) +                         i(,  ; ) = 1,     (13)
                                                      
                                                             1 + r(,  ; )

and constraint (1) with  = 1, constraint (2) holding with equality, and constraints (4)-(6).
    At t = 0, each firm chooses how much to invest and how much to save in order to insure
the risk of liquidity shock. Firms not hit by the shock do not demand credit while those who
are hit borrow the maximum possible without violating the pledgeability constraint (2), as
long as the interest rate is not prohibitively high. In order to sustain this borrowing, firms
save enough down payment from their own endowment through state-contingent saving.12
Putting these together, equation (13) gives firm's exante budget constraint.
    At t = 1, after the realization of the aggregate state and the idiosyncratic liquidity shock,
each firm submits its demand for bond issuance to a subset of markets, taking each market's
interest rate and rationing function as given.
    Note that in t = 0, conditional on type  , firms face a different problem only to the
extent that they expect to face a different interest rate r(,  ; ) in t = 1. Therefore,
heterogeneous decisions about scale of operation and continued investment are solely driven
by the differences in financing conditions that the firm expect in credit markets.
    The international investor problem is given by problem (8), with two simplifications:
 = 0 and  is no longer a choice since it is determined by the aggregate state.


4.1       Simple Global Equilibrium
In order to highlight the main mechanism of the model we restrict attention to a "simple
global equilibrium", the simplest variant of equilibrium. Appendix B discusses other variants
of the credit market equilibrium that arise depending on the choice of parameters.
    To characterize the equilibrium, we proceed by backward induction. We start by analyz-
ing the credit market outcome at t = 1, taking scale of operation choices as given, and then
characterize the equilibrium in real quantities determined at t = 0.
 12
      See Appendix C for detail.




                                                     19
4.1.1     Equilibrium Interest Rates and Credit Allocation

In this section, we characterize the credit market outcome at t = 1 for each aggregate state.
The argument generalizes Proposition 2 from Section 3 into two separate results on interests
rates and credit allocation.

Proposition 3 [International Interest Rates]

  (i) If  = H , there is a single common prevailing interest rate, rH . Moreover, there is a
      threshold skill level, sH  [0, 1), such that only investors who are more skilled than this
      threshold, s  sH , participate in the credit market.

 (ii) If  = L, there is a weakly increasing, continuous interest rate schedule rL ( ) at which
      good firms with opacity  raise credit. This schedule is characterized by endogenous
      thresholds 0  1  2  1, and a continuous increasing function r       ^( ), such that
                       
                        0
                                    if   [0, 1 ]
              rL ( ) =  r
                        ^( )        if   (1 , 2 ]                                              (14)
                       
                        r
                        ¯           if   (2 , 1]
                       


        and r
            ^(1 ) = 0, r
                       ^(2 ) = r
                               ¯.

Proposition 4 [International Credit Allocation]

  (i) If  = H , a good firm that is hit by the liquidity shock uses its full scale as collateral
      and obtains (, g ; H ) = I (, g )/(1 + rH ) credit.
        Bad firms demand   ¯ credit, but they are rationed. Specifically, there is a weakly decreas-
        ing function, H ( ), such that a bad firm with opacity  obtains (, b; H ) = H ( )¯        
        credit with H (1) = 1 and H ( ) = 0 for all  < sH .

 (ii) If  = L, bad firms do not obtain any credit; (, b; L) = 0.
        There is a threshold 0 < 3 < 1 such that good firms with opacity   [0, 3 ] fully
        pledge their investment in their scale of operation as collateral and obtain (, g ; L) =
        I (, g )/(1 + rL ( )) credit. In contrast, good firms with opacity   [3 , 1] are only
        partially financed. Specifically, there is a decreasing function L ( ) such that a firm
        with   [3 , 1] obtains (, g ; L) = L ( )I (3 , g )/(1 + rL ( )) credit with L (3 ) = 1.
        and L (1) = 0.

   Credit market outcomes share some common aspects across the simplified and more
general model. In the high state, there is a single prevailing interest rate rH , at which all

                                                 20
  0.25

                                                                                  1


   0.2

                                                                                 0.8


  0.15
                                                                                 0.6



   0.1
                                                                                 0.4



  0.05                                      1         2      3                                                           1         2      3
                                                                                 0.2




    0                                                                             0
         0   0.1    0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1              0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1




                   (a) Interest Rate Schedule                                                    (b) Rationing Function

Figure 1: Interest rate schedule and the rationing function for bad and good firms of opacity
 , in high state (solid) and low state (dashed). Parameters are  = 0.85,  = 5.9,  = 0.7,
H = 0.75, w(s) = 5(1 - s).


good and some bad firms raise credit, represented by the solid blue horizontal line on the
left panel of Figure 1. In the low state, credit markets are fragmented. Good firms face
an interest rate schedule rL ( ) which is increasing in the opacity of their country of origin,
while bad firms cannot raise any credit. In both states, investors who participate in the
credit market accept any application for which their test generates a signal x = g .
    In the high state, the continuous investor distribution leads to a marginal investor, sH
who is the least skilled investor participating in the credit market. In this state, the credit
allocation is similar to the simplified economy: every active investor participates at market
with interest rate rH . All good firms are fully financed while bad firms are rationed and
obtain credit only from investors who mistake them to be good firms. The corresponding
rationing function H ( ) is the solid curve on the right panel of Figure 1.
    As such, the interest rate rH and the marginal type sH are pinned down by two condi-
tions. First, the interest rate has to compensate the marginal investor for the defaults she
experiences in her portfolio due to loans that are extended to bad firms. Second, the wealth
of all participating investors has to be sufficient to cover the aggregate credit demand by
good firms.
    In the low state, the continuous investor distribution results in a continuous interest rate
schedule rL ( ), as illustrated by the dashed curve on left panel of Figure 1. Thus, there is
a continuum of active markets. Investors of all skill levels participate in the credit market,
albeit at different interest rates. Lowest skilled investors with s  1 lend to the good firms
from the least opaque countries  < 1 at interest rate rL = 0. On the opposite end of the

                                                                            21
spectrum, highest skilled investors s > 3 lend at interest rate r  ¯ to good firms from the most
opaque countries,  > 3 . In between, a moderately skilled investor with skill level s = 
participates in the market with interest rate r = rL ( ) and lends to good firms of country
with opacity  .
     Similar to the simplified model, firms in the most transparent countries   [0, 1 ] face
the minimal rate at which any cautious investor is willing to lend. Excess supply of capital
from low-skilled investors relative to the demand from sufficiently transparent countries,
limited by their scale, forces the low-skilled investors to their outside option of not lending,
i.e. zero interest rate.
     By contrast, the most opaque good firms   (2 , 1] can only raise financing from highly-
skilled investors, and only at the maximal interest rate r ¯. In fact, due to the short supply of
capital from highly skilled investors relative to the corresponding demand, the most opaque
firms   (3 , 1], are only partially financed. The corresponding rationing function L ( ) is
the dashed curve on the right panel of Figure 1. Lastly, firms in the intermediate opacity
group   (1 , 2 ] are financed at intermediate interest rates by investors with intermediate
skill.
     The key difference between the simplified and generalized setting in the credit market
constitutes the main technical contribution of the paper. In the general model, not only is the
distribution of the supply of financing subject to minimal restrictions as in Kurlat (2016), but
also the heterogeneous demand for financing across different firms is accommodated. This
generalization not only addresses a realistic phenomena, but also paves the way to analyze
the observed heterogeneity in real outcomes across countries.
     Beyond the technical challenges, the critical economic difference in the credit market is
that the heterogeneity across countries, which was due to the exogenous three-point investor
distribution in the simplified model, arises endogenously here. In other words, countries are
endogenously partitioned into exposure groups to the aggregate shock. As a general picture,
we argue that the partition defined by (1 , 2 , 3 ) is the main determinant of the exposure
to credit cycles across countries. Countries with   (3 , 1] and   [0, 1 ) constitute the
high exposure and low exposure group, respectively, as illustrated in Figure 1.
     Section 5 explores this endogenous heterogeneity in the credit market as well as in the
real economy, across different countries.

4.1.2   Equilibrium in Real Investment

In this section we characterize the equilibrium in the real economy, where we analyze how a
firm j = (,  ) chooses its investment plan, I (,  ), {i(,  ; )} , foreseeing the equilibrium in


                                               22
the credit market described by propositions 3 and 4. This is where our generalized framework
helps the most to generate new insights as it embeds a two-way interaction between credit
market and real outcomes, which we abstracted away from in Section 3.
   The first proposition describes the optimal investment plan for good firms.

 Proposition 5 [Good Firm Investment]
In a simple global equilibrium, a good firm chooses
                                       r
                                       ¯
                                    L 1+¯
                   1 + (1 - L ( )) 1+    r
                                           rH
                                        H 1+r
                                             H
     I (, g ) =                                  ,                                        (15)
                          rH       rL ( )
                  1 +  H 1+rH
                              + L 1+rL ( )

     i(, g ; H ) = I (, g )                                                               (16)
     i(, g ; L) = L ( )I (, g ).                                                          (17)

where 0  L ( )  1 is a weakly increasing function defined in (D.21).

    It is intuitive to analyze a firm's optimal investment and continuation decision backwards.
First, consider a good firm hit by a liquidity shock at t = 1, which has already chosen its
scale. (16) and (17) imply that all good firms fully maintain their scale when investors are
bold. Moreover, most good firms also fully maintain their investment when investors are
cautious, except those in the high exposure region. In this region, credit (partially) dries up
even for good firms because of the scarcity of capital of high-skilled investors, as explained
in Section 4.1.1.
    At t = 0 firms foresee this and choose their scale accordingly. Given a firm's future
investment policy and the market conditions it expects to face, its scale of operation is
determined by constraint (13). For good firms, this constraint encapsulates a key yet simple
trade-off. The fraction of the maintenance cost covered by the firm's saving limits the scale
it can afford.
    Bad firms' investment plan choice differs from that of good firms because they face
different conditions in the market for credit. Bad firms understand that they will not be
able to obtain any credit when investors are cautious and that they are rationed when
investors are bold. The next proposition describes their optimal choice.

Proposition 6 [Bad Firm Investment] In a simple global equilibrium, bad firms choose




                                                 23
the following investment plan:

                      rH
      I (, b) = 1 -       H H ( )¯
                                                                                              (18)
                   1 + rH
                   H ( )¯
                        
      i(, b; H ) =
                     
      i(, b; L) = 0.

where 0  H ( )  1 is a weakly decreasing function defined in (D.22).

    Bad firms' choice of their scale is also determined by the trade-off embedded in the
financing constraint (13). Opaque bad firms can obtain more credit in the high state, which
they do not plan to pay back.
    The last result in this section provides sufficient conditions for existence of a simple global
equilibrium. The precise characterization of the equilibrium and exact sufficient conditions
are provided in the appendix.
                                                                               1
 Proposition 7 [Existence] There exist  and function  ¯ ( ) such that if   1-    
                                                                                  ,  > ,
w(0)   , lims0 w(s) = 0,           ¯ ( ), and assumption 1 is satisfied, then there exists
a simple global equilibrium.

   We end this section by discussing certain modeling assumptions. In the next section, we
provide a detailed discussion of how our model predicts the emergence of core and periphery
economies.


4.2    Comments
In this section, we remark on the interpretation of agents and markets, as well as some of
the assumptions.
    The focus of our analysis is the capital flows that are channeled through global financial
institutions towards local firms. In reality, multiple channels serve these flows with poten-
tially several layers of intermediation. For instance, a large fraction of European firms finance
themselves using loans from local banks. Banks in turn often fund these loans by selling
commercial paper to money market funds (Ivashina et al., 2015; Gallagher et al., 2018).
Larger firms can also raise capital on the corporate bond market directly from bond mutual
funds and other asset managers (Gilchrist and Mojon, 2018). We expect the predictions
of our model to hold in a variety of these contexts, with the labels adjusted appropriately.
For instance, applied to the commercial paper market, local banks are the firms and money
market funds are the international investors.

                                                24
    As our focus is on the interaction of international investors and local firms, our choice
for modeling countries is decidedly simplistic: a country comprises a set of firms. For
our mechanism to be relevant, we need two weak requirements related to the allocation
of firms across countries. First, this allocation cannot be uniform in opacity, i.e., Ec [ ]
has to differ across countries. Second, investors' prior on the allocation has to be coarse.
For simplicity, we push both of these requirements to the extreme. We assume that each
country is populated with firms of a single opacity, and furthermore, that investors have
an uninformative prior about the mapping between country name and opacity level. To
show that this latter assumption is stronger than needed, in Appendix E.2 we generalize our
framework allowing for partially informative priors. For instance, in the European context,
investors can recognize that it is harder to learn about Italian and Spanish firms compared
to German ones, as long as their prior is uninformative about how Spanish and Italian firms
compare to each other. Appendix E.2 shows that our results are robust to this generalization.
    Intuitively, we think of the coarseness of prior information on opacity of a country,  ,
as an assumption which captures the fact that boom-bust patterns are often preceded by
major changes in the countries of interest, contributing to investors' uncertainty about  .
For example, the introduction of the European Monetary Union, or the major economic
reforms preceding the fast growth of East Asian countries perhaps led investors to rely less
on their existing knowledge of these markets.
    Furthermore, to emphasize that our mechanism relies only on the informational frictions
vis-a-vis the international capital supply (supply side), we suppress difference in production
fundamentals (demand side) across countries. In particular, we assume that every country
has the same composition of good and bad firms. We make this assumption solely for expo-
sitional purposes. However, we do not doubt that fundamental differences across emerging
and developed countries, or core and periphery countries exist.


5    Emergence of Core and Periphery Economies
We have shown that firms which are exante identical in production fundamentals but different
in opacity face radically different credit conditions. Firms foresee this and choose their scale
of operation accordingly. Their operating scale, in turn, effect their liquidity demand, feeding
back to the equilibrium outcome of credit markets.
    In this section, we focus on the aggregate implications of this two-way interaction of
firms' investment decisions and credit market outcomes at the country level. We illustrate
how the heterogeneity in credit conditions implies heterogeneity in the composition of invest-


                                              25
ment across countries, which in turn leads to heterogeneous boom and bust patterns across
countries. A group of countries are highly exposed to business cycles and suffer large busts,
while a second group have a much lower exposure and only experience a minor decline in
output. Thus, peripheral and core countries emerge endogenously.
    In section 5.1 we explore the cross-country implications of the model in a global economy
where the set of core and peripheral countries are fixed. As such, we focus on the differences
in real and credit market outcomes across countries over boom and bust periods. In section
5.2 we expand this analysis to consider the evolution of the structure of the global economy
in the face of various shocks. There we analyze how spillover effects in demand and supply
of capital among countries can lead to an expansion of the periphery and higher exposure to
shocks.


5.1      Heterogeneous Booms and Busts
We first study the cross-section of real outcomes including output, debt and default across
countries, and then investigate the model implications about credit market outcomes such as
credit spreads, ownership of debt and portfolio returns. Lastly, we examine the determination
of safe assets in the context of our model.

5.1.1    Real Economy: Output, Credit, and Default

The total output Y (, ) in country  and state  can be calculated by aggregating across
all firms within the country,


                   g I (, g ) + b (1 - ) ((1 - )I (, b) + i(, b, H ))           if  = H
        Y (, ) 
                   g ((1 - ) + L ( ))I (, g ) + b (1 - ) (1 - )I (, b).         if  = L

As depicted in Figure 2b, output is higher in the high state compared to the low state in
every country. As such, we refer to the high and low aggregate state in our model as the
boom and bust phase of the global cycle, with the output as the critical statistic.
   Similarly, the total credit raised by by all firms in country  and state  is given by

                    (I (, g ) + (1 - ) i(, b, H ))      if  = H
        C (, ) 
                    (L ( )I (, g )) .                   if  = L

    We next use these definitions to explore the cross-country predictions of the model in
different dimensions. It is most insightful to interpret the cross-country pattern in output


                                             26
along with that of credit, Figures 2b and 2c respectively. While the peripheral economies
enjoy higher credit inflows compared to all other countries during booms, they experience
the largest credit dry-up during busts. In particular, the cross-country variation of output in
boom is relatively small. On the contrary, during the bust, the output dramatically collapses
in peripheral economies while the drop is much less pronounced in the core. The wide degree
of dispersion is particularly striking given that the cross-country variation of investment,
as illustrated in figure 2a, is an order of magnitude smaller than that of output collapse.
Notably, while the scale initially falls as the countries' exposure to global cycles increases, it
is non-monotone and the most peripheral countries have more similar level of investment to
core countries.
     The non-monotonicity of the exante choice of scale of operation follows from a gambling
behavior by peripheral firms in response to the credit conditions that they face. The good
firms in the periphery know that they cannot raise much financing in busts, so if they want
to continue production in the bust they only have one option: they have to save enough to do
the required liquidity injection on their own, which in turn hurts their scale of investment in
both boom and busts. Instead, they follow a risky strategy: they invest a lot and do not save
enough to ensure against liquidity shocks. If there is a boom, they produce at very high scale
and borrow in the bold credit market if necessary, while in the bust they abandon production
if they need liquidity. This trade-off is embodied in the investment-saving constraint (13).13
     The risk taking behavior of bad firms further amplifies this pattern. While all bad firms
have to abandon all production in bust, the ones in the periphery know that they can free
ride on good firms in booms when investors are bold, invest, and do not pay back. Thus
they choose a scale that they know they have to give up in bad times. All peripheral firms
partially or fully abandon production in a bust, leading to a collapse in output. Figures 2c
and 2b outline the cross-section of credit and output across the spectrum of countries in each
state, highlighting the plunge in the periphery in the bust. In section 5.2.2 we discuss how
this risky strategy of the peripheral firms leads to a negative spillover from boom to bust
and underlies the grim consequences of a saving glut.
     One interpretation of the collapse in real output that follows credit rationing is capacity
underutilization, which has been documented in the recessions (e.g. Ragan, 1976; Shapiro et
al., 1989; Fernald, 2015) Our simplified model of production in Section 3 cannot accommodate
this phenomena since there is no choice of the scale of operation. These observations lead
to the first testable prediction of the model.
  13
    The trade-off of between investment and saving towards the cost of liquidity in adverse states is akin
to the investment and risk-management trade-off explored by Rampini and Viswanathan (2013). See also
Rampini et al. (2020) for evidence on the relevance of this channel.


                                                   27
   1                                                                                                                 7

  0.9
                                                                                                                     6
  0.8

  0.7                                                                                                                5


  0.6
                                                                                                                     4

  0.5

                                                                                                                     3
  0.4

  0.3                                                                                                                2

  0.2                                     1                 2            3                                                                                       1         2      3

                                                                                                                     1
  0.1

   0                                                                                                                 0
        0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6           0.7         0.8         0.9         1                        0       0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1




 (a) Cross-country Firm Scale of Operation                                                                                             (b) Cross-country output

                                                    3



                                               2.5



                                                    2


                                                                High state
                                               1.5              Low state
                                                                Non-performing Debt in High State




                                                    1



                                                                                                                1            2          3
                                               0.5



                                                    0
                                                        0         0.1         0.2         0.3       0.4   0.5       0.6      0.7       0.8    0.9    1




                                          (c) Cross-country credit and non-performing
                                          debt

Figure 2: Total scale of operation, I (, g ) + (1 - )I (, b), output, Y (, ), credit, C (, ) and
non-performing debt, (1 - )i(, b, H ) in each country. Output and credit are separately plotted
for high state (blue, solid) and low state (red, dashed). Parameters are  = 0.85,  = 5.9,  = 0.7,
H = 0.75, w(s) = 5(1 - s).



 Corollary 2 [Testable Predictions I: Real Economy]
Total output and debt to output ratio are more cyclical in peripheral versus core countries.
Furthermore, in booms, total output and total debt per capita are higher in the periphery than
in the core.

   These patterns are consistent with the stylized facts of sudden stop crises in emerging
markets in general (Calvo et al., 2004), and with the experience of periphery countries during
the European sovereign debt crisis (Lane, 2013; Martin and Philippon, 2017).

                                                                                                          28
    As discussed earlier, bad firms only raise financing in booms, and they default. As
more bad firms obtain credit in more opaque countries, there are more defaults in periphery
economies. This implies larger dispersion of productivity in booms between the core and the
periphery, with g > b . Furthermore, let non-performing debt denote the amount of credit
for which the borrowers default and do not pay the lenders back. A similar argument implies
that within each country, more non-performing debt is initiated in booms compared to busts.
Figure 2c also depicts the cross-section of non-performing debt issued during booms, and
the following Corollary summarizes these results.

Corollary 3 [Testable Predictions II: Real Economy]

  (i) In booms, productivity dispersion among firms obtaining credit is larger in the periphery
      than in the core, leading to capital misallocation.

 (ii) More non-performing debt is issued in booms than in busts. Furthermore, more non-
      performing debt is issued in the periphery.

   These predictions are consistent with the observed increase in the misallocation of capital
during the pre-crisis years in the south of Europe (Reis, 2013; Gopinath et al., 2017).

5.1.2   Credit Market: Price and Return on Debt, and Portfolio Compositions

The most straightforward implication of the model concerning the credit market is that while
they are integrated in booms, they become fragmented in recessions, and yields in periph-
ery economies spike especially relative to the core countries. In relation to the European
sovereign debt crisis, this fragmentation was observed not only in the market of sovereign
bonds, but also on financial and non-financial corporate debt (Battistini et al., 2014; Farhi
and Tirole, 2016; Gilchrist and Mojon, 2018), and bank credit (Darracq Paries et al., 2014).
    The European debt crisis provides a good example: as shown in Gilchrist and Mojon
(2018), non-financial firms active in the corporate bond market who were treated almost
as equals before the Greek crisis, suddenly started facing very different market conditions
depending on their country of origin in 2010. Whether an investment grade firm was French
or Italian did not seem to matter before or even during the crisis in 2008­2009. By 2011,
Italian firms were paying a much higher interest rate for credit than French firms. We connect
this figure with the interest rate schedule on Figure 1. The shift from the high to the low
aggregate state in our model corresponds to the fragmentation of the corporate bond market
around 2010. This is the first prediction of the model about the cross-section of bonds.



                                              29
 Corollary 4 [Testable Predictions I: Credit Market]
Credit markets are integrated in booms and fragmented in busts. The nominal yields for
comparable firms are close to equal across countries in booms, while they are higher in the
periphery than in the core economies in busts.

    A novel testable implication of our information structure is the significant change in the
concentration of ownership of the portfolio of securities across states. In booms, a wide range
of investors with various skill levels hold the debt of each country. Hence, the concentration
of ownership of bonds is low in each country as even low-skilled investors lend to firms in
periphery economies. However, during busts, low-skilled investors stop lending to firms in
peripheral countries and re-balance their portfolio towards core countries where they can
confidently identify the good firms. In contrast, highly skilled investors rebalance toward
periphery countries where they can earn high returns. This leads to a high concentration of
ownership of credit in high exposure peripheral countries during busts.14
    Indeed, in context of the eurozone crisis, Ivashina et al. (2015) and Gallagher et al. (2018)
find that in 2011 a group of US money market funds stopped lending only to European banks
but not to other banks which had similar risk. In particular, Gallagher et al. (2018) find
that when these money market funds stopped financing firms in a European country, they
did so irrespective of a firm's implied risk of default. Moreover, Ivashina et al. (2015) also
find evidence that this process led to a significant disruption in the syndicated loan market.
    The final testable implication of the model concerns realized average return across coun-
tries, investors, and states. In booms, although the yields are the same across all countries,
more bonds issued in peripheral countries default. Thus in booms, the average realized return
is higher in core countries compared to periphery, and higher for the high-skilled investors
who held fewer bad bonds. Alternatively, in busts, nominal yields are higher for periphery
bonds. As such, the average realized return in peripheral countries is higher than the core in
busts, and for investors who hold more high return bonds, who are again the higher skilled
investors.
    We summarize these observations as testable predictions in the following Corollary.

 Corollary 5 [Testable Predictions II: Credit Market]

  (i) In each country, ownership of debt is more concentrated in busts relative to booms.
      Moreover during busts, ownership of debt is more concentrated in the periphery than
      in the core.
  14
     Battistini et al. (2014) document a pattern consistent with our prediction on concentration of ownership
in the context of sovereign lending in the eurozone. However, we are not aware of any test of these predictions
on corporate credit.


                                                      30
 (ii) In busts, unskilled investors shed assets in peripheral countries and rebalance towards
      core countries with low yields, while skilled investors rebalance toward peripheral coun-
      tries with high yields.

(iii) Average realized return on bonds issued in booms is higher in core countries versus
      peripheral countries, while it is the opposite for bonds issued in busts.

    Let us emphasize that we generate these facts in a model where countries are exante
identical in their production fundamentals. As such, the aggregate shock would be neutral
without investors being heterogeneously informed about firms in different countries. While
we do not doubt that fundamental differences across European countries also contributed to
their differential performance, we abstract away from this channel in order to emphasize the
role of the informational frictions affecting credit supply in global cycles.

5.1.3   Corporate Credit, Sovereign Bonds and Safe Asset Determination

Sovereign bonds and corporate credit do not have separate roles in our framework since
we have chosen not to explicitly model governments as decision makers. Nevertheless, it
is reasonable to use the spread on the corporate bond portfolio of a given country in our
model as a prediction for the corresponding sovereign spread, as sovereign bond and average
corporate spreads move in tandem in the data. For instance, the average correlation between
the non-financial corporate spreads and the sovereign bond spreads between 1999 and 2017
in European countries was 0.92 (ranging from 0.88 in Italy to 0.95 in Germany) as estimated
by Gilchrist and Mojon (2018).
    With this caveat in mind, our model has implications on the set of countries where safe
assets, public or private, can be issued. We follow the definition of He et al. (2016) and
Maggiori (2017), who define safe assets as those which are traded at a lower yield during bad
times, often due to flight-to-quality episodes. We state our model prediction in the following
Corollary.

 Corollary 6 [Safe asset determination] Safe assets are issued only in sufficiently trans-
parent countries. The real outcomes of these countries have a low-exposure to credit fluctu-
ations.

    Note that our framework provides a novel mechanism for safe asset determination. He et
al. (2016) emphasizes the role of coordination of investors. Farhi and Maggiori (2017) focuses
on the issuer's limited commitment not to default on the asset, or devaluate the underlying
currency. There is also a strand of literature (Caballero et al., 2008; Caballero and Farhi,


                                              31
2013) where a given country is capable of issuing safe assets and/or certain investors demand
safe assets by assumption, and only the quantity is determined in equilibrium. In contrast,
in our paper, the set of issuers and the set of buyers are endogenously determined through
a critical level of opacity, 1 . As 1 responds to parameter changes, so does the marginal
country's ability to issue safe assets.15
    In the next section we study the type of shocks which might lead some countries to move
across exposure groups.


5.2     Changes in the Anatomy of the Global Economy
A unique feature of our model is the endogenous determination of the exposure groups, i.e.
the core and the periphery. This allows us to study effect of global shocks on the composition
and relative size of core and periphery, that is, how the global economy is structured.
    We first explain how the skill distribution of capital supply interacts with demand for
capital from different countries and determines the exposure groups in our model. We
then use two experiments to illustrate the most important insights of this mechanism. The
first scenario explores the effect of a permanent credit demand shock, and the second one
examines an increase in the supply of capital by low-skilled global investors. Since the capital
demand and supply interact through different channels in each experiment, the outcomes
have similarities and differences. Counterintuitively, both shocks lead to a contraction in the
set of core countries. However, while the credit demand shock leads to a suppressed boom
and an amplified bust across all countries, the supply shock culminates in a suppressed bust
in more core countries accompanied with an amplified boom in more peripheral ones.
    Figure 3 illustrates how the demand and supply of capital across skill groups determine
the exposure groups. Let s  ^( ) =  denote the marginal investor for opacity  , the lowest-
skill investor who recognizes the (pledgeability) type of the firm with opacity  . The solid
diagonal line is w( ), the supply of capital by the marginal investor.
    Recall that the credit demand of a good firm j = (, g ) in  = L, conditional on the
interest rate r(,  ; L) that the firm faces, is independent of the firm opacity  . The red
dash-dotted horizontal line (higher) corresponds to credit demand of any good firm facing
  15
    It is useful to recognize that in the existing literature the distinction between the concepts of "reserve
currency" and "safe asset" is not always clear. A reserve currency is traditionally defined as an asset which
serves three roles simultaneously: it is an international store of value, a unit of account, and a medium of
exchange. Because of the second and third role, almost by definition, there can be only very few reserve
currencies in the world. While reserve currencies usually qualify, our definition of safe assets can also
include a large set of other securities, potentially ranging from sovereign bonds and currencies of some small
developed countries (e.g. Swedish sovereign bond, Swiss Franc), to highly rated commercial papers, or
certain asset-backed securities.


                                                     32
                            6



                                A
                            5



                            4



                            3

                                B                                  E


                            2



                                                                       1         2           3
                            1



                                C                                  D
                            0
                                0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5           0.6   0.7   0.8       0.9   1




Figure 3: Supply and demand for investors' funds, and the determination of thresholds
1 , 2 , 3 .


zero interest rate, dh =  (, g ; L|rL ( ) = 0). Thus 1 is the highest opacity level for
which the wealth of the corresponding marginal investor, s1 , is sufficient to cover dh . When
 = L, good firms in the least opaque countries,   1 , enjoy zero interest rate and have the
maximum credit demand. Therefore, countries with  = [0, 1 ] constitute the low exposure
group, alternatively the core. Note that the total supply of capital in this market, area
ACDE, is larger than the total demand from firms serviced in this market, area BCDE.
That is, investors with low skill "queue up" to finance the transparent good firms which
they can identify confidently.
    Next, consider the interest rate r ¯, above which good firms prefer to abandon production
after a liquidity shock and instead invest at a higher scale and continue only when they are
not hit by the shock. The blue dashed horizontal line (lower) corresponds to credit demand
                                                                     
of any good firm facing the maximum interest rate r     ¯, dl =  1+¯  r
                                                                         (, g ; L|rL ( ) = r¯). Then,
2 is the highest opacity level such that the wealth of the corresponding marginal investor
is sufficient to cover credit demand dl .
    It also follows that every firm in the [2 , 1] region faces the same interest rate r ¯. Since the
price of credit is constant in this region but the supply is lower for more opaque firms, the
quantity of credit instead adjusts. Recall that each investor active in a market distributes
her endowment pro-rata across all the good firms that she can identify. As such, threshold
3 is the opacity level for which the corresponding total supply of capital allocated to good
firms with this level of opacity is exactly sufficient to cover their demand. Firms in more
opaque countries,  > 3 , get rationed for credit and their investment takes a larger hit
when  = L. Thus, countries in [3 , 1] constitute the high exposure region, or the periphery.


                                                            33
    As Figure 3 illustrates, for a fixed supply curve of capital w(·), 1 is determined using
demand curve for international capital at zero interest rate, d1 . Changes in parameters
that lead to an upward shift of this demand curve implies a lower 1 , that is, a shrinking
group of core countries. Intuitively, larger capital demand by good firms implies that the
marginal investor who absorbs the demand from core countries has to be richer. Since w(s)
is downward sloping, this implies that investor s1 = 1 is less skilled, which in turn implies
that 1 has to correspond to a less opaque country. In the following section we argue the
global pandemic of 2020-21 might lead to shrinkage of the set of core countries through this
mechanism.16
    Note that on top of the direct effects described above, parameter shifts also induce an
indirect, general equilibrium effect through the adjustment of rH . Section 5.2.2 illustrates
how at the beginning of the 2000-2010 decade, the global saving glut might have pushed
some countries out of the core through this indirect effect.

5.2.1    Increase in Credit Demand: The Case of More Distressed Firms

In this section, we consider the effect of a permanent shift in credit demand by increasing
the fraction of distressed firms, , in both aggregate states and every country. Figure 4a
illustrates how the structure of the global economy changes as a result.
    The higher probability that a firm is hit by a liquidity shock implies that each firm
chooses a smaller scale and does more precautionary saving to cover their interim liquidity
needs. While lower scale of investment reduces the maintenance cost of the firm conditional
on being hit by a liquidity shock, the aggregate credit demand still increases in each state
and country as it is more likely to be hit by a liquidity shock.
    Higher aggregate liquidity demand in each country pushes certain countries out of the
core as the threshold 1 gets smaller, as explained above. This is illustrated on panel (a)
of Figure 4. Furthermore, there is a suppressed boom and a more pronounced bust in
virtually all countries, as illustrated by panel (c). The suppressed boom is mainly due to the
smaller investment by good firms. For non-periphery countries,   [0, 3 ], the same effect
is responsible for the larger bust in the low state.
    Interestingly, there is heterogeneity in how much the bust worsens within the peripheral
countries,   [3 , 1]. Recall that in the periphery, short supply of skilled capital leads to
credit rationing, which is more extreme for more opaque countries in this region. After the
credit demand shock, the higher demand of relatively more transparent countries in the core
  16
   For the interested reader Appendix E.1 summarizes our analytical results on the effect of parameters
, ,  ,  on the size of high and low exposure groups.



                                                  34
    5                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                           High state
                                                                                                                                                           Low state
   4.5
                                                                                           6
    4

   3.5
                                                                                           5
    3

   2.5                                                                                     4

    2
                                                                                           3
   1.5

    1                                 1                  2           3                                                      1                  2       3
                                                                                           2
   0.5

    0                                                                                      1
         0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6       0.7   0.8       0.9   1               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6       0.7   0.8   0.9          1




(a) The effect of more distressed firms on cross-                                       (b) The effect of more distressed firms on cross-
country credit supply and demand                                                        country output

   16                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                           High state
                                                                                                                                                           Low state

   14
         A                                                                                 6

   12
                                E
                                                                                           5
   10


    8                                                                                      4


    6
                                                                                           3

    4
                                D          1         2           3                                                               1         2           3
         B                           C                                                     2
    2


    0                                                                                      1
         0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6       0.7   0.8       0.9   1               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5       0.6       0.7   0.8   0.9          1




(c) The effect of more low-skill capital on cross-                                      (d) The effect of more low-skill capital on cross-
country credit supply and demand                                                        country output

Figure 4: The effect of increase in low-skill wealth on output and investment. Parameters are as
in the baseline, except that  = 0.8 on panels (a) and (b), and w(s) = 5(1 - s) + 10.6>s × 8 on
panels (c) and (d).


absorbs even more of the available skilled capital. This leaves the most opaque countries
even more squeezed, leading to a more dramatic collapse in output.
   To sum up, our model predicts that a global increase in firm credit demand pushes some
countries out of the core. Furthermore, growth rates will be suppressed across the board,
and the credit crunch will be even more severe in the most opaque countries. Arguably, this
represents a first order consequence of the global pandemic of 2020-21.




                                                                                   35
5.2.2     Excess Savings: The Case of the Global Saving Glut

In this section, we examine the effect of an increase in the supply of capital by low-skilled
global investors. We interpret this exercise as a representation of the excess global savings
phenomena described by Caballero et al. (2017). In particular, we consider the effect of
substituting w(s) with a w~ (s) such that

                  w ( s) + k   if s  s¯
        w
        ~ (s) =
                  w ( s)       if s > s
                                      ¯

for some positive constant k . Consider the endogenous boundary of the core region, 1 ,
associated with w(s). In order to emphasize the role of the indirect general equilibrium
forces, we choose s ¯< s ^(1 ) = 1 . This choice implies that the increase in the supply of
global capital does not have a direct effect on demand and supply around thresholds 1 and
3 . As such, all the results are driven by the change in the boom interest rate, rH .
    Panel 4c illustrates this exercise. The key observation is that both thresholds 1 and 3
move to the left: the core shrinks and the periphery expands. The reason is that increase in
the supply of capital decreases the common interest rate in the boom, rH . This improvement
in funding conditions during the boom allows firms to invest more, which increases their
liquidity demand for low and high expertise capital alike, both in the boom and the bust.
The upward shift in the demand curve when  = L implies that both thresholds 1 and 3
shift to the left. Moreover, this increase in the supply of capital affects the real economic
outcomes across countries in both states. Panel 4d illustrates this by showing the total
output after the increase in credit supply.
    As mentioned above, the higher availability of the global supply of capital increases the
investment of both good and bad firms during booms. Good firms simply increase investment
because of lower interest rate rH , which leads to a bigger boom everywhere. The boom is
further amplified in the more opaque countries as their bad firms' access to capital increases
disproportionately, since the additional capital is channeled towards low-skilled investors
who mistakenly lend to them. The more pronounced boom fueled by bad investment implies
a larger collapse and a larger volume of non-performing debt in the peripheral countries
during the bust.
    The expansion of the periphery and the exacerbation of the bust in these countries is
a pure general equilibrium effect, a negative spillover from the boom to the bust. It is
through the more elaborate Holmstr¨    om and Tirole (1998) technology that the model is able
to capture this crucial spillover effect and address the global saving glut.
    This discussion also sheds new light on the problem of scarce safe assets described in

                                             36
Caballero et al. (2017). It is argued that during the last few decades, the supply of safe
assets has not been able to keep up with the increasing demand, which has led to excessively
low interest rates on these assets. Under our interpretation of safe assets, introduced in
Section 5.1.3, an increase in capital of low-skilled investors represents increasing demand for
safe assets. In line with Caballero et al. (2017), this increasing demand results in a lower
interest rate, rH , during booms. Similar to the previous literature, our model predicts an
increase in the supply of safe assets by each core country, but not nearly enough to offset
the increase in demand. This is apparent by the increase in the area of the ADE triangle
in Figure 3 to the A'B'C'D'E' area in Figure 4c, which corresponds to the increase in idle
capital.


6    Conclusion
We argue that in the presence of heterogeneous information frictions between international
investors and firms, financial liberalization impacts countries heterogeneously, even if these
countries have similar fundamentals. Our main premise is that identifying good lending
opportunities requires skill, and investor skill is particularly important in certain countries,
which we refer to as opaque. As such, countries are subject to varying degrees of information
frictions vis-a-vis investors.
    We show that countries subject to the most severe frictions become highly exposed to
aggregate shocks to investors' information, which leads to counter-cyclical credit flows and
output. Countries that are less exposed to these information frictions experience a much
smaller drop in output in a bust, and benefit from low spreads and large capital-inflows. We
further illustrate that the key to both the existence of the credit cycle and the heterogeneous
exposure spectrum across countries is the scarcity of skilled investor capital.
    Our framework provides a wealth of predictions about credit spreads, investment, safe
asset supply, concentration of debt ownership, and the return on debt during the boom-
bust cycle, both in the time series and in the cross-section. These implications provide a
useful guidance for future empirical work. Moreover, we plan to examine the normative
implications of our framework and the consequences of different policy interventions on the
structure of the global equilibrium.


References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, "Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the


                                              37
  trend," Journal of political Economy, 2007, 115 (1), 69­102.

  , Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath, "Coordination and crisis
  in monetary unions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (4), 1727­1779.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Robert N McCauley, and Hyun Song Shin, "Breaking free of the
 triple coincidence in international finance," Economic Policy, 2016, 31 (87), 409­451.

Battistini, Niccol`
                  o, Marco Pagano, and Saverio Simonelli, "Systemic risk, sovereign
 yields and bank exposures in the euro crisis," Economic Policy, 2014, 29 (78), 203­251.

Broner, Fernando and Jaume Ventura, "Rethinking the effects of financial globaliza-
 tion," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1497­1542.

Caballero, Ricardo J and Alp Simsek, "A model of fickle capital flows and retrench-
 ment," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

   and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Excessive dollar debt: Financial development and un-
  derinsurance," The Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (2), 867­893.

   and , "Collective risk management in a flight to quality episode," The Journal of
  Finance, 2008, 63 (5), 2195­2230.

   and Emmanuel Farhi, "A model of the safe asset mechanism (sam): Safety traps and
  economic policy," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.

  , , and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, "An equilibrium model of" global imbalances"
  and low interest rates," American economic review, 2008, 98 (1), 358­93.

  , , and , "The safe assets shortage conundrum," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2017, 31 (3), 29­46.

Calvo, Guillermo A, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejia, "On the em-
 pirics of sudden stops: the relevance of balance-sheet effects," Technical Report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research 2004.

Cu~
  nat, Vicente and Luis Garicano, "Did good Cajas extend bad loans? The role of
 governance and human capital in Cajas portfolios decisions," FEDEA Monograph, V The
 Crisis of the Spanish EconomyV, November, 2009.

Duffie, Darrell, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Kenneth J Singleton, "Modeling sovereign
 yield spreads: A case study of Russian debt," The journal of finance, 2003, 58 (1), 119­159.

                                             38
Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann, "Exchange rates and financial fragility,"
  Technical Report, National bureau of economic research 1999.

Farboodi, Maryam and P´      eter Kondor, "Rational Cycles and Endogenous Lending
  Standards," Technical Report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2021.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole, "Deadly embrace: Sovereign and financial balance
  sheets doom loops," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

   and Matteo Maggiori, "A model of the international monetary system," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2017, 133 (1), 295­355.

Fernald, John G, "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great
  Recession," NBER macroeconomics annual, 2015, 29 (1), 1­51.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Luis Garicano, and Tano Santos, "Political credit cy-
  cles: the case of the Eurozone," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2013, 27 (3),
  145­166.

Fishman, Michael J and Jonathan A Parker, "Valuation, adverse selection, and market
  collapses," The Review of Financial Studies, 2015, 28 (9), 2575­2607.

Gallagher, Emily, Lawrence Schmidt, Allan Timmermann, and Russ Wermers,
 "Investor Information Acquisition and Money Market Fund Risk Rebalancing During the
 2011-12 Eurozone Crisis," 2018. MIT.

Gilchrist, Simon and Benoit Mojon, "Credit risk in the euro area," The Economic
 Journal, 2018, 128 (608), 118­158.

Gopinath, Gita, S                     ¨
                 ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,      Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina
 Villegas-Sanchez, "Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1915­1967.

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordonez, "Collateral crises," The American Economic
 Review, 2014, 104 (2), 343­378.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and H´ el`
                                    ene Rey, "External adjustment, global imbalances,
 valuation effects," in "Handbook of International Economics," Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014,
 pp. 585­645.

  , Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, "Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty," 2017.
  London Business School.

                                          39
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, "A model of safe
 asset determination," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

Holmstr¨ om, Bengt and Jean Tirole, "Prte and public supply of liquidity," Journal of
 political Economy, 1998, 106 (1), 1­40.

   and    , Inside and outside liquidity, MIT press, 2011.

Ivashina, Victoria, David S Scharfstein, and Jeremy C Stein, "Dollar funding and
  the lending behavior of global banks," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130
  (3), 1241­1281.

Kamin, Steven and K von Kleist, "The evolution and determinants of emerging markets
 credit spreads in the 1990s," BIS Working Papers 68, Bank for International Settlements
 1999.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Credit cycles," Journal of political economy,
 1997, 105 (2), 211­248.

Kurlat, Pablo, "Asset markets with heterogeneous information," Econometrica, 2016, 84
 (1), 33­85.

Lane, Philip R., "Capital Flows in the Euro Area," European Economy - Economic Pa-
  pers 2008 - 2015 497, Directorate General Economic and Financial Affairs (DG ECFIN),
  European Commission April 2013.

Lorenzoni, Guido, "Inefficient credit booms," The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75
  (3), 809­833.

Maggiori, Matteo, "Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve cur-
 rencies," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 3038­71.

Martin, Philippe and Thomas Philippon, "Inspecting the mechanism: leverage and the
 Great Recession in the Eurozone," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (7), 1904­1937.

Mendoza, Enrique G, "Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage," The American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 1941­1966.

Paries, Matthieu Darracq, Diego Moccero, Elizaveta Krylova, and Claudia Mar-
 chini, "The retail bank interest rate pass-through: The case of the euro area during the
 financial and sovereign debt crisis," Occasional Paper series 155, European Central Bank
 August 2014.

                                            40
Ragan, James F, "Measuring capacity utilization in manufacturing," Federal Reserve
 Board New York Quarterly Review, 1976.

Rampini, Adriano A and S Viswanathan, "Collateral and capital structure," Journal
 of Financial Economics, 2013, 109 (2), 466­492.

  ,   , and Guillaume Vuillemey, "Risk management in financial institutions," The
  Journal of Finance, 2020, 75 (2), 591­637.

Reis, Ricardo, "The Portuguese slump and crash and the euro crisis," Technical Report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.

Rey, Helene and Philippe Martin, "Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or
 Without Crash?," American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1631­1651.

Schmitt-Groh´  e, Stephanie and Martin Uribe, "Downward nominal wage rigidity, cur-
  rency pegs, and involuntary unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (5),
  1466­1514.

Shapiro, Matthew D, Robert J Gordon, and Lawrence H Summers, "Assessing the
  Federal Reserve's measures of capacity and utilization," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 1989, 1989 (1), 181­241.

Vayanos, Dimitri, "Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk," Technical
 Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2004.




                                             41
Online Appendices
    The appendix is organized as follows. Appendix A introduces the required formalization
to solve for the credit market equilibrium, with endogenous and exogenous prudence.
    Appendix B solves for the general form of credit market equilibrium, at t = 1, in a global
equilibrium with exogenous prudence. Appendix C uses the credit market equilibrium in
Appendix B to constructs the equilibrium in real market, at t = 0, specialized to a simple
global equilibrium. In particular, we break the firm problem into two sub-problems. Firm
j first chooses its initial and maintained investment levels, I (,  ), {i(,  ; )} , and then
chooses how to raise the required liquidity on the international markets. Appendix B solves
the latter problem in a global equilibrium, while appendix C solves the former problem in a
simple global equilibrium.
    Appendix D provides the proofs for the results in the text, and Appendix E discusses
extensions.


A      International Credit Market Formalization
There are many markets at t = 1, indexed by m, open simultaneously, where firms can
demand credit. M denotes the set of all markets. Each market in aggregate state  is
defined by two features. The first feature is the market interest rate, r  ~(m; ), paid by firms
to international investor in exchange for bonds. If in market m only firms from a single
opacity  are serviced, we use r ( ) = r     ~(m; ) to denote the interest rate associated with
that market m.
    The second is a clearing algorithm. A clearing algorithm is a rule that determines which
bonds are bought, as a function of demand and supply in a market. Since investors have
different information sets, different clearing algorithms result in different allocations and we
need to specify what algorithm will be used. We use an adjusted version of the algorithms
proposed by Kurlat (2016).
 Definition A.2 [LRF Clearing Algorithm] A clearing algorithm is a total order on X ,
which determines which acceptance rule is executed first.  is a less-restrictive-first (LRF)
algorithm if it orders nested acceptance rules according to (.; s, .) < (.; s , .) if (.; s , .) is
nested in (.; s, .); i.e. the less restrictive acceptance rule first.
    Thus, acceptance rules of the form (,  ; s, ) = 1 (  T1 || (  T2 &   s)) are or-
dered according to (.; s, .) < (.; s , .) if s < s , when  is an LRF clearing algorithm.
Given the signal structure of investors when  = H , the less restrictive acceptance rule is
also the less accurate.

                                                42
  Definition A.3 [NMR Clearing Algorithm]  is a nonselective-then-more-restrictive-
first (NMR) algorithm if it orders nested acceptance rules according to (.; s, .) first if it
imposes no restriction, and among acceptance rules with restrictions, the more restrictive
acceptance rule first; i.e. (.; s, .) < (.; s , .) if (.; s, .) is nested in (.; s , .).

 Let T0 = {g, b}. If  is an NMR clearing algorithm, acceptance rules of the form
(,  ; s, ) = 1 (  T &   s) are ordered according to

  (i) (, T0 ; s, ) < (, T ; s, ), for all s < 1 and T a subset of {g, b};

 (ii) (, T ; s, ) < (, T ; s , ) if s < s , for all s, s < 1;

Given the signal structure of investors when  = L, the more restrictive acceptance rule is
the less accurate.
    Kurlat (2016) proves that in the presence of markets with different clearing algorithms,
there exist an equilibrium where investors self-select into markets using LRF algorithm when
the information structure is akin to ours in  = H , and markets using NMR algorithm when
the information structure is that of  = L. For simplicity, we will directly assume that the
clearing algorithm is LRF when  = H and NMR when  = L. These algorithms guarantee
that each investor receives a representative sample of the overall supply of bonds he is willing
to accept, in the market where he participates.

A.1     Firm Problem
 Assumption A.1 [Maximum Market Demand] There is a maximum amount of credit
each firm j can demand in each market m, denoted by ¯ . We require ¯  max (, g ; ).

 Definition A.4 [Rationing Function] A rationing function  assigns a measure  (., ,  ; )
on M to each bond issued by firm j = (,  ).

    Let M0  M denote a set of markets. Then  (M0 , ,  ; ) is the number of bonds firm
(,  ) issues if he submits one unit of credit demand to each market m  M0 in aggregate
state . The firm receives one unit per bond issued, and r(,  ; ) denote the average interest
rate firm j = (,  ) has to pay back if aggregate state is .

Firm Optimization in International Markets. The firm participates in the interna-
tional markets in each state  if he is hit by the liquidity shock, to raise liquidity required to
maintain investment. We closely map the problem of the firm in the international market to
the seller problem of Kurlat (2016). In order to do so, we introduce the following auxiliary
variable, y
          ^.


                                               43
 Definition A.5 [Credit Capacity] y     ^ (,  ; , rH , rL ) is the credit capacity of firm j with
(,  ) when aggregate state is , and the firm faces interest rate rH (rL ) in state H (L),
                        ^(,  ; , rH , rL )  
respectively. We assume y                   ¯ , and y
                                                    ^(,  ; , rH , rL ) is continuous and weakly
decreasing in r , .

   Here we define the firm's problem on the international credit market as an independent
problem, which takes one state variable, y     ^(,  ; , rH , rL ). As we explained in the text,
                                                                               1
when  = 0, the the credit capacity of firm j is y       ^(,  ; , rH , rL )  r(,  ; )
                                                                                     . For the case
where  > 0, we will relate y   ^ (,  ; , rH , rL ) to the firm's pledgeability constraint and the
technological constraint ¯ later in section C. We also show that y (,  ; , rH , rL ) in problem
(A.1) maps to (,  ; ) as defined in equation (5). Moreover, in section C we verify that in
equilibrium, y
             ^(,  ; , rH , rL ) is weakly decreasing in rH and rL .


                                                                   
          y (.; , rH , rL )) 
      V, (^                         max        (1 + r(,  ; ))       - 1 =g y (,  ; , rH , rL ) (A.1)
                                 { (m,, ;)}m                       
                          s.t.

                                y (,  ; , rH , rL ) =         (m, ,  ; )d (m, ,  ; )
                                                         M

                                y (,  ; , rH , rL )  y
                                                     ^(,  ; , rH , rL )                       (A.2)
                                0   (m, ,  ; )  ¯
                                               M
                                                   r
                                                   ~(m; ) (m, ,  ; )d (m, ,  ; )
                                r(,  ; ) =
                                                     M
                                                        (m, ,  ; )d (m, ,  ; )

    To any unit of bonds that the firm issues to international investors, he adds r(,  ; )
units of what he has saved using the bankers. He then injects this as the required liquidity
to maintain investment. Thus by issuing y (,  ; , rH , rL ) bonds, the firm continues at scale
1+r(, ;)
    
         y (,  ; , rH , rL ), which pays off  at date t = 2. Good firms then have to pay back
1 + r(,  ; ) per unit bond issued, which leads to the objective (A.1).
    Similar to Kurlat (2016), the choice of  (m, ,  ; ) for any single market m such that
 (m, ,  ; ) = 0 has no effect on the funding obtained by the firm. Formally, this implies
that program (A.1) has multiple solutions. We follow Kurlat (2016) and assume that when
this is the case, the solution has to be robust to small positive  (m, ,  ; ), meaning that
the firm must attempt to sell an asset in all the markets where if he could he would want to,
and must not attempt to sell an asset in any market where if he could he would not want to.

  Definition A.6 [Robust Program] A solution to program 12 is robust if for each 
and every (m0 , 0 , 0 ) such that  (m0 , 0 , 0 ; ) = 0 there exists a sequence of strictly pos-
itive real numbers {zn } n=1 and a sequence of credit demand, and bond issuance decisions


                                                    44
{ n (m, ,  ; )}m , and y n (,  ; , rH , rL ), such that defining

       n (M0 , 0 , 0 ; ) =  (M0 , 0 , 0 ; ) + zn I(m0  M0 )I (j = j0 )

  (i) In aggregate state , { n (m, ,  ; )}m solve program


                                              
               max          (1 + r(,  ; ))     - 1 =g y (,  ; , rH , rL )                 (A.3)
            { (m,, ;)}m                       
                     s.t.

                          y (,  ; , rH , rL ) =        (m, ,  ; )d n (m, ,  ; )
                                                  M
                          y (,  ; , rH , rL )  y
                                               ^(,  ; , rH , rL )
                          0   (m, ,  ; )        ¯

 (ii) zn  0

(iii)  n   , y n  y ; (,  ), m

Why don't that cross-sectional differences across  (m, ,  ; ), at the same market
m0 , reveal the firm j = (,  )? We assume that  (m, ,  ; ) is divisible, and firms submit
unit by unit. The investment that can potentially serve as collateral, if  = g , is verified and
"marked", to avoid double promising.

A.2     International Investor Problem
There is a distribution w(s) of investors of expertise s, each endowed with one unit of wealth.
International investors consume at dates t = 1, 2 and participate in international markets at
t = 1. Since this is after realization of aggregate shock , we will suppress the dependence
of their decisions on .

 Definition A.7 [Acceptance Rule] An acceptance rule is a function  : [0, 1] × {g, b} ×
[0, 1] × {0, 1}  {0, 1}.

 Definition A.8 [Feasibility] An acceptance rule  is feasible for investor s if it is mea-
surable with respect to his information set, i.e. if

      (,  ; s, ) = ( ,  ; s, )        whenever        x(, , s, ) = x( ,  , s, ).

   Let X denote the set of all possible acceptance rules, and Xs the set of acceptance rules
that are feasible for investor s.



                                                  45
 Definition A.9 [Allocation Function] An allocation function A assigns a measure A(.; , m, )
on [0, 1] to each acceptance rule-market pair (, m)  X × M .

   If I0  [0, 1] × {g, b}, A(I0 ; , m, ) represents the fraction of bonds issued by firms j
with (,  )  I0 that an investor will obtain if he demands to buy one unit in market m and
imposes acceptance rule .
   In each aggregate state , investor s chooses of the test, , the market he participates in,
m, how many bonds he intends to finance  , and a feasible acceptance rule  to maximize
                  2
      max              ct
     ,m,,
               t=1

        s.t.
                 Xs                                                                     (A.4)

                             dA(,  ; , m, )  1                                          (A.5)
                      (, )

               c1 = 1 -                dA(,  ; , m; ) -                                 (A.6)
                                (, )

               c2 = 1 + r
                        ~(m; )               dA(, g ; , m, )                            (A.7)
                                          

    Constraint (A.4) restrict the investor to using feasible rules. Constraint (A.5) says that
each investor can only provide credit from her own wealth. Constraint (A.6) says the investor
consumes her leftover endowment at t = 1 net of cost of sampling, while (A.7) says that at
t = 2 she is paid back by good firms and consume. Substitute the consumption into investor
utility function and simplify to get the objective function (8) in the text.


B     Global Equilibrium.
      Construction of Equilibrium in Credit Market (t = 1)
  At t = 1, we take the maximum level of liquidity that a firm can raise on
the credit markets, y    ^(,  ; , rH , rL ), satisfying the properties of definition A.5,
as given. Given y    ^ (, , , rH , rL ), and under certain parametric restrictions, the
equilibrium in international markets is such that firms maximize problem (A.1),
international investors maximize problem (8), and active markets clear.
    We construct a more general version of the equilibrium compared to the one used in the
main text. Throughout, we point out how the simplified version of certain expressions look
like, given the date t = 0 structure of the problem.


                                                      46
    We solve for the credit market equilibrium state-by state. As such, to save on notation
we often suppress the dependence on rH , and rL , and sometimes the dependence on , unless
useful to clarify the context. So y ^(,  )  y  ^ (,  ; , rH , rL ),  (m, ,  )   (m, ,  ; ),
y (,  )  y (, , , rH , rL ), and  (m, ,  )   (m, ,  ; ). We will also use, whenever helpful
to ease the notation, H ( ) =  (mH , , b; H ), and L ( ) =  (m,  ¯ , g ; L).
    In the next two subsections we suppress the argument  of (,  ; s, ), as it is implied
by  in each subsection.

B.1       = H: Bold International Investors
Equilibrium Description. The equilibrium consists of a pair (rH , sH ), firm and investor
optimization, an allocation function, and a rationing function. Market mH is the market
defined by interest rate rH and an LRF algorithm. The equilibrium is described as follows.

  (i) Pair (rH , sH ) is the solution to the pair of equations
                                  1
                 (1 - )          s
                                      y
                                      ^(, b; H )d
            r=              1                                                                             (B.8)
                           0
                                y
                                ^(, g ; H )d
                      1
                                                    1
           =                            1                     1                  w(s )ds                  (B.9)
                  s       (1 - )       s
                                            y
                                            ^(, b; H )d +    0
                                                                  ^(, g ; H )d
                                                                  y

 (ii) Firm decision

        · Good firm
                                  
                                   min {
                                           ^(, g ; H )} = y
                                        ¯, y              ^(, g ; H )                      if r
                                                                                              ~(m) = rH
                  (m, , g ; H ) =  ¯                                                       if r
                                                                                              ~(m) < rH
                                  
                                   0                                                       otherwise
                                  

           where the first line in  follows from definition (A.1) along with construction of
           y
           ^(, g ).
        · Bad firm

                  (m, , b; H ) = min {   ^(, b; H )} = y
                                      ¯, y             ^(, b; H )                     m

(iii) International investor decision




                                                        47
                            · s < sH

                                             s = 0
                                            ms = mH
                                     (,  ; s) = I ( = g || ( = b &   s))

                            · s  sH

                                             s = 1
                                            ms = mH
                                     (,  ; s) = I ( = g || ( = b &   s))

              (iv) Allocation function

                            · For market mH and (,  ; s) = 1 ( = g || ( = b &   s)) for some h  [0, 1]


                                                           1                      (I( = g ) + I( = b &   s))  (m, ,  ; H )
                                     a(,  ; , mH ) =                     1                                         1
                                                        y
                                                        ^(,  ; H )            (mH ,  , g ; H )d + (1 - )                (mH ,  , b; H )d
                                                                        0                                          h
                                                                                                                           (B.10)

                            · For market mH and any other acceptance rule
                                   (, ;s)[1- (mH ,, ;H )]
                                                                         if ( ,  ; s) / Xs &             ( ,  ; s) (mH ,  ,  )[1 -  (mH ,  ,  )]d >
                  
                                       (mH , , ;H )[1- (mH , , ;H )]d
                               ( , ;s)^                                                               
                                  (, ;s)[1- (mH ,, ;H )]
                                                                         if ( ,  ; s) / Xs &             ( ,  ; s) (mH ,  ,  )[1 -  (mH ,  ,  )]d =
a(,  ; , mH ) =                 ( , ;s) (mH , , ;H )[1- (mH , , ;H )]
                                                                                                      

                                                                         but              ( ,  ; s) (mH ,  ,  )[1 -  (mH ,  ,  )]d > 0
                  
                                                                                       
                  
                     0                                                   otherwise
                                                                                                                            (B.11)

                                where  (mH , ,  ; H ) is defined below.
                     · For any other market
                                    (, ;s)S (m,, )
                                                                             if           ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  )S (m,  ,  )d > 0
                              ( , ;s) (m, , ;H )S (m, , )d                             
                      
                           
                                   (, ;s)S (m,, )
                      
                                 (  , ;s) (m, , ;H )S (m, , )
                                                                             if        
                                                                                          ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  )S (m,  ,  )d = 0,
        a(,  ; , m) =         
                                                                             but              ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; H )S (m,  ,  )d > 0
                      
                         0                                                    otherwise
                      
                                                                                                                            (B.12)




                                                                    48
               where
                                        
                                                     =b
                                        
                                                      or
                                        
                                        
                                   1 if    =g&r     ~(m)  (0, rH ]
                     S (m, ,  ) =       
                                                      or
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                                  ~(m)  0
                                                  r
                                        
                                   0 if  = g , r
                                               ~(m) > rH

       (v) Rationing function
                  
                   1
                                                                               if mH  M0 and  = g
                                               1
 (M0 , ,  ; H ) =    sH (1-)    1
                                  y
                                  ^ ( ,b ; H )d +()   1
                                                          ^( ,g ;H )d
                                                          y
                                                                        w(s)ds if mH  M0 and  = b and   sH
                                s                     0
                   0                                                           otherwise
                                                                                                (B.13)

     Proof.

       (i) (rH , sH ). There is a single market mH , with r
                                                          ~(mH ) = rH , where all trades take place.
           In this market, firms try to issue as many bonds as they can. Total supply is there-
                       1                                        1
           fore () 0 y   ^( , g ; H )d good bonds and (1 - ) 0 y  ^( , b; H )d bad bonds. Supply
           decisions in markets m = mH have no effect on firm utility since  (m, ,  ; H ) = 0, so
           they are determined in equilibrium by the robustness requirement.
          Buying from markets with interest rate other than rH is not optimal for investors. At
          interest rates above rH , the supply includes only bad firms, so investors prefer to stay
          away, whereas at interest rate below rH , the supply of bonds is exactly the same as
          at interest rate rH but the interest rate is lower. This does not settle the question of
          whether an investor chooses to buy at all. Investor optimization below then shows that
          investor with s = sH faces terms of trade of  (sH ) = 1 in market mH , and is indifferent
          between buying and not buying. This results in equation (B.8).
          All investors with s > sH thus spend all of their wealth buying in market mH and those
          with s < sH choose not to buy at all. The fraction of bonds by firm j = (,  ) that
          can be issued in market mH is given by the ratio of the total allocation of that bond
          across investors, to the supply of that bond. Noticing that only firms hit by liquidity
          shock issue bonds, and adding across investors and imposing that all good bonds are
          issued results in (B.9).



                                                           49
                                                                  rH
    Next define the monotone transformation qH =                 1+rH
                                                                      .   (B.8) can be represented as
                                         1
                               (1 - )   s
                                             y
                                             ^(, b; H )d
          q=               1                         1                                            (B.14)
               (1 - )     s
                               y
                               ^(, b; H )d +        0
                                                         y
                                                         ^(, g ; H )d

                                                             1
    Let H (rH ) = y ^(, b; H, rH ) and G(rH ) = 0 y^(, g ; H, rH )d , noting that y
                                                                                  ^(, g ; H )
    depends on qH (through rH ). We have assumed y      ^ is continuous in rH (Which we
    will verify in section C), and rH is by construction continuous in qH . It follows that
    from lemma D.1, there exists a solution to pair of equations (B.14) and (B.9) such
    that qH  0 and 0  sH  1, which in turn implies there exists a solution to pair of
    equations (B.8) and (B.9) such that rH  0 and 0  sH  1.

(ii) Firm optimization. Taking the equilibrium market structure, rationing function and
     allocation function as given, y (,  ) =  (mH , ,  ) (mH , ,  ). Since  - 1 =g > 0,
     firm j 's optimal choice of  (mH , ,  ) is determined by the constraints. For a good firm,
      (mH , , g ) = 1 from rationing function (B.13), which implies y (, g ) =  (mH , , g ).
     As such, condition (A.2) is the binding constraint which in turn implies y (, g ) =
      (mH , , g ) = y^(, g ), when  = H .
                                                           1                     w ( s)
    For a bad firm  (mH , , b) = sH (1-) 1 y   ^(  ,b; H )d  +   1
                                                                   y
                                                                   ^ ( ,g ; H )d  
                                                                                        ds from rationing
                                             s                   0
    function (B.13). From equation (B.9),  (mH , 1, b) = 1, so  (mH , , b) < 1,  1 >  
    sH , thus y (, b)   (mH , , b). Since  (mH , , b) = y           ^(, b) =     ¯ , constrain (A.2) is
    satisfied, which in turn implies y (, b) =  (mH , , b)^     y (, b).
    Put together, the rationing function (B.13) implies that in market mH , all good firms
    will be able to issue as many bonds as they demand to issue. A bad firm with opacity
     will be able to sell a fraction  (mH , , b) < 1 of bonds they demand to issue. No
    other bond can be issued. Put together this implies

                         y
                         ^(,  )                                             if  = g
          y (,  ) =                                                                               (B.15)
                          (mH , ,  )^
                                    y (,  ) = H ( )^
                                                   y (,  )                  if  = b

    Off equilibrium, in all cheaper markets (lower interest rate), all good firms submit ¯.
    In all more expensive markets, they submit zero demand. All bad firms submit the
    maximum that they can submit,    ¯ , on every other market. These decisions satisfy the
    robust program (A.3). Note that the equilibrium  (m, ,  ) satisfy the form of lemma
    B.1.

(iii) International investor optimization. Choosing any feasible acceptance rule other

                                                    50
than (,  ; s) = 1 - 1[x(, , s, 1) = b] by investor s using test  = 1 in market mH
would, according to (B.10) and (B.11), result in a lower fraction of good assets, so
choosing (,  ; s) = 1 ( = g || ( = b &   s)) is optimal.
Define the terms of trade that an investor obtains in market m with acceptance rule 
as
                         (1+~
                            r(m))     1[ =g ] (m,,g ;)dA(,g ;,m,)
                                     
                                       (m,, ;)dA(, ;,m,)
                                                                           if A({g, b}, [0, 1]; , m) > 0
      (m, ) =                   ,

                         0                                                 otherwise

which is his expected repayment per unit of bond he finances, i.e. the principal and
interest rate he receives at t = 2. Let

      max (s)           max      (m, )
                       mM,Xs


be the best term of trade that investor s can achieve, and let M max (s) be the set of
markets where investor s can obtain terms of trade  max with a feasible acceptance
rule.
Necessary and sufficient condition for investor optimization are that investors for whom
 max < 1 choose not to finance any bonds, investors for whom  max > 1 spend their
entire endowment in a market m  M max (s), and investors for whom  max = 1 choose
a market m  M max (s). Using equation (B.10), an investor s that uses acceptance rule
(,  ; s) = 1 ( = g || ( = b &   s)) in market m obtains terms of trade
                                     1
                         (1+~r(m)) 0   y
                                       ^(,g ;H )d
                
                          1
                    (1-) s y^(,b;H )d + 0  1
                                             ^(,g ;H )d
                                             y
                                                        ~(m)  rH
                                                        r
       (m, ) =
                 0                                       otherwise

Thus for all investors
                                                   1
        max                     (1 + rH )         0
                                                       y
                                                       ^(, g ; H )d
              ( s) =             1                            1
                       (1 - )   s
                                     y
                                     ^(, b; H )d +           0
                                                                  y
                                                                  ^(, g ; H )d

and the maximum is attained in any market where the interest rate is rH , including
mH . Rewrite

      max (s) = (1 + rH )J (s)
                                            1
                                           0
                                                y
                                                ^(, g ; H )d
         J ( s) =                1                            1                  ,
                       (1 - )   s
                                     y
                                     ^(, b; H )d +           0
                                                                  y
                                                                  ^(, g ; H )d



                                                       51
                                                1
      Note that from equation (B.8), J (sH ) = 1+ r
                                                    , so  max (sH ) = 1. Moreover, J (s) > 0.
      This implies that investors s < sH have  max (s) < 1, so not financing any bonds is
      optimal for them. Investors of types s  sH have  max (s)  1, so financing bonds such
      that they spend their entire wealth in market mH at t = 2 is optimal for them too.

(iv) Allocation function.
      In all markets except mH (off equilibrium path), there are no investors, so for any
      clearing algorithm the residual set of bonds any investor faces is just the original set of
      bonds demanded by firm on that market. In this case, (B.12) follows from Appendix
      B of Kurlat (2016), equation (65).
      For market mH , the LRF algorithm implies that an investor who imposes
      (,  ; s) = 1 ( = g || ( = b &   s)) faces a residual firm demand of acceptable
      bonds that is proportional to the original firm demand. Therefore, the measure of
      assets he will obtain is the same as if he traded first. Therefore (B.10) follows from
      Appendix B of Kurlat (2016), equation (65).
      For market mH and rules that are not of the form (,  ; s) = 1 ( = g || ( = b &   s)),
      (off equilibrium path), their trades clear after all other investors, so the bond financing
      demand they face only includes bonds demanded by bad firms. Therefor (B.11) follows
      from Appendix B of Kurlat (2016), equation (65).

 (v) Rationing function.
      (B.13) follows from B.9 using Appendix B of Kurlat (2016), equation (67). It is the
      fraction of bonds that the firm is able to issue , out of the total bonds offered (i.e. a
      number between zero and one).




B.2       = L: Cautious International Investors
Equilibrium Description. The equilibrium consists of an interest rate schedule 0 
rL ( )  r ¯, cut-offs 1 < 2 < 3 , firm and investor optimization, an allocation function,
and a rationing function. For any   [0, 1], let m( ) denote the market where the price is
rL ( ) , where rL ( ) is found by the procedure described in the proof below, and the clearing
algorithm is NMR. Because of bunching, m( ) could mean the same market for different  .
For any 0  [0, 1], let the set of markets M (0 ) be M (0 ) = {m( ) :   0 }. The set of
active markets is M ([0, 1]).
    The equilibrium is described as follows.

                                               52
 (i) Premium schedule 0  rL ( )  r  ¯ such that the interest rate falls into one of the cash-
     in-the-market, bunching, bunching-with-scarcity, or non-selective regions as described
     below.

(ii) Firm decision

        · Good firm
                                 
                                 
                                  min { ¯, y^(, g ; L)} = y
                                                          ^(, g ; L)                  ~(m) = rL ( ),   2
                                                                                   if r
                                  y
                                  ^(2 , g ; L)                                     if r
                                                                                      ~(m) = rL ( ),  < 2
                  (m, , g ; L) =
                                  
                                  ¯                                                if r
                                                                                      ~(m) < rL ( )
                                  0                                                otherwise

                      y (, g ; L) =                   (m, , g ; L)d (m, , g ; L)
                                          M ([,1])

          where the first line in  follows from definition (A.1) along with construction of
          y
          ^(, g ; L).
        · Bad firm

                                           min {   ^(, b; L)} = y
                                                ¯, y            ^(, b; L)          m  non-selective region
                  (m, , b; L) =
                                           ¯                                       otherwise

                      y (, b; L) =                    (m, , b; L)d (m, 0, b; L)
                                      M ([0,1])


     where the rationing functions  (m, ,  ; L) are defined in (B.21) and (B.22).
     Selling decisions follow the reservation interest rate strategy. A good firm (, g ) raises
     total liquidity equal to all the bonds they are able to sell on all M ([, 1]) markets. A
     bad firm (, b) tries to sell in all markets M ([0, 1]). Since in equilibrium all bad assets
     sell at the same ratio,  (m, , b; L) =  (m, 0, b; L),  m,    [0, 1].

(iii) International investor decision:
     Recall that s^( ) =  is the lowest-skill investor who recognizes the type of a firm with
     opacity  . Furthermore, let 1 denote the highest- opacity whose firm face a zero
     interest rate when investors are cautious, rL ( ) = 0. Define sN by
             s
             ^(1 )                        1
                     w(s)ds =                 y
                                              ^(, g ; L)d.
            sN                        0


     Thus the aggregate wealth of investors in the interval [sN , s
                                                                  ^(1 )] is just sufficient to
     finance all the bonds offered by good firms with opacity  < 1 at interest rate 0, and

                                                          53
each of these investors can identify some good bond in this interval. Investors with
lower degree of expertise than sN either buy non-selectively or do not buy at all.
Define the function s
                    ~( ) as the solution to the following differential equation
                                         1                        
                     1
     ~ ( ) = -
     s                     (1 - )            y
                                             ^( , b; L)d +           ^( , g ; L)d  ( )
                                                                     y
                 w (~
                    s( ))            0                        0
                                                                                         (B.16)

with boundary condition s
                        ~(1) = sN . Finally, let s0 = s
                                                      ~(0) and define ~ (s) for s 
[s0 , sN ] by

     ~ (s) = min { : s
                     ~( ) = s}

 (a) for s  sN

                    s = 1
                    ms = m(s)
           (,  ; s) = I( = g &   s)

(b) s  [s0 , sN )

                    s = 1
                    ms = m(~
                            (s))
           (,  ; s) = 1

 (c) s < s0

                    s = 0
                    ms = m(1)
           (,  ; s) = 1

Investors s  sN spend their entire endowment financing bonds in market m(s), i.e. the
market for the most opaque firms for which they can observe a good signal, and they
use the selective acceptance rule I( = g &   s), which only accepts good assets.
Some of these investor are in cash-in-the-market region, some in bunching, and some
in bunching-with-scarcity. Investors s  [s0 , sN ) are nonselective. The function   ~ (s)
assigns each one to a market: in market m( ), nonselective investors bring down the
                                                                        
un-financed reminder fraction by  ( ), which requires buying  ( ) 0 y     ^( , g ; L)d

                                             54
                                     1
     good assets and  ( ) (1 - ) 0 y    ^( , b; L)d bad assets. If investor s
                                                                            ~( ) is the nons-
     elective investor that buys in market m( ) then the total nonselective wealth available
     in that market is -w (~  s( )) s
                                    ~ ( ), so market clearing implies (B.16). Inverting this
     function results in investor s choosing market m (~ (s)). Investors s < s0 don't finance
     (buy) anything. Since they are indifferent between buying and not buying, many other
     patterns of demand among non-selective investors are possible.

 (iv) Allocation function

       · For markets m( )  M ([0, 1]) where  falls in either a cash-in-the-market or a
          nonselective region
                            (, ;s)S (m,, )
                                                   if   ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S (m,  ,  )d >
                        (m, , ;L)( , ;s)S (m, , )d
              
                   
                           (, ;s)S (m,, )
                                                   if   ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S (m,  ,  )d =
a(,  ; , m) =           ( , ;s) (m, , ;L)S (m, , )
                                                   but         ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S (m,  ,  )d
              
                 0                                  otherwise
              
                                                                                (B.17)

          where
                                   
                                                 =b
                                   
                                                  or
                                   
                                   
                              1 if    =g&r     ~(m)  (0, rL ( )]
                S (m, ,  ) =       
                                                  or
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                              ~(m)  0
                                              r
                                   
                              0 if  = g , r
                                          ~(m) > rL ( )

       · For market m( ) where  falls in [ L ,  H ] which is either a bunching, or bunching-
          with-scarcity region ([ L ,  H ] = [0,   ¯ ]); and  is of the form I ( = g &   s):
                            (, ;s)S h (m,, )
              
                                                                                            h
                 (m, , ;L)( , ;s)S h (m, , )d if   ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S (m,  ,  )d >
              
                            (, ;s)S h (m,, )
              
                          (  , ;s) (m, , ;L)S h (m, , )
                                                            if   ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S h (m,  ,  )d =
a(,  ; , m) =          
                                                                                               h
                                                            but         ( ,  ; s) (m,  ,  ; L)S (m,  ,  )d
              
                 0                                           otherwise
              
                                                                                        (B.18)




                                            55
        where S h (m, ,  ) is the solution to differential equation
                               
                                         S s (m,, )I[s  H ]
             dS (m, ,  )  -w(s) H S s (m, , )d
                 s                                          if  = g and s  [ L ,  H ]
                            =               s
                   ds           0                            otherwise
                                                                                        (B.19)

        If m( ) is in a bunching-with-scarcity region,  (m, , g ; L) =  (m, ¯ , g ; L),   .
        The terminal condition is

                                1 if  = b or ( = g and   [0,  H ])
              S 0 (m, ,  ) =                                                            (B.20)
                                0 otherwise

   Except for bunching and bunching-with-scarcity markets, the clearing algorithm im-
   plies that all investors draw bonds from a sample that is proportional to the original
   supply. This results in (B.17). In bunching markets, investor s imposes acceptance rule
   of the form s (,  ; s) = I ( = g &   s); therefore when he buys his bond portfolio,
   the demand for bonds from good firms in opacity  falls in proportion to his wealth,
   w(s), times the ratio between the demand for credit by good firms with opacity  and
   all the other bonds acceptable by investor s. This results in differential equation (B.19)
   which characterizes how the demand for bonds fall as the clearing algorithm progresses.

(v) Rationing function

     · Firm (,  ),   3
                           
                            1 - (l)  > l or ( = l and  = b)
                           
    (M ([l, 1]), ,  ; L) =  1         l and  = g                                        (B.21)
                           
                            0       otherwise
                           


     · Firm (,  ),  > 3
                           
                            1 - (l)
                                                                     >l
                              1               1
    (M ([l, 1]), ,  ; L) =    RD (~
                                   ,   ¯,1;x)+(s-
                                    ¯ ,r         ~ )y  ,g ;L)
                                                    ^(¯
                                                              w(s)ds   l and  = g       (B.22)
                           
                            0                                        otherwise
                           


   where RD (.) and   ~ are defined in equations (B.27) and (B.28), respectively. The
   rationing function is separately defined for firms with opacity   3 and  > 3 . It
   says that when   3 , a good firm with opacity  > l who offers a bond at every
   market with interest rate r(m)  [0, rL (l)], (rL (l) < r
                                                          ¯) will be able to sell a fraction


                                           56
       1 - (l) (so the unsold fraction of the good assets is (l)), and ( ) fraction can be sold
       in market m( ).
       When  > 3 , a good firm with opacity  > l who offers a bond at every market with
       interest rate r(m)  [0, rL (l)], (rL (l) < r
                                                  ¯) will be able to sell a fraction 1 - (l), and
       then ( )L ( ) fraction can be sold in market m( ) which has interest rate r       ¯, where
       L ( ) =  (m( ), , g ; L) is defined in (C.9).
       Condition (l =  and  = b) in (B.21) handles bad firms with opacity  who sells on
       the same non-selective pricing market where the good firms from the same opacity sell
       all the reminder of their bonds.

Proof. From Lemma B.1 below, each firm decision is expressed in terms of a reservation
interest rate rL (,  ). The idea is to show the following statements: all bad firms are
identified under equilibrium acceptance rule, so rL (, b) = 0. However, unlike  = H ,
rL (, g ) is different for good firms of different transparencies. Finding rL (, g ) is equivalent
to finding the highest interest rate at which bonds of a good firm with opacity  trades.
     Moreover, unlike  = H , firm (, g ) might be able to sell some bonds at interest rate
below rL (, g ), so the equilibrium must characterize rL (, g ) and any other prices at which
bonds of firm (, g ) are sold.

  (i) Premium schedule 0  rL ( )  ¯         r
      Let rL ( ) = rL (, g ). rL ( ) falls into three possible classes: a "cash-in-the-market"
      interest rate, a"bunching" interest rate, a"bunching-with-scarcity" interest rate, or a
      "non-selective" interest rate.


       Cash-in-the-market. The cash in the market interest rate rC ( ) for the bond issued
       by the good firm of opacity  is determined by equating demand and supply in the
       corresponding market.17 The total amount of liquidity demanded by firm j = (, g )
       at interest rate rC ( ) should be equal to total wealth of investor s =  which is the
       financier in that market.

                ^(, g ; L; rC ( )) = w ( )
             ( )y                                                                               (B.23)

       As long as rC ( ) is a strictly decreasing function and in the correct range, the equi-
       librium would be a cash-in-the-market pricing equilibrium. Each good firm of opacity
  17
    The full notation would be rC (,  ), but since when  = L only  = g firms have a reservation interest
rate, we suppress the dependence on  .


                                                  57
 demands bonds in all markets where r(m)  rC ( ), and no market with a higher
interest rate, while bad firms demand maximum bonds on every (active) market. Given
the prudence shocks, each investor imposes s (,  ; s) = I( = g &   s), i.e. he fi-
nances bond in the most profitable (highest interest rate) market for which he observes
x(g ; , s, 0) = g . Now consider a market with r = rC ( ). Firms with opacity   
demand credit in that market, but no firm with opacity  <  demand in this market
because they have been able to issue all the bonds that they want at lower interest
rate. Investor s =  is able to recognize good assets in this markets, but investors
s <  are not. Moreover, if rC ( ) is strictly decreasing, this is the highest interest rate
where s =  can detect good firms, so he will spend his entire wealth financing bonds
demanded on this market. Then equation (B.23) implies all the bonds demanded by
firm j = (, g ) are financed at this market, and there will be non of them for sale at
interest rate higher than rC ( ).


Bunching. If rC ( ) turns out to be downward sloping in any range, the logic of
cash-in-the-market pricing breaks down because it implies the good firm with a lower
opacity is paying a higher interest rate to issue bonds,  <  and rC ( ) > rC ( ).
The investor who is financing the firm from higher opacity,  , can also identify the
firm from a lower opacity,  , so he is better off financing the more transparent firm
and collect a higher interest rate rC ( ) > rC ( ), so there will be no financier for the
more opaque firm  ; a contradiction. In this region, there will be "bunching" of all the
firms [,  ] at a single price, i.e. an ironing procedure that restores a weakly monotone
function. The clearing algorithm is such that the lower s investor picks the bonds that
he finances first in a bunching market.
Since w(.) function is decreasing in s, and y^(.) function is decreasing in rC , for low
enough  , and appropriate set of parameters, equation (B.23) requires rC ( ) < 0. Let
^ = max  such that rC ( )  0, then as long as rC ( ) is increasing, or ironed as

explained above,   s.t.     ^ >   0, rC ( ) < 0. Thus the requirement that there
is a zero lower bound on the interest rate (no negative interest rate), implies there is
a range of transparencies at the bottom,        ^ , whose good firms face zero interest
rate in issuing bonds. Investors with s   ^ have idle wealth that is not financing any
bonds, as there is not enough credit demand from good firms that they can recognize.
In order for  ^ > 0 it must be that

      w(0) > y
             ^(1, g ; L),                                                           (B.24)


                                         58
where we have used that rL (0) = 0. Later in proof of Proposition 7 we make the
appropriate parametric assumption to ensure this condition holds.


Nonselective pricing. Consider a market m with interest rate r = r     ~(m), where
good firms with opacity  submit credit demand in that market. That implies all the
good firms with opacity  >  also submit demand in market m, as well as all the
bad firms with any level of opacity. An investor can choose to impose s (,  ; s) = 1
in market m and buy a representative sample of the pool.
The terms of trade that he will get is

                                      (1 + r)[g Supply at interest rate r in FN]
      N (r ) =
                   ((1 - ) [b Supply at interest rate r in FN] + [g Supply at interest rate r in FN])
                                                    1
                                      (1 + r)       
                                                        y
                                                        ^(, g ; L)d
               =                      1                        1
                     (1 - )          0
                                          y
                                          ^(, b; L)d +         
                                                                   y
                                                                   ^(, g ; L)d

As long as 1 > 0, there are (low expertise) international investors who finance bonds
issued by good firms with opacity  < 1 . The interest rate for these bonds is zero,
so these investors make zero profits and are indifferent between financing and not
financing bonds. Alternatively, if they trade non-selectively at a market at interest
rate r, they can get the above terms of trade. As a result if  N (r) > 1 these investors
are better off trading at interest rate r nonselectively, which in turn implies no good
bond from opacity  can be offered at a interest rate above rN S ( ). In other words,
N (r)  1 implies r  rN S ( ).
                                          1
                      (1 + r)             
                                              y
                                              ^( , g ; L)d
                      1                              1
                                                                         1
         (1 - )      0
                          y
                          ^(, b; L)d +               
                                                         y
                                                         ^( , g ; L)d
       1                                        1 y
                                                  ^( , g ; L)d                                     1
                                                                                  =                1
      1+r  (1 - )
                                      1
                                          ^(, b; L)d + 
                                          y
                                                               1
                                                                   y
                                                                   ^( , g ; L)d       1+
                                                                                           (1-)    0   ^(,b;L)d
                                                                                                       y
                                     0                                                         1
                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                   ^( ,g ;L)d
                            1
              (1 - )       0
                                y
                                ^(, b; L)d
     r               1
                     
                          y
                          ^( , g ; L)d
so
                                      1
         NS          (1 - )          0
                                          y
                                          ^(, b; L)d
     r        ( )               1                                                                          (B.25)
                                
                                    y
                                    ^( , g ; L)d

When this upper bound interest rate is operative, bonds are finances in markets where


                                                          59
       both selective and non-selective buyers are active. In the markets where the interest
       rate is rN S ( ), non-selective buyers will buy just enough assets (distributed pro-rate
       among the assets offered) such that the interest rate rC ( ) is pushed down such that
       marginal investor s =  can charge exactly interest rate rN S ( ):

                ^(, g ; L; rN S ( )) = w ( )
             ( )y                                                                                      (B.26)

       In other words, if s =  international investors are poor, that requires a high interest
       rate to push the demand of firms (, g ) down so that equation (B.26) is satisfied. At
       this high interest rate, investors financing low  good firms will enter this market and
       be non-selective financiers. This takes some bonds off of the market, which in turn
       implies a lower interest rate.


       Bunching-with-scarcity. If there is a maximum interest rate r     ¯ that firms are willing
       to pay to get bonds from investors, and if the wealth of smart investors, in the sense
       precisely defined below, is in short supply, then there will be a bunching region where
       some good firms will be rationed.
       At any interest rate r > r  ¯, good firms have zero demand for bonds, and (with linear
       objective function) at r = r  ¯ they are indifferent between all levels of bond issued. So
       if the interest rate hits r
                                 ¯ in any market, it cannot increase any further than that.
       Let m¯ denote the market with interest rate r       ¯, r
                                                              ~(m ¯) = r
                                                                       ¯, and let    ¯ denote the lowest
       opacity level whose good firms demand credit on market m                 ¯ . Firms (¯     , g ) submit
        (m,
          ¯   ¯ , g ; L) = y
                           ^(¯
                              , g ; L) on market m  ¯ and by definition their demand is exactly fully
       satisfied at interest rate r   ¯. Good firms with opacity  >      ¯ also demand credit on this
       market. Since these firms are indifferent about how many bonds they raise on market
       m
       ¯ (given the linearity of t = 0 objective function), we assume that all of them submit
       the maximum that they can, y           , g ; L):   > 
                                           ^(¯                       ¯ 
                                                               ¯ ,  (m, ¯ , g ; L) = y ^(¯
                                                                                          , g ; L); and how
                                                                                    18
       many bond they raise is determined by rationing explained next.
       Bad firms with any opacity level also demand credit on market m
                                                                     ¯ , but none is able to
  18
    This is slightly stronger than what we actually need to simplify the equilibrium derivation. What we
need is that when  = L, on the market where interest rate is r¯, no good firm submits more than the credit
capacity of the lowest-opacity good firm in that market. The latter firm is j = (2 , g ), and even absent this
assumption, y             ^(2 , g ; L) for 3   > 2 . So what we need is y
             ^(, g ; L) = y                                               ^(, g ; L) = y^(3 , g ; L) for  > 3 ,
weaker than what specified here.




                                                      60
issue any bonds in this market. Thus the demand submitted on market m
                                                                    ¯ is given by
                     
                      y
                         ^(, b; L)   if  = b
       (m,
        ¯ ,  ; L) =     y^(¯
                            , g ; L) if  = g and  > ¯
                     
                        0            otherwise
                     


As such, if
                                    1
      (1 - ¯) × y
                ^(¯
                   , g ; L) >           w(s)ds,
                                ¯

then the wealth of investor who are able to recognize good firms from some opacity in
(¯ , 1) is collectively in short supply, and some of the good firm demand is rationed at
maximum interest rate r     ¯. Next we determine the range of transparencies whose good
firm demand for bonds is fully satisfied at interest rate r¯. In order to do so, introduce
the following function.


RD ( , , r, ; x). For  >  , and interest rate r, let
                                                                 
      RD ( , , r, ; x)                   ^(z, g ; L; r)dz -
                                         y                           w(s)ds.       (B.27)
                                                              

where x is a parameter.
RD ( , , r, ; x) Measures the excess residual demand () by good firms with opacity
in the interval (,  ), at interest rate r, which is not met by the cumulative wealth
of the investors who are able to identify some good firm in this interval but no good
firms with opacity  >  , i.e.   s   .
For  = ¯ and (¯
               ) = 1, we have


                                                                  
      RD ( ,    ¯, 1; x) = ( - 
             ¯, r              ¯ )^
                                  y (¯         ¯) -
                                      , g ; L; r                     w(s)ds.
                                                              ¯

Recall that in markets where there is bunching, the clearing algorithm used lets lower-s
investors, who impose more restrictive acceptance rules, trade before higher-s investors.
Moreover, note that RD ( ,      ¯, 1; x) > 0,   < 
                             ¯, r                       ¯ . The reason is the following.
By the logic of cash-in-the-market pricing, r¯ is the interest rate at which demand of
good firms of opacity ¯ is exactly absorbed by wealth of the marginal investor s =    ¯.
Consider a good firm with opacity  right above       ¯ . Let r
                                                             ~ denote the hypothetical

                                               61
interest rate which clears the market for such good firm  >     ¯ , if this firm was still
in a cash-in-the-market pricing. Again, using the logic of cash-in-the-market pricing,
and the downward sloping wealth distribution of investors, it must be that r    ~ >r ¯ as
 >    ¯ . However, since r
                         ¯ is the maximum interest rate any good firm accept, good firm
 >    ¯ faces a lower interest rate compared to what would clear his demand using only
the wealth of his marginal investors, s =  . Applying the same logic backward which
would lead to a positive excess demand by good firms with opacity level in (¯      ,  )
compared to what can be absorbed by their marginal investors collectively.
Let ~  (0,   ¯ ) be the highest opacity where the demand of good firms is fully absorbed
by all the investors active in market m ¯.
                                    1
                                                     RD (~,  ¯, r
                                                                ¯, 1; x)
      RD (~
          , ¯, r
               ¯, 1; x) =                                                               w(s)ds
                                ~       RD (~
                                            ,    ¯, 1; x) + (s - 
                                              ¯, r                 ~ ) y ^(¯
                                                                            , g ; L; r
                                                                                     ¯)

which implies ~ is the solution to
                1
                                         1
      1=                                                        w(s)ds                           (B.28)
            ~       RD (~
                        ,    ¯, 1; x) + (s - 
                          ¯, r                   ^(¯
                                             ~ ) y  , g ; L; r
                                                             ¯)

In Proposition 7 we argue that under our assumptions, ~ > 0.
For a good firm from any opacity  >      ~ , none of his offered bonds can be bought by
investors of expertise s < ~ , since those investors cannot identify him as good. Thus
he can only sell what can be absorbed by the residual wealth of the subset of investors
s>  ~ who can identify him, s >  >      ~.
For s > ~ , let

                         (s -   ~ ) y^(¯
                                        , g ; L; r
                                                 ¯)
       (s) =
                RD (~
                    ,    ¯, 1; x) + (s - 
                      ¯, r               ~ ) y   ^(¯
                                                    , g ; L; r
                                                             ¯)

 (s) captures how much of the portfolio held by investor s >      ~ are bonds issued
"collectively" by good firms with opacity  >     ~ that s can identify. The measure
of those good firms is (s -  ~ ) . Thus for an individual firm of opacity  >      ~,
aggregating over holdings of his bonds, by all the investors s >  , we find how much
j = (, g ) can issue.
Let L ( ) =  (m,
              ¯ , g ; L) denote the rationing function in this market. The above




                                                    62
argument implies
                                                    1
                                     1                     1
      (m,
       ¯ , g ; L) = L ( ) =                                       (s)w(s)ds
                                y
                                ^(¯
                                   , g ; L; r
                                            ¯)     (s -     ~ ) 
                                     1
                                                               1
                            =                                                        ds
                                         RD (~
                                             ,    ¯, 1; x) + (s - 
                                               ¯, r               ~ ) y
                                                                      ^(¯
                                                                         , g ; L; r
                                                                                  ¯)

and for good firms with opacity ~>¯ , L ( ) = 1.


Interest Rate Regimes. Next, we need to determine what range of bonds has each
kind of interest rate. In order to do so, introduce the following function.


E(, r, ; x). Define
                                                                                             
     E (, r, ; x)  max            w(s)ds -  (1 - )                   y
                                                                     ^(z, b; L; r)dz +          y
                                                                                                ^(z, g ; L; r)dz
                     [,1]                                                                 


For a bond issued by good firm of opacity  , interest rate r and remaining firm demand
for bonds issuance , E (, r, ; x) measures the maximum over  >  of the difference
between the endowment of all investors who can recognize  is good but cannot rec-
ognize that  is good, and how much is needed to finance  units of all the bonds in
[,  ] which firms demand if they all face interest rate r. A bond interest rate can only
be determined by cash-in-the-market if E (, rC ( ), ( ); x) = 0. A strictly positive
value would mean that there exists a range of investors s  [,  ] for some  >  ,
all of whom can identify some bond in the range [,  ] as a good bond (but not any
bonds offered by firms with opacity higher than  ) and whose collective endowment
exceeds what is necessary to finance all the bonds demanded by firms in [,  ] facing
a interest rate rC ( ). Since these investors will want to spend their entire endowment
financing bonds, it must be that some bond in the range [,  ] must face a interest
rate lower than rC ( ). This is because D  r
                                              < 0, and a lower interest rate would push
the firm demand up and bring demand closer to supply. But then monotonicity implies
that the interest rate faced by a good firm with opacity  must be lower than rC ( ),
a contradiction.
Next, suppose one knows that    is the lower limit of one type of region. In a similar
manner to (Kurlat, 2016), the following procedure finds the higher end of that region,
the type of region immediately above and the prices within the region.



                                              63
     1. For a cash-in-the-market region, the higher end is

              inf { >  : rN S ( ) < rC ( ) or E (, rC ( ), ( ); rH ) > 0 or rC ( ) > r
                                                                                     ¯}
                                                                                     (B.29)

        and the region to the right is a nonselective region (first condition) or a bunching
        region (second condition), and bunching-with-scarcity (third condition), respec-
        tively. Within the region, rL ( ) = rC ( ) and ( ) = (      ).
     2. For a bunching region, the higher end is

              min{ >  : E (, rC (¯     ); rH ) = 0}
                                  ), (¯                                               (B.30)

        and the region to the right is a cash-in-the-market region. Within the region,
        rL ( ) = rL ( ) and r( ) = r( ).
     3. For a non-selective region, the higher end is


                                w ( )
              inf   <:                           > r( ) for some   (, )
                            ^(, g ; L, rN S ( ))
                            y

                    or E (, rC ( ), ( ); rH ) > 0 or rN S ( )  r
                                                               ¯                      (B.31)


        and the region to the right is a cash-in-the-market region (former condition),
        (second condition), and bunching-with-scarcity (third condition), respectively.
                                                          w(^s( ))
        Within the region, rL ( ) = rN S ( ) and ( ) = y^(,g ;L,rN S ( ))
                                                                          .
     4. For a bunching-with-scarcity-region, the higher end is 1. Within the region,
        rL ( ) = r
                 ¯ and ( ) = ( ).

   The first region is a bunching region with  = 0, rL (  ) = 0, and (   ) =    ¯ . If either
   one of the sets defined by (B.29), (B.30), (B.31) is empty, that region extends up to
   1; or the bunching-with-scarcity region is hit and it extends all the way to 1.

(ii) Firm optimization.
   Let 2 denote the index of the lowest  firm who faces a interest rate r
                                                                        ¯

         w(2 ) = y
                 ^(2 , g ; L),




                                           64
    and let 3 denote the index of the highest  opacity whose good firms do not face ra-
    tioning in the bunching-with-scarcity region, defined as the solution to equation (B.28).
    For any good firm with opacity  < 2 , since r( ) > 0, the rationing function (B.21)
    implies that in order to issue all of the firm bonds, the reservation interest rate should
    be rL ( ). Good firm with opacity  > 2 are indifferent between raising any number
    of bonds, so the issuance decision is optimal. For any bad firm, the rationing function
    implies that reservation interest rate is r
                                              ¯. Therefor credit issuance decisions are optimal
    for all firms and the total number of bonds they issue follows directly.

(iii) International investor optimization.
    For s  [sN , 1], each investor chooses the highest interest rate market on which there is
    an opacity level  such that x(g ; , s, 0) = g and S (m, , g ) > 0. Since r~(m)  0, this
    is optimal. For s  [s0 , sN ), investors only place weight on markets where nonselective
    pricing prevails. Equation (B.25) implies they are indifferent between financing bonds
    and staying out, since the highest interest rate market where there is a  such that
    x(g ; , s, 0) = g and S (m, , g ) > 0 has r ~(m) = 0, there is no other market in which
    they would strictly prefer to finance. For s < s0 , the same logic implies that no
    financing is optimal.

(iv) Allocation function.
    For any market m( ) where  falls in either a cash-in-the-market or a nonselective
    range, the NMR algorithm implies that all the investors face a residual supply propor-
    tional to the original supply, so equation (B.17) follows from Appendix B of Kurlat
    (2016), equation (65).
    For markets m( ) where  falls in a bunching or bunching-with-scarcity region as
    described above and  is of the form (,  ; s) = I ( = g &  < s), then the differential
    equations (B.19) follows from Appendix B of Kurlat (2016), equation (66), along with
    equation (D.19). Then (B.18) follows from applying the NMR algorithm.

(v) Rationing function.
    Follows from applying equation (67) in Appendix B of Kurlat (2016).



Lemma B.1 Every solution to robust program A.3 satisfies

        (m, ,  ; )  y                             ~(m; ) < rR (,  ; )
                     ^ (,  ; , rH ( ), rL ( )) if r
        (m, ,  ; ) = 0                            ~(m; ) > rR (,  ; )
                                               if r

                                             65
for some reservation interest rate, rR (,  ; ).
                    ~(m; ) < rR (,  ; ), dd
    Furthermore, if r                        (m,, ;)
                                              r
                                              ~(m;)
                                                      0.

Proof. We start with the first part of the proposition. For simplicity, let j denote the firm
       ^(,  )  y
(,  ), y          ^ (,  ; , rH , rL ( )),  (m, j )   (m, ,  ; ), and  (m, j )   (m, ,  ; ).
Also, we suppress the dependence of interest rate on prudence shock  = H, L and write
r
~(m). Each individual firm is small and takes the prices as given, and does not affect the
schedule of prices either.
   Assume the contrary. This implies that there are two markets, m and m with r      ~(m ) <
r
~(m) such that, for some j , the firm chooses  (m, j ) > 0 and  (m , j ) < y
                                                                           ^(,  ). There are
four possible cases:

  (i)  (m; i) > 0 and  (m , j ) > 0. Then the firm can increase his utility by choosing demand
      ~ with  ~ (m , j ) =  (i, m ) + and ~ (m, j ) =  (m , j ) -  (m ,j )
                                                                   (m,j )
                                                                           ) for some positive .

 (ii)  (m, j ) > 0 and  (m , j ) = 0. Consider a sequence such that  n (m , j ) > 0. By the
      argument in part 1, for any n the solution to robust firm problem must have either
       n (m, j ) = 0 or  n (m , j )  y
                                     ^(,  ) (or both). Therefore either the condition that
       (m, j )   (m, j ) or the condition that  n (m , j )   (j, m ) in a robust solution is
       n

      violated.

(iii)  (m, j ) = 0 and  (m , j ) > 0. Consider a sequence such that  n (m , j ) > 0. By the
      argument in part 1, for any n the solution to robust firm problem must have either
       n (m, j ) = 0 or  n (m , j )  y
                                     ^(,  ) (or both). Therefore either the condition that
       n (m, j )   (m, j ) or the condition that  n (m , j )   (m , j ) in a robust solution is
      violated.

(iv)  (m, j ) =  (m , j ) = 0. Consider a sequence such that  n (m , j ) > 0 and suppose
     that there is a sequence of solutions to robust firm problem which satisfies  n (m , j ) 
                 ^(,  ). This implies that for any sequence such that  n (m, j ) > 0 and for
      (m , j ) < y
     any n, the solution to robust firm problem must have  n (m, j ) = 0. Therefore the
     condition that  n (m, j )   (m, j ) in a robust solution is violated.



Lemma B.2 In any equilibrium rL ( ) is non-decreasing in  everywhere.

Proof.



                                              66
   Assume the contrary. Then when  = L, there exists bonds offered by good firms with
opacity ,  with  <  such that rL ( ) > rL ( ).For this to be consistent with firm
optimization, it must be that

       (M0 ,  , g ; L) <  (M0 , , g ; L) = 1,

    where the inequality follows from firm optimization, and the equality from definition
of rL ( ) and M0 , where M0 = {m : r  ~(m)  rL ( )}. But investor optimization and the
signal structure when  = L requires that investors only use rules of the form (,  ; s) =
1 ( = g &   s). This implies that for any M0  M ,

       (M0 ,  , g ; L)   (M0 , , g ; L),

a contradiction.


C      Simple Global Equilibrium.
       Construction of Equilibrium in Real Investment (t = 0)
Here we connect y       ^(,  ; , rH , rL ) to (,  ; ), and show that it satisfies the required
conditions in equilibrium. At t = 0, firms anticipate the date t = 1 continuation
value and choose the initial and maintained investment levels, I (,  ), {i(,  ; )} ,
to maximize their expected utility as defined in program (12).
                                                                rH
     Throughout this section, for brevity we will use qH = 1+     rH
                                                                     , rL ( ) = r(, g ; L), qL ( ) =
  rL ( )              r
                      ¯
1+rL ( )
         , and q¯ = 1+¯ r
                          .
     We start by constructing y     ^(,  ; ), i.e. the maximum liquidity that a firm can raise
on the international markets. Maintaining i(,  ; ) units allows a good firm to issue up
                        1
to (,  ; ) = 1+r(,          ; )
                                i(,  ; ) bonds, with unit face value each, without violating the
pledgeability constraint.
     Bad firms value each unit of continued investment more than good firms since investors
cannot seize anything from their output. Moreover, (1) they do not need any liquidity if
 = L, since they cannot continue if hit by a liquidity shock, and (2) they face the same
financing condition as good firms if  = H but can only partially continue. It follows that
bad firms save less liquidity, and every bad firm have enough collateral (initial scale) to issue
up to    ¯ . See section "Firm problem given the optimal choice of issuance" in C.2 for more
detail.




                                                67
       Putting this together we have19
                      
                       (,  ; )
                                        = g ;  = H or ( = L and   2 )
         y
         ^ (,  ; ) =       (2 ,  ; )    = g ;  = L and  > 2                                           (C.1)
                      
                         ¯              = b;  ,  
                      

   Substituting the above y^ into the t = 1 credit market equilibria considerably simplifies the
                                                    1
expressions. In particular, when  = H , (1 - ) s y    ^(, b; H )d reduces to (1 - ) (1 - s)¯  .
                                  1
Similarly, when  = L, (1 - ) 0 y    ^(, b; H )d reduces to (1 - )   ¯.

Remark. Recall that in section C we assumed y       ^(,  ; , rH , rL ) is decreasing in the (com-
mon) interest rate when  = H , and in the firm specific rL . With the above mapping, we
need to verify that the equilibrium (,  ; ) is in fact downward sloping in rH , rL , which we
will do in this section.
    Next, using the y ^ defined in (C.1), we specialize the investor wealth function to satisfy
the sufficient condition C.1.(iv). This specification implies a particular form of equilibrium
when  = L, which we use along with the equilibrium in  = H to derive firm's optimal
investment decision at t = 0.

C.1        Specializing the International Investors Wealth Function
We impose the following parameter restrictions going forward, to focus on a simple global
equilibrium. They are also a sufficient condition for existence of a simple global equilibrium,
as shown in the proof of Proposition 7.

 Assumption C.1
              1
  (i)        1-

         (1-)              (g - )
 (ii)      
                   g  (1-)+(g - )(L  -1)

(iii) w(0)   and lims1 w(s) = 0.
                 (g - )(1+(1-)H )
 (iv) min                         , -w()
                (g (1-)+(g - )H ) (+w( )L )
                                                             (1-)
                                                          (1-)+(1- )
                                                                           

  Condition (i) ensures that when there is liquidity risk,  > 0, without access to credit
markets firms prefer to invest all of their initial endowment and do not use any part of it to
manage liquidity risk. It also implies that without access to credit markets firms do want
  19
    We will show that when  = L, good firms with opacity  < 2 are indifferent in the scale at which
they continue. Thus the above y ^ is an equilibrium. We pick this tie-breaking rule because it simplifies the
exposition. For more detail see section B.2, Bunching-with-scarcity.


                                                     68
                                                                       1
to invest (rather than consume right away), which requires  > 1-         
                                                                          and follows since   ,
 >  . Condition (ii) ensures that the common interest rate is not prohibitively high when
 = H , so that firms use international markets and part of their own endowment to manage
liquidity risk, as opposed to investing all of their initial endowment. Condition (iii) ensures
two properties of the wealth function. First, low-expertise investors have sufficient wealth so
that some bonds are issued at zero interest rate. Second, expert capital is in short supply.
Condition (iv) ensures that when investors are cautious, there is no equilibrium interest rate
for which some investors are willing to buy up all the offered securities independent of their
signal.
    Consider rC ( ) and rN S ( ) defined in equation (B.23) and (B.25), respectively. First,
note that we have assumed the wealth function is monotonically decreasing, w (s) < 0, so
rC ( ) does not become non-monotone. As such, bunching region can only emerge below some
threshold, 0   <  , and bunching-with-scarcity only above some threshold,          ¯ <   1.
    In what follows, we derive a parametric assumption to ensure that non-selective region
does not emerge. Non-selective interest rate schedule is an upper bound on the prevailing
interest rate in each market. Thus a sufficient condition for this upper bound to never be
active, i.e. for the non-selective pricing region not to emerge, is to have rC ( )  rN S ( ) for
markets where 0 < r   ~(m) < r¯.

                  -1   w (^
                          s( ))                (1 - ) ¯
      rC ( ) =                          1                             ,
                                            (, g ; L, rH , rC ( ))d
                                        

where -1 (.) denotes the inverse of function (, g ; L; {rH , rC ( )}) with respect to rC ( ), and
{rH , rC ( )} indicates the dependence of demand function on (H, L) interest rate explicitly.
   Moreover, we have used that y   ^(, g ; L; {rH , rC ( )}) = (, g ; L; {rH , rC ( )}) for rC ( ) <
r
¯, and that ( ) = 1 when there is no non-selective region in equilibrium. Note that
y
^( , g ; L) =  ¯ (  ) minimizes the right hand side on the above equation, which yields
the following sufficient condition

                  -1   w ( )      (1 - )
      r C ( ) =                           .                                                   (C.2)
                                  (1 -  )

    Proof of Proposition 7 shows that Assumption C.1.(iv) is a sufficient condition on prim-
itives to ensure that (C.2) holds.
    This implies that under Assumption C.1, there is no non-selective region when  = L,
1 > 0 and 3 < 1. The equilibrium pricing regions are thus characterized by three thresholds
1 < 2 < 3 such that
  (i) Good firms with opacity 1   > 0 are in bunching region and face zero interest rate.

                                                 69
 (ii) Good firms with opacity 2   > 1 are in cash-in-the-market pricing region.

(iii) Good firms with opacity 3   > 2 are in bunching-with-scarcity market m
                                                                           ¯ at
      interest rate r
                    ¯(rH ), defined in (D.17), and  (m,
                                                     ¯ , g ; L) = 1.

(iv) Good firms with opacity 1   > 3 are in bunching-with-scarcity market m
                                                                          ¯ at interest
     rate r
          ¯(rH ), defined in (D.17), and  (m,
                                           ¯ , g ; L) < 1.

 (v) No bad firm issues any bonds in any market.

In this equilibrium
                 
                  y
                    ^(,  )                                 if  = g and   3
      y (,  ) =     (m(¯r), ,  )^
                                y (,  ) = L ( )^
                                               y (,  )     if  = g and  > 3              (C.3)
                 
                   0                                       if  = b
                 


C.2     Firm Optimal Decision
Consider the firm problem (12). Each firm j takes his optimal behavior at t = 1 as given,
which along with t = 1 prices in different prudence shocks, the allocation function and the
rationing function fully describes firm j continuation payoff. Firm j then chooses his business
plan to maximize his expected utility given this continuation payoff.

Derivation of firm optimal choice of bond issuance, equations (2) and (13). A
firm hit by liquidity shock has three possible options, at t = 0, in how to manage a liquidity
shock in each aggregate state at t = 1. First, the firm can choose not to insure against the
liquidity risk and abandon investment if a liquidity shock happen. This would lead to the
highest scale of operation, I (,  ). Second, the firm can choose to save enough out of his
own endowment, through the banker, such that he has sufficient liquidity at t = 1 and does
not need to raise any extra financing on the international markets. This option leads to the
lowest scale of operation. Third, the firm can choose to save a lower amount from his initial
endowment and borrow the rest from international investors. This leads to an intermediate
level of scale of operation.
    From the linearity of the firm problem, the firm chooses one option and does the same
thing for all units of investment. Moreover, Assumption C.1.(i) implies the first option
dominates second. Then Assumption C.1.(iii) implies that borrowing on the international
markets are sufficiently cheap that the third option dominates the first one, which in turn
leads to firm's optimal liquidity choice, equation (2). Conditions (i) and (iii) of assumption
(C.1) are derived in proof of Proposition 7.

                                              70
   Alternatively, a good firm who is not hit by a liquidity shock is indifferent between issuing
bonds or not if r(,  ; ) = 0, and otherwise prefers not to issue. Thus these firms do not
participate in the international markets. It follows that, if a bad firm not hit by a liquidity
shock tries to issue bonds, his type is revealed and he does not succeed in raising funding,
and it will not participate either.
   As such, only firms hit by liquidity shock attempt to raise funding from international
investors at t = 1, which in turn implies the exante budget constraint 13.

Firm problem given the optimal choice of issuance. Since problem (12) is linear,
equations (4)-(13) determine the optimal firm choices, i(,  ; )   whenever they are non-
zero. Plugging these solutions into (13) determines I (,  ).
   The rest of the argument follows from a parallel logic to (Holmstr¨ om and Tirole, 1998),
(Holmstr¨om and Tirole, 2011). Conjecture i(,  ; H ) = I (,  ), and let 0  x  1 denote
the scale of investment for firm j = (,  ) when  = L.
   Use the t = 2 interest rate along with equation (13) to get I (,  ). Substitute I (,  ) in
the objective function (12).

Good firms. Consider a good firm j = (, g ). The objective function of the good firm
boils down to
               (g -  )(H + L x) + (1 - )g
      (x) =                               -1
                1 +  (H qH + L qL ( )x)

Thus he optimal investment is determined by

               L  g -  - H  2 (qH - qL ( )) - g  qL ( ) (1 - L ) - H qH 
       (x) =
                                   (1 +  (H qH + L qL ( )x))2

   As such,  (x) > 0(< 0) implies x = 1(x = 0), and if  (x) = 0 good firm j is indifferent
between any level of continuation when  = L and the firm has a liquidity shock . This
implies

                       (g -  )(1 + H rH  )
      qL ( ) < q
               ¯=                          .                                              (C.4)
                     ((1 - )g + H (g -  ))
            rL ( )
Substitute 1+rL ( )
                    for qL ( ) to get equation (D.17).
    Next, we need to make sure that our conjecture for continuation at full scale in high
state regime, i(,  ; H ) = I (,  ), is correct for a good firm. For this conjecture to hold,
it must be that rH < r   ¯H such that every good firm j prefers to submit liquidity demand


                                              71
to international markets when  = H . Using Assumption C.1.(i), the alternative is to set
i(,  ; H ) = 0, do not do any liquidity risk management and abandon production if hit by a
liquidity shock in state  = H , and instead increase I (,  ). Since firms with opacity  = 1
are those who face the lowest interest rate in  = L, such deviation is most profitable for
them. Thus it is sufficient to ensure that they do not want to deviate. Thus r¯H solves

                                  g (1 - ) + (g -  )
      g (1 - ) + ( -  )L =                    r
                                              ¯H
                                      1 + H  1+¯rH

Thus if
                             (g -  )
      rH < r
           ¯H =                                                                           (C.5)
                  g  (1 - ) + (g -  )(L  - 1)

all good firms prefer to do liquidity management using a combination of own saving and
international markets.
    Next consider the most transparent good firm, j0,g = (0, g ). When  = L this firm faces
zero interest rate, and thus does not need to hold any precautionary liquidity against this
state. Moreover, as long as rH < r¯H , every good firm (including j0,g ) prefers to do liquidity
                                                                           rH
management against the liquidity shock in  = H state, and saves H  1+       rH
                                                                               per unit of scale
towards this state. It follows that j0,g faces the lowest possible interest rate in both states
of the world, and thus has the highest investment level among all good firms, I (0, g ). As
explained at the end of the proof, we have chosen    ¯  I (0, g ).

Bad firms. Consider any bad firm. Assumption C.1.(i) implies firms either do liquidity
management using international markets, or do not do any liquidity management. When
 = L a bad firms hit by a liquidity shock is not able to raise any international financing, so
he has to liquidate investment, which means for a bad firm x = 0. Thus no bad firms save
any liquidity against  = L aggregate state. Next, consider the least transparent bad firm,
j1,b = (0, b). When  = H , H (1) = 1, thus j0,b is not rationed, and is treated as a good firm.
                              rH
Thus he needs to save H  1+     rH
                                   , per unit of scale, to be able to continue at full scale. It
follows that j1,b saves the same amount of liquidity as j0,g , and thus chooses the same level
of investment   ¯.
     Every other bad firm,  > 0 is rationed when  = H , thus they hold lower liquidity,
compared to j1,b , against this state of the world. This in turn implies they choose a larger
scale of operation: I (, b) > I (1, b),   > 0. Thus every bad firm has enough collateral
to borrow up to    ¯ . Furthermore, bad firms face the same interest rate rH as good firms
when  = H , and moreover they do not pay back, so if good firms participate in the


                                              72
international markets when  = H , it is optimal for bad firms to do so as well. It follows
that y^(, b; , rH , rL ) as defined in equation (C.1) is optimal.
    Thus at t = 0, similar to all bad firms, firm ^ j does not save any precautionary liquidity
for  = L state. Bad firms also face the same interest rate rH when  = H , and furthermore
they do not pay back, so if firm j participates in the international markets when  = H , all
bad firms will do so as well.

Firm investment at t = 0. Next we characterize the t = 0 firm investment. Substitute
back the optimal continuation decision, and corresponding date t = 2 prices into equation
(13) to get the optimal investment decision
                 
                           1
                                      if  < 2
                  1+(H qH +L qL ())
                 
                         1
      I (, g ) =   1+ (H qH +L q
                               ¯)
                                      if 2   < 3                                    (C.6)
                                L q¯
                  1+(1-L ()) 1+H qH
                 
                     1+ (H qH +L q¯)
                                      if   3

    where L ( ) =  (m(¯  r), , g ; L), 1 is defined by (D.28); and the investment for   3
follows from substituting the continuation decision corresponding to each aggregate state in
the date t = 0 budget constraint:
                                                      L q ¯
                1 - L q
                      ¯D(¯
                         r; rH )L ( )   1-                       ( )
                                                              ¯) L
                                                  1+ (H qH +L q
     I (, g ) =                       =
                    1 + H qH                         1 + H qH
                 1+H qH +L q ¯(1-L ( ))
                   1+ (H qH +L q¯)            1 + (1 - L ( )) 1+ Lr
                                                                  ¯
                                                                H qH
             =                            =                            .
                      1 + H qH                 1 +  (H qH + L q
                                                              ¯)

Moreover,

     I (, b) = 1 - qH H H ( )¯
                                                                                         (C.7)

where H ( ) =  (mH , , b; H ).
    Next we verify that for good firms who do payback the international investors, the liq-
uidity a firm raises at t = 1 on the international market, y (,  ; ) in problem (A.1), is equal
to its liquidity need, (,  ; ) associated with optimal investment decision (C.6). This is im-
mediate from comparing equations (B.15), (C.3) and (C.1). It follows that firm j 's realized
issuance of bonds on the international market, (,  ; ), is given by:

  (i) Good firms,  = g

             (, g ; ) =        I (,  )d (m, , g ; )                                      (C.8)
                          Mj



                                                73
           where  (m, , g ; ) is given by
               
                   1            1+¯
                                  r
               
                   D(¯  r;rH )(s-2 )- 2
                                         w(s)ds
                                                w(s)ds,    ~(m) = r
                                                           r      ¯ &  > 3 &  = L
                                       1
               
                 1                                              r
                                                                ~(m) < r
                                                                       ¯ or r      ¯ &   3
                                                                            ~(m) = r            &=L
               
 (m, , g ; ) =
                                                            or r
                                                               ~(m) = rH &  = H
                0                                           otherwise
                                                                                               (C.9)

       (ii) Bad firms,  = b

                   (,  ; ) = ¯          (m, ,  ; )dm                                          (C.10)
                                 mMj


           where Mj , j = (, b) is the set of markets firm j = (, b) can sell bonds in, and
                                      1+rH             w ( s)
                                                ¯ (rH )  ds
                         sH (1-)(1-s)D(0;rH )+()D
                                                                   ~(m) = rH &   sH &  = H
                                                                   r
      (m, , b; ) =
                        0                                          otherwise
                                                                                              (C.11)

        To complete the proof we need to verify that there is a fixed point to the joint t = 0, 1
     problem, i.e. date t = 0 optimal outcomes do constitute an equilibrium in the international
     markets at t = 1. We do this in Proposition 7.

     Maximum liquidity demand on international markets. By construction of the model,
     firms can always submit excess demand y   ^ on (different) markets at t = 1 to undo the ra-
     tioning by investors. To avoid this, we need to impose an exogenous upper bound on how
     much demand for bond issuance firm can submit. We choose         ¯  I (0, g ) = D(0; rH ) for
     convenience as in this case good firms are not constrained by this limit in equilibrium, while
     no bad firms can undo rationing by submitting more than what they need.


     D      Proofs
     Proof of Propositions 1, 2, and Lemma 1 . We prove the results in Section 3 backward.
     However, in the main text the results are stated forward. As such, we will present the 3 proofs
     jointly and point to the corresponding result accordingly. Furthermore, the credit market
     is as described in Appendix A. Furthermore, with the same argument as in Appendix B,

                                                     74
a bold investor extends loans to all firms who do not produce conclusive evidence of being
bad, while a cautious investor only extends loans to firms who produce conclusive evidence
for being good.
    We proceed in two steps. First we conjecture investors' choice of test (information choice)
and acceptance rule in each state, describe the equilibrium for the conjectured test and
acceptance rule, and prove that it is an equilibrium. We then step back and prove that
investors' optimal choice of test is consistent with the conjectured choice and the proposed
equilibrium in each state.

High Aggregate Shock ( = H .) We conjectures that all investors are bold in this state
and accept applications with x(,  ) = g only. In equilibrium, a fraction of unskilled and all
investors with s > s0 advertise rH . All good firms demand    ¯ (H )  r1 H
                                                                            credit at all interest
rates not higher than rH and all bad firms demand     ¯ (H ) credit at all interest rates. Good
firms' demand is fulfilled at rH while bad firms are allocated
                   
                    0
                                                          if   [0, s0 ]
                         1         w ( s1 )     1
       (, b; H ) =      rB
                           - H +(1-H )(1-s1 ) - H w (1)   if   [s0 , s1 ]                   (D.1)
                    1
                        rB
                           - 1H
                                w (1)                     if   [s1 , 1]

at rH . rH is defined using the condition that unskilled investors break even. It is the solution
to
              H                                         1
                             (1 + rH ) -                                  - 1 = 0,          (D.2)
      H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 )                   H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 )

i.e. the zero profit condition of an unskilled bold investor when all firms submit the same
credit demand at rH , and Assumption A.2 implies that she is the first investor who samples
the pool. H +(1 - H ) (1 - s0 ) is the fraction of applications which do not provide conclusive
evidence that they are bad in the bold test, when used by an investor with skill s0 , and the
                                                                    1
investor lends to them. Therefore, the investor has to test H +(1-   H )(1-s0 )
                                                                                applications to be
able to lend out her 1 unit. Out of these projects, H fraction are actually good and pay
back, generating the total revenue from lending. The second term is the cost of these tests.
Therefore, the unskilled group is indifferent whether to lend at rH or stay out.


           H w (s0 )           H              H w ( s 1 )
                             >    - w1 -                        >0                          (D.3)
      H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 )   rH        H + (1 - H ) (1 - s1 )




                                               75
is sufficient to endure that there exists an sH < s0 such that

             sH        H w (s0 )              H w (s1 )                   H
        1-                              +                       + w (1) =                    (D.4)
             s0   H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 ) H + (1 - H ) (1 - s1 )           rH

In turn, (D.4) ensures that at interest rate rH , the total credit supplied by a fraction 1 - s H
                                                                                               s0
of unskilled investors along with every other investors is exactly sufficient to satisfy the credit
demand of all good firms.
    The allocation of credit to bad firms is given by market clearing conditions. In particular,
we have
           sH     (1 - H ) (1 - s1 ) w (s0 ) (1 - H ) (1 - s1 ) w (s1 )
        1-                                   +                          = (1 - s1 ) (1 - H ) (, b; H )
           s0     H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 )       H + (1 - H ) (1 - s1 )
           sH     (1 - H ) (s1 - s0 ) w (s0 )
        1-                                    = (s1 - s0 ) (1 - H ) (, b; H )
           s0      H + (1 - H ) (1 - s0 )

for   [s1 , 1] and   [s0 , s1 ] respectively, which, together with (D.4), implies (D.1).
    Any investor with s > s0 strictly prefers to enter at rH as they make strictly fewer bad
loans. These investors do not advertise a higher rate as good firms do not demand credit
at higher rates. All entrants lend out all of their capital, thus none of them advertise a
lower rate either. All good firms can borrow up to their credit capacity, therefore they do
not demand credit at a higher rate. As all bad investors are rationed, by our robustness
requirement and the fact that they do not intend to pay back, they demand maximum credit
at higher interest rates as well, but do not raise any credit in those markets.

Low Aggregate Shock ( = L .) We conjecture that all investors are cautious in this
state and accept applications with x(,  ) = g only. In equilibrium, unskilled advertise the
rate r, moderately skilled advertise r
                                     ^, and the most skilled advertise r
                                                                       ¯. Bad firms are not
allocated any credit, hence by our robustness requirement, all bad firms demand maximum
credit ¯ (L )  1r
                  at every interest rate. Let rL ( ) denote the interest rate at which good
firms from country  can raise financing.
    Assume the following two conditions hold:
                1
      w(0)  s0 L ,                                                                           (D.5)
                r
                        1
      w(1) < (1 - s1 ) L ,                                                                   (D.6)
                        r
                        ¯




                                                76
Then, rL ( ) is given by
               
                r
                                                    if   [0, s0 ]
                                (s1 -s0 )
     rL ( ) =     ^ = max{min{ Lw
                  r               (s1 )
                                           ¯}, r}
                                          ,r        if   [s0 , s1 ]
               
                  r
                  ¯                                 if   [s1 , 1] ,
               

If in addition, we have

      1    w ( s1 )   1
                                                                                         (D.7)
      ¯ (s1 - s0 ) L
      r               r

    then the interest rate schedule corresponds to the following credit allocation for good
firms on the international market:
                    
                       1
                    
                     r
                                 if   [0, s0 ]
       (, g ; L ) =    1
                       r
                       ^
                                 if   [s0 , s1 ]
                    
                     w(1)
                    
                                 if   [s1 , 1] .
                         (1-s1 )L


Demand of the good firms from least opaque countries,   [0, s1 ] , is fully satisfied at the
market with minimum interest rate, rL ( ) = r, i.e. (, g ; L ) =  (m(rL ( )), , g ; ) =
¯ (L ). r is the solution to the zero profit condition of unskilled cautious investors when all
type of firms submit the same credit demand at the given interest rate,

                     1
     (1 + r) -                - 1 = 0.                                                   (D.8)
                     L s 0

For these investors, only fraction L s0 of the sampled firms provide conclusive evidence that
they are good, which implies the second term is the cost. However, all the passed applications
are from good firms, hence the revenue is the first term. Therefore, unskilled investors are
indifferent whether to advertise interest rate r or stay inactive. The fraction of unskilled
entrants is consistent with market clearing if condition (D.5) is satisfied. The acceptance
rule is rationalized by the same argument as in state  = H .
    Moderately skilled investors offer a higher rate r
                                                     ^, hence they make a positive rent. r ^ is
determined by the market clearing condition of these investors, through cash in the market
pricing,
                                1
     w ( s 1 ) = ( s 1 - s 0 ) L .
                                r
                                ^
                                                   -s0 )L
                                            ^ = (s1w
Thus, if condition (D.7) is satisfied, then r        (s1 )
                                                           , and otherwise r
                                                                           ^ takes the boundary
values of r and r
                ¯, correspondingly. The completes proof of Lemma 1.


                                              77
    Note that if an unskilled or moderately skilled investor were to advertise a higher rate,
she would not receive any applications she could pass her their skill level.
    As long as skilled capital is in short supply, i.e. condition (D.6) is satisfied, skilled
investors advertise the maximal interest rate any good firm is willing to accept r  ¯.
    Firms from the most opaque countries   [s1 , 1] who cannot raise capital at any other
advertised interest rate demand the maximum      ¯ (L ) both at and under rL ( ) = r ¯. They can
only raise financing in the market with highest interest rate r ¯ tho since only in that market
they are recognized as good firms. Furthermore since skilled capital is in short supply, good
firms are rationed at this rate. Thus, (, g ; L ) for this group is given by the market clearing
condition

      w(1) = (1 - s1 )L (, g ; L ).

Assumption 2.(ii) ensures that (D.3) and (D.5)-(D.6) hold. This completes the proof of
Proposition 2.

Optimal Choice of Test. Now we show that in each aggregate state, each investor prefers
to choose the conjectured test and acceptance rule. Note that the skilled group's choice is
immaterial as they observe  of all firms regardless of their choice of test.
    Recall that the acceptance rule has to be measurable to the signal. That is, for any test,
investors have three choices.(1) they can accept applications generating x(,  ) = g only as
conjectured, (2) they can reject all applications regardless of the signal, (3) they can accept
all applications regardless of the signal. (2) is dominated by choosing to be inactive, while
(3) is dominated by choosing the bold test and following (1). The latter is so, because a
bold test rejects only bad firms, which is surely better than accepting all for any given pool.
Therefore, our conjectured acceptance rule has to be optimal for any choice of test.
    Consider an investor with skill s, running an -test and advertising an interest rate r un-
derstanding that the the corresponding market m,  (m, s) fraction of the good applications
and  (m, s) fraction of the bad applications she samples, are submitted by  > s firms.
Thus, lending out her one unit of capital at market m leads to the profit

        ( +  (1 -  )) (1 + r) - 
                                      -1
       +  ((1 -  )  + (1 - ) (1 -  ))

where we have omitted arguments of  (m, s) and  (m, s) for brevity. This expression is
consistent with the zero profit conditions (D.2) and (D.8).




                                              78
      The first order condition with respect to the optimal test is

       ( +(1- ))(1+r)-
       +((1- )+(1-)(1- ))
                            -1        ((1 -  ) (1 - ) +  (1 -  )) -  (1 - ) (1 -  ) (1 + r)
                                 =                                                          .
                                               ( +  ((1 -  )  + (1 - ) (1 -  )))2
                                                                                      (D.9)

   Observe that the sign is independent of , implying a corner solution. Therefore, when
(D.9) is positive the investor chooses the bold test, and when it is negative she chooses the
cautious test.
   When  = H , (D.9) must be positive for rH . As all firms submit demand at that rate,
 =  = s. Therefore, we need

                                                                 ( + (1 - ) (1 - s))
         ((1 - s) (1 - ) +  (1 - s)) - s (1 - ) (1 - s) 1 +                            >0
                                                                         
or:

        (1 - s) (1 - s (1 - )) (-s +  + s) > 0.

Thus
             
           >    > 1 - H                                                                 (D.10)
        s0   s1
ensures that both unskilled and moderately skilled strictly prefers to enter as bold.
   When  = L , for an unskilled investor, in the market with r where all firms submit and
so  =  = s0 , we need

                                                                            
         ((1 - s0 ) (1 - L ) + L (1 - s0 )) - L s0 (1 - L ) (1 - s0 ) 1 +
                                                                            L s 0
         = L (1 - s0 ) ( - s0 + L s0 ) < 0

or
        
           < 1 - L .                                                                    (D.11)
        s0
For moderately skilled investors, (D.9) is decreasing in r. Therefore, it is sufficient to show
that they prefer to enter as cautious at interest rate min r
                                                           ^ = r. Importantly, in the candidate
equilibrium  = (s1 - s0 ) ,  = s1 as only   [s0 , s1 ] good firms and all bad firms participate




                                                79
in the market with interest rate r
                                 ^. Therefore, it is sufficient if

         ((1 - s1 ) (1 - L ) + L (1 - (s1 - s0 )))
                                                 ( + (1 - L ) (1 - s1 ))
         - L (s1 - s0 ) (1 - L ) (1 - s1 ) 1 +                             <0
                                                          L
or
         (1 - (s1 - s0 ))
                             < 1 - L .                                                     (D.12)
        (1 - s1 ) (s1 - s0 )

(D.10)-(D.12) follow from Assumptions 2.(i) and 2.(iv). This completes the proof of Propo-
sition 1.

Proof of Proposition 3.
  The firm problem at date t = 1 is defined in (A.1).

     (i) The general form of equilibrium for  = H is characterized in section B.1. (rH , sH ) are
         given by equations (B.8) and (B.8), respectively, using y
                                                                 ^ defined in (C.1).

 (ii) The general form of equilibrium for  = L is characterized in section B.2. The form
      in (14) is then derived by specializing the wealth function in section C.1, which also
      uses y
           ^ defined in (C.1) as well as Assumption C.1.




Proof of Proposition 4.
  The firm problem at date t = 1 is defined in (A.1).

     (i) The general form of equilibrium for  = H is characterized in section B.1. Section
         C.2 shows that the optimal continuation decision is determined by the constraint. It
         follows that the equilibrium amount that the firm raises is given by y (,  ; H, rH , rL )
         in program (A.1), using y^ defined in (C.1) and equations (2) and (13) with the optimal
         i(,  ; H ).

 (ii) The general form of equilibrium for  = L is characterized in section B.2, and special-
      ized in section C.1 by specializing the wealth function under Assumption C.1. Section
      C.2 shows that the optimal continuation decision is determined by the constraint. It
      follows that the equilibrium amount that the firm raises is given by y (,  ; L, rH , rL )
      in program (A.1), using y^ defined in (C.1) and equations (2) and (13) with the optimal
      i(,  ; L) and  =  .

                                                  80
Proof of Proposition 5.
    The derivation of optimal firm scale of operation, as well as the optimal continuation
decision, is provided in section C.2. (15) follows from (C.6), where the rationing function is
defined in (C.9).

Proof of Proposition 6.
    The derivation of optimal firm exante investment, as well as the optimal continuation
decision, is provided in section C.2. (18) follows from (C.7), where the rationing function is
defined in (C.11).


 Lemma D.1 Assume G(x) and H (x, z ) are continuous in x. Equation (D.13) has a fixed
point x  [0, 1],
                                         1
                     (1 - )             sH (x)
                                                 H (x, z )dz
     F (x) =                    1                                  ;                    (D.13)
                 (1 - )        sH (x)
                                        H (x, z )dz + G(x)

where sH (x) is the solution to
        1
                                    1
                           1                                   w(s)ds = (1 - x),        (D.14)
       sH (x)   (1 - )    s
                               H (x, z )dz + G(x)

   if equation (D.14) has a solution, and sH (x) = 0 otherwise.

Proof of Lemma D.1.
   First note that if equation (D.14) has a solution in sH (x), it will be sH (x)  [0, 1]. The
reason is that w(s) = 0 for s > 1 and s < 0, so moving sH outside the [0, 1] interval does
not change the left hand side of equation (D.14).

Case 1 [Equation (D.14) holds with equality, sH  [0, 1]]. Consider the case where
sH is interior. Consider the self-map on F : [0, 1]  [0, 1]. We use Brouwer's fixed-point
theorem to prove existence of a fixed point. [0, 1] is a compact convex set. We need to show
is that F (x) is a continuous function, and maps [0, 1] to itself, which is immediate since the
ratio in F (x) is positive and (weakly) smaller than one.
    Next we move to proving continuity. G(x) is continuous in x. H (x, z ) is also continuous
in x, and so is H (x, z )dz . Thus if a solution sH (x) to equation (D.14) exists, it is also
continuous.

                                                                 81
   This implies that if a solution to equation (D.14) exists, then everything on the right
hand side of equation (D.13) is continuous, so F (x) is a continuous map from [0, 1] to [0, 1],
which implies by Brouwer's theorem a fix point exists.

Case 2 [Equation (D.14) only holds with inequality, thus sH = 0]. Then equation
(D.13) becomes one equation in one unknown in x, which with the same argument as the
previous case has a fixed point.

Proof of Proposition 7.
  We start by defining two values that we will use throughout the proof.

          g  (1 - ) + (g -  )(L  - 1)
     =
             g  (1 - ) + (g -  )L 
                                                                          
             1-                      1
     ¯ ( ) =                                                           - 1       
                     min (g -)(1+(1-)H ) ,        -w( )
                                (g (1-)+(g - )H ) (+w( )L )


   Next, we provide the full description of equilibrium. Equations (D.15)-(D.30) spell out
how the equilibrium objects rH , rL ( ), sH , 1 , 2 , 3 , L ( ) and H ( ) are constructed.

                      (1 - ) (1 - sH (x)) D (0; x)
     F (x) =                                       ¯ ( x)                                 (D.15)
                  (1 - ) (1 - sH (x)) D (0; x) + D

where sH (x) solves
        1
                              1
       sH (x)
                                        ¯ (x) w(s)ds = (1 - x),
                (1 - ) (1 - s)D(0; x) + D
                                                                                          (D.16)

   if equation (D.16) has a positive solution, and sH (x) = 0 otherwise.
   Moreover
                    (g -  ) (1 + H x)
         y
         ¯(x) =                                                                           (D.17)
                (g (1 - ) +  (g -  ) H ) 
                        
     D(y ; x) =                                                                           (D.18)
                1 +  (H x + L y )
                                      2 (x)
        ¯ (x) =1 (x)D(0; x) +
        D                                     D(y C ( ); x)d
                                     1 (x)
                                                     1
                                      L y¯(x)
                   + 1 - 2 (x) +                            (1 - L ( ))d D (¯
                                                                            y (x); x) .   (D.19)
                                     1 + H x        3 (x)




                                                    82
where
                      - w( )(1 + H x)
       y C ( ; x)                                               [1 (x), 2 (x)] .                          (D.20)
                     ( + w( )L )

   The rationing functions are given as follows
                                                                                                         
                               1
                                                               1
        L ( ) = min 1,                                                              3 (x)
                                                                                                     w(s)ds
                                   (1 - y      y (x); x)(s - 2 (x)) -
                                        ¯(x))D(¯                                    2 (x)
                                                                                            w(s)ds
                                                                                                          (D.21)
                            
                                                  1               w(s)
       H ( ) = min 1,                                       ¯            ds                               (D.22)
                           sH (x)   (1 - ) (1 - s)D(0; x) + D(x) (1 - x)

and 1 (x), 2 (x), 3 (x) are defined as follows.
   Let ^ 1 (x) and ^ 2 (x) be the solution to the following two equations, respectively:

       w (2 ) -  (1 - y
                      ¯(x)) D (¯
                               y (x); x) = 0,                                                             (D.23)
       w (1 ) - D (0; x) = 0.                                                                             (D.24)

Then

       2 (x) = min{max{^ 2 (x), 0}, 1},                                                                   (D.25)
       1 (x) = min{max{^ 3 (x), 0}, 1}.                                                                   (D.26)

Moreover, let ^ 3 be the solution to
              1
                                             1
       1=                                                          3 (x)
                                                                                    w(s)ds                (D.27)
             3    (1 - y      y (x); x) (s - 2 (x))) -
                       ¯(x))D(¯                                    2 (x)
                                                                           w(s)ds



       3 (x) = min{max{^ 3 (x), 0}, 1}.                                                                   (D.28)

                                             ¯(x )
                                             y
Finally, given the fixed point x , r
                                   ¯=       1-y¯(x )
                                                     ,   and interest rates rH and rL ( ) are given by

                x
         rH =                                                                                             (D.29)
              1 - x
                y C (  ; x )
       r
       ^( ) =                 .                                                                           (D.30)
              1 - y C ( ; x )

and (14).
   We next explain the mapping between the equations in the statement of the proposition


                                                     83
to the solution developed in sections C and B. To simplify the formulas, the proposition is
stated in terms of premia rather than interest rates, using the monotone transformation
            r
      q=       .                                                                            (D.31)
           1+r
    Equation (D.18) writes the general form of expected maintenance cost of a good firm
                                                                             x         y
who faces premia x when  = H , and y when  = L, or interest rates 1-           x
                                                                                 and 1-  y
                                                                                           , respec-
tively. It uses the equilibrium firm scale of operation, defined by equation (C.6), and optimal
continuation scale. Substitute in equation (2) (with  =  ) to get firm liquidity demand
in international markets: (, g ; , rH ) = D(rL ( ); rH ). Using this demand functions, y        ^ at
t = 1 is defined in (C.1). It is straight forward to verify that using (C.1) to solve for the
firm problem at t = 1 (section B), y (,  ; ) = (,  ; ).
    Under the appropriate sufficient conditions on the parameters (see the end of this proposi-
tion), firms choose to participate in international markets when  = H , with the equilibrium
described in B.1, and when  = L with the equilibrium described in sections B.2 and C.1,.
Under this equilibrium structure, equation (D.19) aggregates the total required maintenance
across the pricing regions when  = L.
    Equation (D.17) rewrites the maximum premium q        ¯ in  = L, defined in equation (C.4),
when the common premium in high state is x. The threshold transparencies 1 , 2 and 3
are defined in equations (D.26), (D.25), and (D.28), respectively, and 3 =        ~ and 2 =     ¯ in
the  = L equilibrium in section B.2. This leads to the rationing function in equation (C.9).
Equation (D.24) determines the threshold where bunching region ends, at zero interest rate,
given liquidity demand function (D.18). Equation (D.23) determines the threshold where
bunching-with-scarcity region starts, at premium q     ¯ (interest rate r
                                                                        ¯). Equation (D.27) de-
termines the threshold where rationing starts in bunching-with-scarcity region, given the
liquidity demand
    Finally, equations (D.15) and (D.16) jointly determine the pooling premium and marginal
investor when  = H , at the above liquidity demand levels.
    The last equilibrium object to determine is demand function for credit { (m, ,  ; )}=H,L .
It is implied from Lemma B.1 and equation (C.1), Proposition 4, and equations (C.6)
and (C.7) to relate each firm demand for credit in each state to its the equilibrium scale
of operation.
    We use lemma D.1 to prove existence of equilibrium. Let G(x) = D           ¯ (x) and H (x) =
D(0; x). As such we need to show both functions are continuous.
    y
    ¯(x) is continuous. D(y ; x) is continuous in x for any x, y > 0 since 1+  (H x + L y ) > 0.
Thus D(0; x) and D(¯   y (x); x) are also continuous.


                                                84
    Now turn to 1 (x), 2 (x) and 3 (x). w(.) and D(y ; x) are continuous in x. D(y, x) is
constant in  and w(.) is increasing in  , so equations (D.23) and (D.24) have a unique
solution in  , so ^ 1 (x) and ^ 2 (x) exist, are unique, and continuous.
    Next, D(0, x) is decreasing in x. Moreover

                                                                  H - 
        y (x); x) - (1 - y
      D(¯                ¯(x))D(¯
                                y (x); x) = y
                                            ¯(x)D(¯
                                                  y (x); x) =          ,
                                                                  g - 
      d (1 - y
             ¯(x))D(¯
                    y (x); x)       dD(¯
                                       y (x); x)    2 H (g (1 - ) + H (g -  ))
                                  =              =                             < 0.
                  dx                   dx               (g -  )(1 + H x)2

Thus both     ^ 2 (x) and  ^ 1 (x) are monotonically decreasing in x. Since ^ 2 (x) and ^ 1 (x) are
continuous, (D.25) and (D.26) imply that 2 (x) and 1 (x) are also continuous and weakly
decreasing in x.
    Next consider the right hand side of (D.27). 2 (x) is continuous. Moreover, (D.27) is the
simplified version of (B.28). We have already shown that RD (1 , 2 (x), y    ¯(x), 1; x) > 0, and
y
^(2 (x), g ; L) = D(¯  y (x); x)(1 - x) > 0, thus the denominator is positive. Each term is also
continuous in x, which in turn implies the right hand side is continuous in x. Thus        ^ 3 (x) is
continuous as well, and using equation (D.28), 3 (x) is also continuous.
    Finally, continuity of i (x) i = 1, 2, 3, along with continuity of w(.),  (.) and D(y ; x) (in
x) implies D ¯ (x) is continuous. So by lemma D.1, the fixed point exists.


Explanation of Parameter Restrictions in Assumption C.1.

                                                                                      1
Optimal Firm Decision without Access to International Market [  1-                      
                                                                                         .] As-
sume the firm does not have access to international investors. So the firm can do one of the
two things. The first option is to invest all of his initial endowment. Then the firm continues
with a high scale, II = 1, if not hit by a liquidity shock, and terminate the project if hit.
Thus the payoff is I =  (1 - )I1 =  (1 - ). Alternatively, the firm can save enough
of his own endowment using bankers to insure against the liquidity shock in either or both
aggregate states. Since the aggregate state is only relevant in the interaction with the inter-
national investors, if the firm choose to insure against liquidity shock from own endowment,
                                                                                    1
it will be for both aggregate states. The firm investment scale is given by IS = 1+  
                                                                                       , and his
expected payoff is I =  I2 . Thus for I > S we need
                  1           1
      1->           <      >    ,
               1 +    1 +    1-




                                                 85
which is Assumption C.1.(i). Under this assumptions when firms can access the international
credit market, we only need to compare borrowing on the international markets with investing
all of their endowment. This is the next parametric restriction that we consider.

                                                                     (g - )
Sufficient Condition for Inequality (C.5) [ (1-
                                              
                                                )
                                                             g  (1-)+(g - )(L  -1)
                                                                                   ].       Let qH =
 rH
1+rH
     .
From equation (D.15)

               rH          (1 - ) (1 - sH (rH ))                 (1 - )
      qH =          =                             ¯
                                                 D(rH )
                                                                       D¯ (rH ) ,
             1 + rH   (1 - ) (1 - sH (rH )) + () D          (1 -  ) + 
                                                   (0;rH )             D(0;rH )

which in turn implies

             (1 - )          (1 - ) D(0; rH )
      rH     D¯ (rH )    =           ¯ (rH ) .
             D                       D
               (0;rH )

                                                                               D(0;rH )
So to find an upper bound on rH , it is sufficient to find an upper bound on   D¯ (rH ) .   Note that
D(0; rH ) is the maintenance cost of the firms with the lowest opacity. Moreover, ¯ = D1+
                                                                                        (0;rH )
                                                                                          rH
                                                                                                is
by construction have the highest liquidity demand submitted by any firm to the international
markets, which in turn implies D(0; rH ) is the highest maintenance cost for any good firm
from any opacity. Thus D  ¯ (rH )  D(0; rH ), which in turn implies

             (1 - )
      rH             qH  (1 - )
                

    In Assumption C.1.(ii) we assume (1-
                                         )
                                             r ¯H , where r
                                                          ¯H is defined in equation (C.5).
This in turn insures that rH  r¯H . Moreover, one can substitute (1 - ) for x in (D.17) to
get an upper bound on q ¯.

Sufficient Condition for Inequality (B.24) [w(0)   ]. Using (C.1), we can write
condition (B.24) as

      w(0) >  (1, g ; L) = D(0; rH )

Note that in ^ = 3 (rH ). A sufficient condition for the above inequality to hold is

      w(0)  ,                                                                                 (D.32)

which ensure that 3 < 1, and constitutes the first part of Assumption C.1.(iii).



                                                 86
Sufficient Condition for Strictly Positive Solution to Equation (B.28) [lims0 w(s) =
0]. This condition directly ensures insures that ~ that solves equation (B.28) is strictly
positive, i.e. 1 > 0.

                                                       - )(1+(1-)H )
Sufficient Condition for Inequality (C.2) [min ((gg(1                , -w()
                                                        -)+(g - )H ) (+w( )L )
                                                                                    (1-(1  - )
                                                                                         )+(1- )
                                                                                                  ].
The only set of markets we need to consider are those with cash in the market pricing. Let
           rC ( )                r
                                 ¯(rH )
q C ( ) = 1+rC ( )
                   and q
                       ¯(rH ) = 1+¯r(rH )
                                          . From (C.2)

                       (1 - )
      q C ( ) 
                  (1 - ) + (1 -  )

                     ¯(rH ) is the maximum q C ( ) can achieve, so a sufficient condition for
Start by noting that q
inequality (C.2) is

                                   (1 - )
          ¯(rH ), q C ( )} 
      min{q                                    .
                              (1 - ) + (1 -  )

Next from (D.17)

                     (g -  )(1 + H qH )     (g -  ) (1 + (1 - ) H )
      q
      ¯(rH ) =                            
                  (g (1 - ) + (g -  )H )   (g (1 - ) +  (g -  ) H ) 

where the inequality used part (ii) to replace qH with it's maximum, (1 - ). Next, from (D.20)

                   - w( )(1 + H x)   - w( )
      q C ( ) =                    
                  ( + w( )L )       ( + w( )L )

where the inequality just uses qH  0. Substitute both back to get a sufficient condition

             (g -  ) (1 + (1 - ) H )    - w( )                         (1 - )
      min                            ,                                             .
            (g (1 - ) +  (g -  ) H )  ( + w( )L )                 (1 - ) + (1 -  )

which is Assumption C.1.(iv).



E     Further Results and Extensions
E.1     Determination of Exposure Groups: Analytical Results
As we note in the main text, we can decompose the total effect of our parameters to the rel-
ative size of exposure groups into two parts. First, keeping the interest rate in the high state
(rH ) fixed, changes in parameters have a direct effect on maintained investment i(, , L).
Second, there is an indirect effect through the spill-over across aggregate states. A change in

                                              87
credit demand in the low state affects scale I (, g ) and, through the budget constraint (13),
affects credit demand in the high state as well. This in turn changes the equilibrium interest
rate in the high state, rH , which then feeds back into the initial and maintained investment
in both high and low states.
    In the following proposition, we characterize the direct effect. In particular, we show
that an increase in the probability or the size of the liquidity shock,  and  , in the fraction
of good firms, , and in the probability of the low aggregate state, L , all increase the total
credit demand of good firms at zero interest rate, and, consequently, shrink the set of core
countries. Similarly, an increase in the size of the liquidity shock, in the fraction of good
firms, and in the productivity of good firms increases the total credit demand of good firms
at r¯ interest rate, and, consequently, increases the set of peripheral countries. While we
do not have analytical results on the indirect effect, the direct effect dominates in all our
numerical simulations.

Proposition E.1 In a simple global equilibrium, keeping rH fixed,

  (i) the set of low exposure countries shrinks if there is an increase in  , , , or L ,

              1 1 1 1
               , , ,  |r                        fixed   < 0.
                 L H

 (ii) The set of high exposure countries grows if there is an increase in  ,  or g ,

              3 3 3
               , ,  |r                 fixed   <0
                g H

Proof of Proposition E.1. Using (D.24), the size of the low exposure group is determined
by

      w(1 ) = i (, g, L) |[0,1 ] .                                                        (E.33)

The direct effects come from simple differentiation using equations (15) and (17) and noting
that H ( ) = L ( ) = 1 in the low exposure region. The size of the group of high exposure
                                                                
countries is defined implicitly in (D.27). Let Z1 =  () 1+¯      r
                                                                   i (j = , g, L) |[1 ,2 ] , the
amount an unrationed representative good firm borrow facing the maximum interest rate r        ¯.
In the left panel of Figure 3, we plot the supply of capital of a k  3 firm, L ( )Z1 as the
dashed curve, which, using the definition of 2 in (D.23), we can rewrite as
              1
                                        1
      Z1                                       3                    w(s)ds.               (E.34)
                  Z1 (s -   w-1   (Z1 )) -     w-1 (Z1 )
                                                           w(s)ds


                                                               88
                          0.45
                                                                                           Low state
                                                                                           High state
                           0.4


                          0.35


                           0.3


                          0.25


                           0.2


                          0.15


                           0.1


                          0.05             1     2      3




                            0
                                 0   0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9          1
                                                       country transparency,



Figure 5: Interest rates for transparent and opaque countries in the high (solid) and low
(dashed) aggregate state.

By definition, 1 is determined by the point where this curve is equal to the demand Z1 ,
the dashed line, as this is the least transparent country where firms demand for credit is
fully met. While a change in Z1 moves both curves, using the implicit function theorem,
we can verify that    3
                    (Z1 )
                          < 0. The direct effects then come from simple differentiation using
equations (15) and (17) and noting that H ( ) = L ( ) = 1 in the region   [1 , 2 ].

E.2     Partitioned opacity Groups
In the baseline model, we assume that investors have an uninformative prior about  , the
average opacity of firms in a given country. That is, if an investor does not find conclusive
evidence on a firm, the country of origin does not help her do any further inference.
    In this section, we weaken this assumption. In particular, suppose that a public signal
partitions countries into a transparent and an opaque group. That is, observing the public
signal, each investor knows that the opacity,  of the given country is  >  or  < ,
where  is an arbitrary cut-off. Intuitively, investors understand that a firm from a southern
country in Europe tends to be more opaque than a northern country firm, but they have no
information on how firms in different south European countries compare to each other.
    Figure 5 illustrates the effect of this treatment on the equilibrium interest rate schedules.
Compared to the corresponding figure for the baseline case, the left panel of Figure 1, it
is clear that the qualitative difference is small. The main effect of the extra signal is the
partial separation in the high aggregate state. With the public signal, investors have an
additional choice. They can choose to accept only firms from the transparent group to lend
to. For less skilled investors, this implies a portfolio with less bad firms, as their mistakes

                                                                  89
are concentrated in opaque countries. Therefore, in equilibrium, less skilled investors lend
to firms from the transparent group only, albeit at a lower interest rate. On the other
hand, more skilled investors lend to firms from the opaque group but for higher interest
rate. The marginal investor who is just indifferent between these two choices is determined
in equilibrium.20
    While it is an intuitive assumption that investors have some prior knowledge on the
average opacity of firms in different countries, we assume this away in the baseline model
because of two main reasons. First, we believe the additional analytical complexity does not
justify the additional insight. Second, one of the main focuses of our analysis is how investors
endogenously classify countries into low and high exposure groups in equilibrium. As this
extension illustrates, a public signal on  classify countries exogenously, and obscures our
analysis.




  20
    The public signal also introduces a small bunching region around  in the low aggregate state interest
rate schedule. As we explain in Appendix B, this comes from the requirement that the interest rate schedule
has to be weakly monotonically decreasing in  , and is obtained by an ironing procedure.


                                                    90
