                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK

                                       Kenneth R. Ahern
                                          Lei Kong
                                         Xinyan Yan

                                      Working Paper 28837
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28837


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Xavier Gabaix, Xavier Giroud, Jerry Hoberg, Mike Simutin, and seminar participants
at Claremont McKenna College, Clemson University, University of Southern California, and
University of Toronto. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Е 2021 by Kenneth R. Ahern, Lei Kong, and Xinyan Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including Е notice, is given to the source.
The Conglomerate Network
Kenneth R. Ahern, Lei Kong, and Xinyan Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 28837
May 2021
JEL No. E32,G32,L14

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a network model of the economy in which conglomerate firms transmit
idiosyncratic shocks from one industry to another. The strength of inter-industry connections is
determined by the conglomerate's share of total industry sales and by the industry's share of the
conglomerate's total sales. The empirical results show that industry growth rates comove more
strongly within industry pairs that are more closely connected in the conglomerate network.
These results hold after controlling for industry-pair and year fixed effects, input-output
connections, reverse causality, and in tests that exploit exogenous cross-sectional industry shocks
from import tariff changes. Finally, our model also provides a new cross-industry extension for
the widely-used Herfindahl index of concentration.

Kenneth R. Ahern                                 Xinyan Yan
Marshall School of Business                      University of Dayton
University of Southern California                xyan02@udayton.edu
3670 Trousdale Parkway, HOH 718
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
kenneth.ahern@marshall.usc.edu

Lei Kong
Alston 233
The University of Alabama
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
lkong@cba.ua.edu
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                          1



  In a seminal paper, Gabaix (2011) shows that aggregate economic growth is driven by a small
number of very large firms. Because economic activity is sufficiently concentrated in this small set
of firms, their idiosyncratic shocks are not averaged out by the large number of little firms, lead-
ing to aggregate fluctuations. Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) present
a related explanation for aggregate fluctuations based on the inter-sectoral transmission of shocks
through input-output (IO) links. As in Gabaix, it is the concentration of IO links within a small
number of very influential sectors that causes idiosyncratic shocks to contribute to aggregate fluc-
tuations. These papers highlight the importance of understanding the concentration of the forces
that transmit idiosyncratic shocks throughout the economy.
  Our paper contributes to this line of research, starting from a simple observation: the largest
firms in the economy tend to be conglomerates that span multiple industries. This means that
the large idiosyncratic shocks in Gabaix are actually transmitted across multiple industries, similar
to the transmission of shocks in Acemoglu et al. At the same time, the shocks to large firms'
individual segments may be relatively small. For example, one of the largest firms in the world,
Amazon, receives the bulk of its revenues from its retail operations, but within the retail sector,
Amazon commands a relatively small share of the total market. In contrast, Amazon receives only
12% of its revenues from its computing services division, but maintains a dominant 33% market
share within that industry. Thus, the notion of idiosyncratic firm-level shocks in Gabaix must be
understood in the context of the industry-specific market shares of multi-segment firms.
  In this paper, we present a novel model of the transmission of shocks across the economy through
a bipartite, affiliation network of firms and industries. In the bipartite network, firms are only
affiliated with industries, and industries are only affiliated with firms. We define the strength of
connections between firms and industries in proportion to their total outputs. Specifically, we
assume that a growth shock transmits from a firm to an industry with a strength proportional
to the firm's share of total industry sales. Similar to Gabaix (2011), an idiosyncratic shock to a
firm that commands a large share of industry output has a greater influence on the industry's total
fluctuations. Likewise, we assume that a shock transmits from an industry to a firm with a strength
proportional to the industry's share of the firm's total sales. For instance, Amazon's exposure to
fluctuations in the computing services industry will only affect 12% of Amazon's total sales. Thus,
2                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



in our network, each firm-industry pair is characterized by two connections running in opposite
directions, each with its own strength.
    Using the dual perspectives of a bipartite network, we create two separate unipartite networks,
one for industry-to-industry links and one for firm-to-firm links. In one perspective, firms are
connected to other firms through common industry affiliations. In this perspective, intra-industry
market forces serve as the conduit between firms. In the dual perspective, industries are connected
to other industries through conglomerate firms that operate in both industries. Thus, conglomerate
firms serve as the conduit of economic shocks between industries. The duality of firms and industries
in our model is in the spirit of Alchian and Demsetz (1972), who argue that, in a frictionless setting,
contracts within a firm are identical to contracts that occur in a market.
    For both unipartite networks, we derive three forms of connections. For brevity, we only describe
the industry-level connections at this point, but the firm-level connections are analogous. First, we
calculate the strength of the inter-industry transmission from an industry to its affiliated firms and
then from these firms to another industry. Because we allow for weighted and directed links in the
bipartite network, the transmission strength between two industries is not necessarily symmetric.
Second, we calculate two projections from firms onto industries. In one projection, we calculate
the shared in-links of an industry-pair, which represents the commonality of market shares among
the firms that operate in both industries. In the second projection, we calculate the shared out-
links of an industry-pair, which represents the commonality in firms' exposures to industry shocks
among firms that operate in two industries. Because the projections represent shared links of two
industries, they are symmetric. Thus, these three measures are based solely on the concentration
of economic activity and abstract from other forms of connections between industries, such as
customer-supplier links, common geographic locations, or shared institutional investors.
    Though this network model is simple, it provides new insights on a number of important topics.
First, our model provides a microfoundation for standard measures of industry concentration. In
particular, just as variance is a special case of covariance, our model shows that the widely-used
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is a special case of a more general measure of cross-industry
concentration that we call CoHHI. We define CoHHI as the shared in-links of two industries, as
described above. Thus, CoHHI reflects the degree to which the market shares of firms in two
                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                          3



industries overlap. If the same firms command the same market shares in each industry, then the
two industries will have the same level of exposure to the same firm-specific idiosyncratic shocks.
Using the covariance analogy, the CoHHI of an industry with itself is identical to HHI. Thus, our
network provides a new interpretation of HHI as the concentration of in-links into an industry.
  Second, our model generates new predictions on the variance and covariance of growth rates
across industries. We assume the growth rate of a firm segment is the sum of a firm-specific shock
and an industry-specific shock. Our model predicts that the variance of an industry's growth rate
equals the sum of the industry-specific growth rate plus the variance of firm-specific growth scaled
by the HHI of the firms in the industry. We also show that the covariance of two industries'
growth rates equals to firm-specific variance scaled by the CoHHI of the two industries. Intuitively,
industries that share the same conglomerate firms will face common firm-level shocks. In the dual
representation, we show that diversified firms, with lower concentrations of in-links from industries,
have lower volatility in their growth rates.
  Third, like Acemoglu et al. (2012), our model describes how idiosyncratic shocks transmit
throughout an economy. In particular, our model predicts the paths and timing of the transmission
of shocks from one industry to another. We show that industry centrality in the conglomerate
network is directly proportional to the size of an industry's sales as a fraction of the economy's
total sales. This finding echoes Gabaix's result on the importance of large firms and also mimics
the findings in Acemoglu et al. which shows that centrality in the input-output network is directly
proportional to the size of the industry relative to the economy.
  To bring our theoretical framework to the data, we use segment data from Compustat for all
public firms in the US for the years 1997 to 2018. Though our theoretical framework provides both
firm-level and industry-level representations of the economy, we focus on the industry-level analysis
to reduce selection bias concerns. To create a panel of industries, we follow Pierce and Schott (2016)
and create industry families to provide time-series consistency. In a series of robustness checks, we
show that the main results are not driven by truncation bias caused by using Compustat data or
particular industry definitions.
  We first show that the conglomerate network exhibits features of scale-free networks, including
a fat-tailed distribution of inter-industry connections. Thus, the network is sparse with relatively
4                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



few central industries and many peripheral industries. Consistent with small world networks, the
maximum path between industries in an average year is 7.5 links, out of over 500 different industries.
We also show that during the sample period, the network evolved into a more concentrated network
as industries dropped links to more peripheral industries while retaining links to more central
industries. These statistics provide a new perspective on the importance of conglomerate firms in
the economy. Though conglomerate firms are less common than single segment firms, their large
size and scope leave an oversized footprint across the economy.
    Next, we show that the empirical inter-industry connections in the conglomerate network are
distinct from other forms of industry connections. First, the correlation between conglomerate
network links and input-output links is low. This is consistent with the notion that conglomerate
firms diversify for reasons beyond vertical integration, such as economies of scope (Teece, 1980), co-
insurance (Lewellen, 1971), or agency conflicts (Jensen, 1986). Second, the pattern of conglomerate
ownership is not driven by product similarity, as measured by Hoberg and Phillips (2016).
    To estimate the relationship between the industry connections in the conglomerate network and
the comovement of industry growth, we first estimate cross-sectional regressions. We find that
CoHHI is positively correlated with the covariance of sales growth, asset growth, and investment
rates in the cross-section of industries, consistent with our theoretical framework. We also find
that, consistent with our framework, the volatilities of growth rates are positively correlated with
HHI reflecting that concentrated industries are less diversified across individual firm-level shocks.
    Next, to further isolate the correlation between the conglomerate network and the covariance
of industry volatilities, we estimate panel regressions using industry-pair and year fixed effects.
To capture a yearly measure of cross-industry comovement in industry outcomes, the dependent
variable is the squared difference of industry growth rates between industries. The industry-pair
fixed effects captures both time-invariant industry and industry-pair characteristics that could
influence the comovement of industry growth rates. This includes traits such as average volatility,
the labor share in production, the average firm size, and the persistent component of input-output
relations. The year fixed effects control for general macroeconomic trends that could influence the
comovement of industry growth rates. We also control for input-output linkages and product market
                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                           5



similarity of Hoberg and Phillips (2016). Thus, our empirical model isolates the correlation between
abnormal time-series variation in the conglomerate network and the comovement of industry growth.
  The panel regressions show that when inter-industry connections strengthen in the the conglom-
erate network, the comovement of growth rates increases, as predicted by the model. The results
hold for both in-links, out-links, and the transmission network for sales growth and asset growth.
For investment rates, only shared out-links and the transmission network are significantly related.
The economic magnitude of the results is meaningful. Compared to an industry-pair with no con-
glomerate link, the formation of a link is associated with a squared difference in growth rates that
is lower by about 30%, relative to the median squared difference.
  Next, we we use a quasi-natural experiment to identify the transmission of economic shocks
through the conglomerate network. Following Pierce and Schott (2016), we exploit cross-sectional
variation in industries' exposure to tariff rate shocks from the granting of normal trade relations to
China in 2000. Using the conglomerate network from 1999, and controlling for industry fixed effects,
year fixed effects, and customer-supplier links, we find that industries with stronger connections in
the network to those industries most affected by the tariff shock had larger declines in employment
following the shock. Because we use predetermined network links to test for future economic shocks,
these results help alleviate concerns of reverse causality or spurious correlations.
  Finally, we present a series of robustness tests. First, because we construct the conglomerate
network using only publicly-traded firms' segment data, we test for the generalizability of our results
using employment data from the US Census County Business Patterns data, which covers nearly
all establishments in the private sector. We find similar results using these data, which implies that
the predictive power of the conglomerate network is not limited to public firms. Second, we find
similar results to our baseline tests when we estimate the same relationships using lagged measures
of the conglomerate network. These results further mitigate concerns of reverse causation. Third,
we increase the minimum size threshold of firms in our sample to show that there is little evidence
of truncation bias from using relatively large, public firms to construct our conglomerate network.
Fourth, we show that our results persist when we construct our network using coarser industry
definitions.
6                                       THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



    This paper makes two central contributions. First, we present a model and empirical evidence
of inter-industry transmission of economic shocks through conglomerate firms. As discussed above,
these findings build on Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi
(2012). More recently, Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2020) find that firm
size is related to aggregate fluctuations in a firm-level customer-supplier network. Additional em-
pirical evidence of the spread of idiosyncratic shocks through production networks is found in
Ahern and Harford (2014) and Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). In contrast to these papers, we
show that industry-specific shocks transmit across the economy through the internal redistribu-
tion of conglomerate firms. Our approach is also related to the notion that local shocks spread
to wider geographic regions through multi-regional firms (di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean,
2014; Kleinert, Martin, and Toubal, 2015; Giroud and Mueller, 2019). In contrast to shocks that
are spread across geographic space, we show multi-segment firms facilitate the spread of economic
shocks across industry space. Our results also relate to recent literature on the importance of com-
mon ownership (Azar, Schmalz, and Tecu, 2018; Ant┤
                                                 on, Ederer, Gin┤
                                                                e, and Schmalz, 2018). While
this line of research focuses on partial ownership by institutional investors, we study controlling
ownership by conglomerate firms. Finally, this paper also relates to the large literature on internal
capital markets (Stein, 1997; Lamont, 1997; Shin and Stulz, 1998; Matsusaka and Nanda, 2002).
    The second contribution of this paper is to provide a novel, economic interpretation of HHI.
Even though HHI was not originally developed from economic theory,1 it has become the standard
metric of industry concentration among academics, practitioners, and policy-makers. For example,
during 2011 to 2020, HHI is referenced in 4.5% of all articles published in the top five economics
journals, which represents an increase of 87% relative to the 2000s. Second, HHI is a primary filter
to identify non-competitive markets among a wide range of regulatory agencies, including the DOJ,
FTC, FCC, FDIC, and the Federal Reserve. Our framework provides a new microfoundation for
the calculation of HHI based on a network of firms and industries. To our knowledge, this provides
one of the only economic interpretations of HHI.2 Moreover, we use our framework to derive a new
measure of cross-industry concentration: CoHHI.
1
 HHI was originally developed to meet two ad hoc criteria of concentration measures (Hirschman, 1945; Herfindahl,
1950). Hirschman acknowledges that HHI is not a unique solution.
2
 Stigler (1964) shows that HHI is directly related to profitability in Cournot competition models. Our microfoundation
applies to all industries, not just those with Cournot competition.
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                           7



                       I. The Theoretical Conglomerate Network


  To construct the conglomerate network of industries, we start with a bipartite graph, also known
as a two-mode network or an affiliation network, in which there are two types of nodes that are
disjoint, independent sets and each type of node is connected only to nodes of the other type.
Typical examples of affiliation networks include football players and football clubs, co-authors and
publications, and corporate directors and corporate boards. Much of the research on networks in
economics studies one-node networks with an implicit assumption of an underlying two-mode net-
work. For instance, corporate boards typically do not have direct connections with other corporate
boards, but instead, have indirect connections through shared directors in an affiliation network.
  In our network, the two types of nodes are firms and industries. Firms are affiliated with
industries, and industries are affiliated with firms. Because two-mode networks have two distinct
types of nodes, they allow for dual perspectives on the network's structure. In our setting, one
representation of the network is from the perspective of firms: firms are connected to each other
through shared industry affiliations. This perspective is the commonplace view of the relationship
between firms and industries. The dual representation of the network from the perspective of
industries is less commonplace: industries are connected to other industries by firms that operate
in both industries. In this perspective, conglomerate firms that span multiple industries are the
conduits for economic shocks to transmit between industries. Though the firm perspective is the
basis for the common assumption that firms in the same industry face the same economic shocks, the
industry perspective is an equally valid representation of the same underlying two-mode network.
Because of the importance of conglomerates in the dual representation, throughout the paper, we
call this affiliation network the conglomerate network.
  The transmission of economic shocks in the conglomerate network is distinct from an input-
output network where firms buy and sell directly from other firms. Instead, the economic shocks in
the affiliation network transmit through firms' shared exposure to industry conditions, or equally,
through industries' shared exposures to firm conditions. We do not specify the source of these shocks
in our theoretical framework. We only assume that conglomerate firms redistribute an industry
shock received by one of its segments to its other segments. Among other explanations, prior
research argues that within-firm redistribution could be caused by corporate socialism (Scharfstein
8                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



and Stein, 2000), optimal reallocation to equate marginal revenue products (Williamson, 1975;
Giroud and Mueller, 2019), or the trade-off between the benefit of flexible investments versus
the costs of agency-driven over-investment (Matsusaka and Nanda, 2002). Likewise, we assume
that market forces within an industry redistribute firm-level idiosyncratic shocks from one firm
to another. As discussed in Shea (2002), these forces could be consumption complementarities,
external economies of scale, or aggregate demand spillovers, among other spillover mechanisms.
The generality of these assumptions reflects our focus not on the transmission of shocks within
firms or within industries but on the firm-to-firm and industry-to-industry transmission of shocks.




I.A. Formal Definitions


    To formalize these assumptions, we assume the economy has i = 1, . . . , n firms and j = 1, . . . , m
industries. Let S be the n О m bi-adjacency matrix in which entry si,j denotes firm i's sales in
industry j . Thus, the total sales for firm i is m                                          n
                                                 j si,j . The total sales for industry j is i si,j . Below,

we use capital letters to denote matrices, lower case letters to denote matrix elements, and x to
represent vectors.
    We normalize S in two ways. First, we generate the matrix of market shares, H , by normalizing
                                                                                     si,j
S by its column sums. Thus, the market share of firm i in industry j is hi,j =       n      .   Similarly, we
                                                                                     i si,j
                                                                                                      si,j
generate the matrix of industries' firm shares, F , by normalizing S by its row sums: fi,j =          m      .
                                                                                                      j si,j

Thus, each entry of F represents the fraction of firm i's total sales that are attributed to industry
j . By normalizing industries and firms by their total sales, we focus on the relative importance of
the connections between industries and firms, rather than the size of each node.
    We allow the connections between firms and industries in the conglomerate network to be di-
rectional and weighted. In particular, we assume that growth shocks that transmit from a firm
node to an industry node are weighted by the firm's market share in the industry, as recorded
in H . Intuitively, a firm-level shock will affect an industry's growth in proportion to the firm's
fraction of the industry's total sales. Analogously, we assume that shocks that transmit from an
industry to a firm are weighted by the size of the industry segment in the firm's overall operation,
as recorded in F . We denote this fraction as an industry's firm share, analogous to a firm's market
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                          9



share. Intuitively, an industry-wide growth shock will affect a firm's growth in proportion to the
industry's importance in the firm's total sales.
  We combine F and H into an (m + n) О (m + n) adjacency matrix A that represents the complete,
weighted and directed bipartite graph, as follows,
                                                           
                                             0        F
(1)                                       A=               .
                                            H          0

The first m rows and columns of A refer to industries, and the last n rows and columns refer
to firms. Matrix A represents the effect of a shock in the row entry on the column entry. F 
represents the effect of a shock transmitting from an industry to a firm. H represents the effect of
a shock transmitting from a firm to an industry. The zero matrices on the diagonals reflect that in
the bipartite graph, firms and industries do not have direct connections. Also note that A is not
symmetric, which reflects the directional nature of the bipartite network.
  To illustrate our network setting, consider a simple example with three firms (x, y , and z ) that
operate in two industries (p and q ). Their segment sales are given in matrix S , and we normalize
S by row sums and column sums to generate F and H , as follows:

                p q                          p        q                     p         q
                                                                                           
             x 3 3                      x 0.50       0.50               x 0.75      0.30
                                                                                         
(2)      S = y  0 3 ,               F = y  0.00      1.00 ,         H = y 0.00      0.30 .
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
             z 1 4                      z 0.20       0.80               z 0.25      0.40

  Figure I provides a graphical representation of this network, where blue arrows refer to the effect
of firms on industries (H ) and red arrows refer to effects of industries on firms (F ), where the
weights of the connections are determined by a firm's market share (blue arrows) or an industry's
firm share (red arrows).
  This example illustrates our definition of the strengths of connections in the conglomerate net-
work. Because firm x receives half of its sales from industry p, a growth shock in industry p will
affect half of firm x's sales. In contrast, the same industry shock in p only affects firm z by 0.2,
because firm z only receives 20% of its sales from industry p. An identical interpretation exists for
10                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



the dual of the network. A growth shock in firm x has a larger effect in industry p than q because
firm x has a market share of 75% in industry p, but only 30% in industry q .



I.B. Network Transformations

     To study the inter-industry and inter-firm connections, we transform the bipartite graph in
matrix A into a unipartite graph in three ways. The first transformation represents the strength
of transmissions between nodes of the same type based on the compound effect of shocks from
one industry to another through affiliated firms, or from one firm to another through industry
affiliations. The second and third transformations are projections from one set of nodes onto the
other. The projections reflect the strength of shared in-links or shared out-links between nodes of
the same type.



                                          B.1. Network Paths

     The first transformation of the network generates the strength of the paths that lead from one
node to another of the same type. In particular, we denote
                                                                
                                                         
                                                        F H  0
(3)                          Transmission Matrix = A2 =         .
                                                         0  HF 


     In a bipartite network, it takes two links to connect nodes of the same type (e.g., one link from
an industry node to firm nodes, and a second link from firm nodes to industry nodes). If A was an
unweighted adjacency matrix consisting of zeros and ones, A2 would count the number of unique
paths with a length of two that connect two industry nodes. If more paths connect two industries,
they would have a stronger connection. In our case, using weighted links, the entry in the j 'th row
and k'th column of F  H reflects the compound effect of a transition from industry j to industry k
through conglomerate firms that operate in both industries. Likewise, in the bottom-right quadrant
of A2 , HF  represents the compound effect of inter-firm transitions through industries. Note also
that A2 is a left stochastic matrix, where each column sums to one.
     In our numerical example, the effect of moving from p to q is the effect of moving from p to x,
then x to q (0.50 и 0.30) plus the effect of moving from p to z then z to q (0.20 и 0.40), which equals
                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         11



0.230. Panel A of Figure II presents a visual representation of the transition matrix. Notice that
this matrix is not symmetric. The effect of moving from p to q is 0.230 compared to the effect of
moving from q to p, which is 0.575. The asymmetry is caused by asymmetry in the strength of the
nodes' in-links relative to their out-links. In Figure I, note that the strength of links that lead out
of industry p are weaker than the links that lead into industry p. In contrast, the strength of the
links that lead out of industry q are stronger than the links that lead into it.
  Second, the diagonal entries in A2 represent the transmission from a node back to itself after
two links in the network. For example, the first entry in F  H represents the effect of a shock
transitioning from industry p back to industry p. In particular, this is the effect of moving from p
to x, then x to p (0.50 и 0.75) plus the effect of moving from p to z then z to p (0.20 и 0.25), which
equals 0.425. In a network setting, the diagonals of A2 represent a feedback loop, or an `echo,' as
denoted in Sharifkhani and Simutin (2021). In the sense of the redistribution of a shock, we can
also think of the diagonal of A2 as the residual fraction of the shock that is not transmitted to
other nodes.
  Panel B of Figure II presents the firm-to-firm transition of our numerical example. A shock in
firm x has the greatest effect back on firm x and the least effect on firm y . As in industries, the
transition matrix for firms is asymmetric.


                                       B.2. Network Projections

  The second type of transformation is a projection from firms onto industries and vice versa. The
first projection reflects the strength of shared in-links:


                                                                        
                                                             H H   0
(4)                            Shared in-links = A A =                  .
                                                              0    FF

A A reflects the strength of the in-links that two nodes share and the diagonal of the matrix is the
sum of the squared weights of the in-links for each node. This reflects how similar two nodes are to
each other based on the strength of their common exposures. If two industries receive shocks from
the same firms, in the same proportions, then they will be more closely related in this projection.
Because the projection is based on shared in-links, it is a symmetric matrix.
12                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



     Panels C and D of Figure II present a visual representation of the strength of shared in-links for
our numerical example. At the firm-level, firm z has a smaller connection to x than it does to y .
This is because firms z and y share strong common in-links from industry q , whereas firms x and
z share weak common in-links from industry p. Thus firm z has a more similar exposure to firm y
from industry shocks than it does to firm x.
     The second projection reflects the strength of shared out-links:
                                                                             
                                                                 F F     0
(5)                              Shared out-links = AA =                     
                                                                  0    HH 

If A was an unweighted, binary matrix, AA would reflect the number of out-links with the same
destination that two nodes share in common. Using weighted connections, as in our case, AA
reflects the strength of the out-links that two nodes share and the diagonal of the matrix is the sum
of the squared weights of the out-links for each node. This reflects how similar two nodes are to
each other based on the strength of the commonality of destinations for shocks. If two industries
tend to have similar effects on the same firms, then the industries have higher connections in this
projection.


I.C. Concentration Measures in the Conglomerate Network

     The conglomerate network provides a new interpretation of standard measures of industry con-
centration. First note that the columns of H are n-dimensional vectors representing the market
shares of the n firms in each industry. Denote an arbitrary column j in H as hj . As defined
above, the entries of the matrix of shared in-links, H  H , are equivalent to the dot products of the
columns of H . Therefore, for two industries, j and k, the row j and column k entry of H  H is
hj и hk = h1,j h1,k + h2,j h2,k + и и и + hn,j hn,k . The diagonal entries of H  H are the dot products of
an industry's market share vector with itself. For industry j , this is h2      2            2
                                                                         1,j + h2,j + и и и hn,j . Thus, the

diagonal entries of H  H are the Herfindahl-Hirschman Indices (HHI) of industry concentration.
     Using the conglomerate network, we can extend this derivation of HHI to generate a measure of
cross-industry concentration. For two industries, j and k, we define,


(6)          Industry CoHHIj,k = (H  H )j,k = hj и hk = h1,j h1,k + h2,j h2,k + и и и + hn,j hn,k .
                                        THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                                    13



Industry CoHHI is the commonality in the pattern of firms' market shares across two industries. If
the same firms have similar market shares in both industries, then Industry CoHHI will be larger.
Thus, Industry CoHHI reflects the similarity of concentration of sales across firms in different
industries. In turn, this means that the standard definition of Industry HHI is a special case of
Industry CoHHI with itself.
   This representation provides a microfoundation for the calculation of industry concentration
as the sum of squared market shares, which is not justified in Hirschman (1945) or Herfindahl
(1950).3 In addition, using the conglomerate network to derive HHI reveals that HHI is a special
case of a more general measure of CoHHI, which reflects the similarity between industries' market
share distributions. Using the network perspective, these results also show that standard HHI
measures can be thought of as the concentration of in-links of an industry. In other words, if two
industries receive the same shocks from the same set of firms, then the two industries have high
co-concentration.
   We can apply a similar idea to the projection of out-links, AA . At the industry level, F  F reflects
the commonality of out-links from industries to firms. If two industries tend to affect the same set
of firms, then the two industries have higher co-concentration of destinations. This would happen
when firms have the same fraction of sales from the same industries. Industries with focused firms
will tend to have higher out-link concentration. Thus, this projection represents a new measure of
industry concentration that is complementary to standard HHI.
   Because of the duality of the bipartite graph, we can also provide similar measures of concentra-
tion at the firm level. In particular, F F  represents the Firm CoHHI matrix in which the diagonals
are the Firm HHIs of concentration, and the off-diagonal elements are the Co-HHI between firms.
Firm HHI measures the concentration of a firm's sales across industries. A firm with equal sales in
two industries has a lower Firm HHI than a firm with the majority of its sales in one industry. The
Firm Co-HHI reflects the commonality of two firm's distribution of sales across industries. Two
3Hirschman designed HHI to meet two criteria that he argued that any measure of industry concentration should
include: 1) concentration should be related to the dispersion of market shares and 2) concentration should be declining
with the number of firms in an industry. Hirschman's measure accomplished these two goals, though the square of
market shares was not justified. In fact, Hirschman recognized that his concentration measure is not the only measure
that could meet these criteria. Herfindahl (1950) justified using the square of market shares by considering HHI as a
weighted average of market shares where the weights were the market shares themselves. However, he did not justify
using the shares as weights versus logged market shares, the square root of market shares, or any other weighting
scheme.
14                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



firms that tend to sell the same fractions of their total sales in each industry will have a higher
Co-HHI.




I.D. The Variance of Growth Shocks in the Conglomerate Network

     In this section, we use our model to derive predictions on the covariance of industry and firm
growth rates. We assume at time  = 0, firm i receives a shock i and industry j receives a shock
j . Both shocks are random variables with mean 0 and standard deviations  and  , such that
cov (k , l ) = 0 for all (k, l) when k = l; cov (k , l ) = 0 for all (k, l) when k = l; and cov (k , l ) = 0
for all (k, l). Thus,  represents firm-level growth shocks after removing industry-level growth
shocks,  , and vice versa. For simplicity, we assume that  is the same across firms and  is the
same across industries. In vector form,  is the m О 1 vector of industry shocks and  is the n О 1
vector of firm shocks.
     We assume shocks transmit from one node to another over time. In a bipartite graph, one
step in the network, enacted by an application of the A matrix, represents an aggregation of a
node's own shock plus the weighted average of the shocks of connected nodes. Two applications
of the adjacency matrix (A2 ) to a shock vector represents a complete transition of shocks back
to their original node type. Therefore, to study the transition of shocks through the network, we
take snapshots of the network after every complete transition of shocks, where the initial shock is
a node's own shock plus the aggregation of its connected nodes' shocks. During every complete
transition, we assume the shocks decay with rate .
     In particular, the snapshot of the growth rate of industry j at  = 0 can be written as the
industry-specific growth shock plus the weighted average of the growth rates of the firms operating
                                         n
in industry j . This is gj,0 = j +       i=1 hi,j i .   Therefore, the vector of industry growth rates is
gind,0 =  + H  . The growth rate of firms follows the same pattern: the firm's specific growth rate
plus the industry-specific growth rates weighted by the industry's firm share. This is, gf irm,0 =
 + F  . In matrix notation, the initial growth rates at  = 0 are
                                                                     
                                                   I    H       + H 
(7)                         g0 = (I + A ) =                 =        .
                                                   F    I       + F
                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         15



  The variance-covariance matrix of growth rates at  = 0 is
                                                                 
                                         2 I + 2 H H 2 F  + 2 H 
                                                              
(8)                         Cov (g0 ) =                          .
                                           2     2   2
                                          F +  H  I +  F F  2


  The upper-left entry of this matrix represents the variance-covariance matrix of industry growth
rates. The diagonal elements reflect the variance of industry growth rates which equal the variance
of industry-specific shocks plus the variance of firm-specific shocks scaled by the industry's HHI.
For industry j , the variance is

                                                    2   2
(9)                                  V ar (gj,0 ) =   +   HHIj .


Thus, assuming all firm-level shocks are equally distributed, more concentrated industries have
higher variance of growth rates. This is driven by concentrated industries' greater exposure to
relatively few idiosyncratic firm-specific shocks.
  The off-diagonal elements of the industry-level variance-covariance matrix equal the variance of
firm-specific shocks scaled by the CoHHI between two industries. Thus, the covariance in growth
rates at  = 0 is

                                                        2
(10)                               Cov (gj,0 , gk,0 ) =   CoHHIj,k .


This derivation shows that CoHHI is directly proportional to the covariance of growth rates, just
as HHI is directly proportional to the variance of growth rates.
  The variance-covariance matrix of firm-level growth rates is 2 I +  2 F F  . This is the dual inter-
                                                                     

pretation of the industry-level matrix. On the diagonal, firm growth rates have a variance equal to
the firm-level variance plus industry-level variance scaled by the firm's HHI across segments. Diver-
sified conglomerate firms with operations in multiple sectors face lower industry-specific variance,
compared to focused, single-segment firms. The off-diagonal elements in the firm-level variance-
covariance matrix are equal to industry-specific variance scaled by firm-level CoHHI. Firms that
operate in the same industries have greater shared in-links and thus, have higher covariance in their
growth rates.
16                                            THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



     The off-diagonal n О m matrix, 2 F  +  2 H  , in Cov (g ) reflects the covariance in growth rates
                                                            0

between firms and industries. This covariance is equal to the sum of the firm-specific variance 2


scaled by the strength of the link from the firm to the industry plus the industry-specific variance
scaled by the strength of the link from the industry to the firm. Intuitively, the covariance of growth
rates between firms and industries is the sum of the firm and industry specific variance scaled by
the strength of the connection between the firm and industry.
     Moving shocks forward one cycle in the network, the variance-covariance matrix of growth rates
at  = 1 is
                                                                                                                     
                               2 H  F F  H +  2 H  F H  HF  H  2 H  F F  HF  +  2 H  F H  HF 
                                                                               
(11)       Cov (g1 ) = 2                                                                                             .
                               2 F H  F F  H +  2 F H  HF  H
                                                                              2 F H  HF  +  2 F H  F F  HF 
                                                                              
                                                                                           


This variance-covariance matrix represents that as shocks pass through the network over time, they
repeatedly transmit from firms to industries and back to firms.
     To help interpret the covariance matrix, we again focus on the industry-to-industry portion of
the covariance matrix. At  = 1, shocks have made a full cycle in the network, represented by the
transmission network A2 . For brevity of notation, we denote the entry in row j and column k of
F  H as tj,k , which records the strength of transmission from industry j to industry k. Using this
notation, the variance of the growth rate for industry j at  = 1, after a full cycle in the network,
is as follows:
                                       m                   m                           m r -1
                               2   2
(12)         V ar (gj,1 ) =                   t2
                                               r,j   + 2
                                                                  t2
                                                                   k,j HHIr   +   22
                                                                                                  ts,j tr,j CoHHIs,r .
                                       r =1                r =1                        r =2 s=1

This equation shows that after one cycle in the network, the variance of industry j 's growth rate has
three components. The first component is the variance of industry-level shocks scaled by the sum of
the square of transmission links from all other industries into industry j . This reflects industry j 's
exposure to all other industry shocks through the conglomerate network. The second component
is the firm-level variance scaled by the sum of the transmission strength into industry j from all
other industries weighted by the other industries' HHI measures. Thus, if industry j has stronger
connections to concentrated industries, its variance is higher because of higher exposure to firm-
level shocks in connected industries. Finally, the last component is the sum of all combinations of
                                         THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                                          17



industries' CoHHI measure multiplied by their transmission strengths and the variance of firm-level
shocks.
  The covariance of the growth rate of industry j and industry k at  = 1, is as follows:
(13)
                            m                    m                           m r -1
Cov (gj,1 gk,1 ) = 2 2
                                 tr,j tr,k + 2
                                                        tr,j tr,k HHIr + 2
                                                                                        (ts,j tr,k + tr,j ts,k ) CoHHIs,r .
                          r =1                   r =1                        r =2 s=1

This equation shows that the covariance in the growth rates of industries j and k is determined
by the similarity of their exposure to industry shocks through the transmission network plus the
similarity of their exposure to firm-level shocks through within-industry concentration and common
in-links (CoHHI).


I.E. The Centrality of the Conglomerate Network

  To understand the long-run outcome of shocks transmitting through the network, we consider
the sum of the growth rates from  = 0, . . . , , as follows
                    
                                                               2              3
                          gt = I + (A )2 + (A )2                   + (A )2        + иии    I + A 
                     =0
                                                 -1
(14)                        = I - (A )2                 (I + A )

                                                                                                                  -1
where the infinite sum converges because A2 is a stochastic matrix. The term I - (A )2                                 is the
Leontief inverse. Thus, Equation 14 represents the transformation of initial shocks into industry
and firm growth rates after passing through the conglomerate network an infinite number of times.
This can be interpreted as the steady state outcome of the transition matrix A2 . In addition, as
Carvalho (2014) points out, the Leontief inverse is equivalent to the Katz-Bonacich eigenvector
centrality of a network. Thus, Equation 14 also implies that the long-run industry and firm growth
rates equal the product of their Katz-Bonacich eigenvector centrality in the conglomerate network
with their initial shock.
  These properties of the conglomerate network are identical to the properties of the industry-level
input-output networks studied in Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) and
the firm-level input-output network studied in Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2020). In particular, both papers show that the Leontief inverse describes how network structure
18                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



affects aggregate growth rates. Acemoglu et al. include the Leontief inverse in a measure they
call the "influence vector" v of an industry, which is equivalent to both Katz-Bonacich eigenvector
centrality and the "sales vector" of the economy, in which each element reflects sector i's sales as
a fraction of the total sales in the economy. Acemoglu et al. note that the second representation
is related to Gabaix's finding that firm-level productivity contributes to aggregate productivity in
proportion with firm size.
     Our conglomerate network has the same representations of the influence vector as the IO network,
except the weights in our measure represent the strength of the bi-partite network of conglomerates.
In particular, the eigenvector centrality of the industries and firms in our network matrix A2 is also
the sales vector of the economy, v . Thus, like Acemoglu et al., given a vector of idiosyncratic
industry shocks  , the aggregate shock to the economy is vind   . Equivalently, the aggregate shock
to the economy from firm-level shocks is vf irm  , as in Herskovic et al.
     In sum, our model generates the same implications for the importance of a single industry or firm
in the conglomerate network as derived in the production network. This is an important distinction.
In our model, firms are diversified, unlike in Gabaix (2011), which affects their centrality, and
thus, their influence on the aggregate economy. Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2020) present a similar intuition based on the concentration of customers in the input-output
network. Our work is similar to Herskovic et al. because they allow for shocks at different levels
of aggregation, including firm, industry, and economy-wide shocks. Our model is distinct from
Herskovic et al. because we focus on connections through conglomerate ownership, whereas they
focus on customer-supplier connections.


                           II. The Empirical Conglomerate Network

II.A. Data Sources

     We collect segment level information of conglomerate firms from the Compustat Historical Seg-
ment data. For corporate segments that represent at least 10 percent or more of consolidated
sales in a different industry, SFAS No. 14 requires that firms report accounting information on a
segment-level basis for fiscal years ending after December 15, 1977. To rectify the inadequacies of
SFAS No. 14, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) further issued SFAS No. 131 in
                                        THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                             19



June 1997, which requires that, for fiscal periods beginning after December 15, 1997, firms identify
industry segments for external reporting purposes in the manner that management views oper-
ating segments for internal decision-making purposes. To ensure the time-series comparability of
our conglomerate network, we use the Compustat Historical Segment data from 1997 to 2018 to
construct our conglomerate network. Specifically, for each segment, we collect the following four
variables: net sales, capital expenditures, identifiable total assets, and the primary NAICS code of
the segment.4 Though our framework provides both firm-level and industry-level predictions, we
focus on the industry-level network to reduce selection bias in publicly-traded company data.
  One complication of the long-time horizon considered in this paper is that the scheme of industry
classifications changes over time, such as the change from the SIC to the NAICS in 1997 and
subsequent versions of NAICS from 2002 to 2017. To obtain the time-consistent industry definitions,
we follow Pierce and Schott (2016) and create "families" of industry codes that group related NAICS
categories together across different industry classification schemes. For example, if an industry code
splits into several codes from 1997 to 2002, the industry code in 1997 and its subsequent "children"
would be grouped into the same family. Therefore, unless otherwise noted, industries in this paper
refer to these families. This adjustment allows us to control for time-invariant industry properties
using fixed effects.



                                           A.1. Industry Definitions

  One potential concern with our framework is that firm boundaries are definite, but industry
boundaries are subjective. We can address this concern in a few ways. First, we note that NAICS
codes were developed in the 1990s by a consortium of federal economic and statistical agencies,
including the Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census,
and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. These agencies designed the classification system on the
principle that industry definitions should be based on a single economic concept of the similarity of
production processes. The boundaries of industries are limited by the degree of homogeneity of the
production process among the establishments in the industry, subject to a minimum threshold of


4Though we would like to study productivity, the variables available at the segment level do not allow it.
20                                     THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



economic significance. Thus, though industry definitions are not as clearly delineated as corporate
ownership, they are not arbitrary.5
     Empirical evidence on the role of sectoral shocks for aggregate outcomes also supports the validity
of industry codes. In particular, Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) shows that both the sectoral-level
sales vector of the economy (as in Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012)) as
well as the firm-level sales vector (as in Gabaix (2011)) help explain aggregate volatility. Because
their formulation uses only the changing weights of sectors and firms in total output, their results
suggest that the boundaries of industries are defined in an economically meaningful way and are
not arbitrarily redefined to maintain equality in the size of sectors.
     The second way we address this potential concern is to control for industry links based on the
alternative industry definitions provided by Hoberg and Phillips (2016) (HP). HP use the text of the
product definitions provided in firms' 10-K filings to identify the similarity of two firms' outputs.
Thus, HP's definitions are likely to be closer to a classification scheme based on the demand-side,
compared to NAICS's scheme based on the supply-side. The third way we address this concern is
to use a different level of industry aggregation in robustness tests, described below.


                                            A.2. Truncation Bias

     A second potential concern with using Compustat data is that we only observe publicly-traded
firms. We first note that both Atalay, HortaИ
                                            csu, Roberts, and Syverson (2011) and Herskovic, Kelly,
Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2020) face the same issue when constructing empirical estimates
of input-output networks. Atalay et al. show that though their sample is truncated, they do not
observe bias in the network structure of the I-O links: the fraction of missing links is the same for
central or peripheral nodes. Herskovic et al. note that measures based on a Herfindahl formulation
(such as our CoHHI measure) give greater weight to larger firms, which reduces truncation bias.
Nevertheless, the bias from using Compustat data reduces the correlations between key moments
in their model. Thus, the truncation bias caused by Compustat data limitations makes it more
difficult to identify statistically significant relationships in the empirical analysis.


5More information on the development and principles guiding NAICS is available on the US Census Bureau's website:
https://www.census.gov/naics/?008967
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                        21



  We also provide robustness tests later in the paper to better understand the potential for trunca-
tion bias. In particular, we re-estimate our main regressions using subsamples of Compustat data
that are truncated by size thresholds to test whether our results differ when we exclude smaller
firms.


II.B. The Structure of the Conglomerate Network

  Networks exist across a continuum of types. On one extreme, random graphs contain nodes that
are connected to each other with an equal probability (Erdos and R┤
                                                                  enyi, 1959). Thus, random
graphs do not have central hubs. In addition, the number of connections to a node (degree) in a
random graph exhibit relatively little variation around the average degree. Second, random graphs
are not clustered, in which a nodes' neighbors are also connected with each other. At the other
extreme of network types are ultra small world networks. These networks have very large hubs,
with undefined degree variance. This means that the degree of an arbitrary network varies widely
around the mean. The presence of prominent hubs in these networks reduces the average distance
between all nodes and creates clusters of nodes. See Barab┤
                                                          asi (2016) for a detailed discussion of
network types.
  One way to measure the structure of a network is by its degree distribution. Random graphs
have symmetric binomial degree distributions. Ultra small world networks have fat tailed degree
distributions with long right tails indicating that a small number of nodes have many connections
and a large number of nodes have few connections. A particular fat tailed distribution is the power
law distribution, also known as the scale free distribution, p(X > x)  Cx- , where  > 2 is the
scaling parameter. The lower is the , the longer is the right tail. As  increases above 3, the
network begins to resemble a random network.


              B.1. The Structure of the Conglomerate Network in the Cross-Section

  Figure III represents the complementary cumulative degree distribution of the conglomerate
network in 1997 in log scale. A linear relationship indicates a fat tailed, power law distribution.
The dashed line in the figure corresponds to an  of 3.44, estimated following Clauset, Shalizi,
and Newman (2009). This  is comparable to 3.1 for the input-output network of industries, as
22                                       THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



estimated in Ahern and Harford (2014). Over our sample period,  is estimated to be 2.8 in
an average year, though in 60% of years we reject the hypothesis that the network is power law
distributed. Thus, these statistics show that the degree distribution of the conglomerate network
has a substantially fat tail, even if not precisely a power law distribution. This means that the
network is characterized by a relatively few hub industries with many connections to other industries
and a relatively large number of industries with few inter-industry connections.
     Additional network statistics confirm that the conglomerate network has a fat tail. In an average
year, the average industry is connected to 6.8 other industries (degree centrality), though the median
industry is connected to 3.3 other industries, consistent with a skewed degree distribution. The
clustering coefficient of the average industry is 39%; for the median industry it is 32%, which is
large relative to clustering in social networks. Finally, in an average year, the maximum path length
between any two industries in the largest component is 7.5 links (7 at the median). Given that
the largest component has 573 industries in an average year, this reflects that the conglomerate
network exhibits small-world network features.6


                         B.2. Time-Series Evolution of the Conglomerate Network

     Figure IV plots the time series of network statistics. First, the power law scaling parameter  has
decreased over this period, while the variation in degree across nodes and clustering increased. This
indicates that the network has evolved towards an ultra small world network with more prominent
hubs. Second, from 2000 to 2018, average degree centrality decreased by more than 30% while
eigenvector centrality decreased less noticeably. These results indicate that the average industry
reduced its number of connections by removing connections to more peripheral industries.
     These results highlight the changes in conglomerate ownership over the last two decades. While
fewer industries are connected through conglomerate firms, the connections that remain are stronger
and more centralized. In addition, industries are now more clustered together through conglomer-
ates than in the past. This is consistent with Hoberg and Phillips (2021) which uses text of product

6We discuss the statistics for the binary network for ease of exposition, but the interpretation of the weighted networks
are similar. We report statistics for the giant component of the network, which is the largest set of interconnected
nodes in a network. In an average year, 75% of industries are in the largest connected component. The remaining
industries are typically in very small components of one or two industries. We also exclude self-loops from the
statistics, where an industry is connected to itself.
                                     THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                       23



descriptions to show that conglomerate firms have become more focused in related industries over
our sample period.




                       B.3. Central Industries in the Conglomerate Network


  Table I presents the most central industries in four versions of the conglomerate network: the
binary network, transmission network, shared in-links, and shared out-links. The binary network is
an unweighted network where links are defined by the existence of any conglomerate link between
industries, without regard to their strength. The top five industries in each network are similar
whether we define centrality using the sum of the connections (degree centrality) in Panel A or
eigenvector centrality in Panel B.
  Within the transmission network, the most central industries include motor vehicle parts, electric
utility services, and petroleum related industries. High centrality in this network indicates that
these industries are at the center of economic activity that is transmitting through conglomerate
firms. The most central industries in the CoHHI network of shared in-links are concentrated in the
food industry: coffee, cheese, frozen foods, etc. High centrality in this industry reflects that these
industries have high CoHHI scores with many other industries. In particular, the food industry
is dominated by firms that operate in multiple food industries with similar market shares in each.
Finally, the most central industries in the shared out-link network are general industrial machinery,
electric services, natural gas and petroleum, and computer systems design. These are industries
that are highly connected to other industries through conglomerates with similar levels of exposure
to common industry shocks.
  To help visualize the conglomerate network, Figure V presents the CoHHI network for man-
ufacturing industries in 2015. Each inter-industry connection represents a CoHHI score above a
minimum threshold. Industries listed in boxes are aggregated to more coarse definitions for brevity.
To give further intuition for the structure of the network, Figure VI provides a detailed represen-
tation of the links between the paper, chemicals, and plastic industries. The firms listed are those
firms that operate in at least two of the three industries. The CoHHI of the paper and chemicals
industries is driven by their common exposure to the same firms, with Procter & Gamble as a key
24                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



conduit. Likewise, the chemicals and plastics industries are connected through common exposure
to conglomerate firms, with Bayer as the strongest connection.


         III. Empirical Evidence on The Comovement of Industry Growth Rates

III.A. Cross-Sectional Tests

     First, we estimate the cross-sectional industry-to-industry variance-covariance matrix in Equation 8.
In particular, following the model, we regress the time-series covariance of industry growth rates
on the time-series average strength of industry connections in the CoHHI network, plus a dummy
variable that indicates the diagonal entries in the matrix (i.e., an industry paired with itself). We
study three industry growth rates in our baseline tests: sales growth, asset growth, and investment
rates (capital expenditures/assets).
     Table II shows that there is a positive cross-sectional correlation between CoHHI and the co-
variance of sales growth and asset growth rates, consistent with the theoretical framework. These
results imply that industries with higher CoHHI connections also have higher comovement of fun-
damental economic growth rates. The intuition is that the comovement of industry growth rates is
driven by conglomerate firms with large market shares in multiple industries.7
     Next, the the positive coefficient on the dummy variable reflects that more concentrated indus-
tries have more volatile growth rates. This result is consistent with the model's intuition that
concentrated industries have greater exposure to firm-specific shocks. These results show that in-
dustry volatility is driven, in part, by large firms as in Gabaix (2011), but only if the firms have
large market shares within the industry.


III.B. Correlations of Alternative Industry Connections

     Figure VII presents the yearly cross-sectional correlation between the measures of the conglom-
erate network, the input-output network, and Hoberg-Phillips industry similarity measures. Ob-
servations are based on directed industry pairs, excluding own industry loops. Panel A shows that
the strength of the transmission link between industry pairs is more correlated with the strength

7In unreported tests, we verify that our results hold when we estimate the network correlations using exponential
random graph models, following Ahern and Harford (2014).
                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                                           25



of shared in-links (about 50%) than with the strength of shared out-links (about 28%). This rep-
resents, in part, that there is more variation across in-links than across out-links because market
shares vary more widely across industries than do industry shares across firms. Shared in-links and
out-links are less correlated with each other (about 11%).
  Panel B shows that shared in-links and the transmission links have persistently low correlations
(less than 6%) with the Hoberg-Phillips measure of industry connections. In contrast, shared out-
links in the conglomerate network display higher correlations (about 14%) and exhibit larger time-
series variation. These results reflect that the similarity of product descriptions across industries
from HP is tied more closely to a firm's industry share than to the firm's market share. This follows
because HP similarity measures are based on the firm's perspective of its products, rather than the
industry's perspective of its leading firms.
  Panel C of Figure VII shows that the conglomerate network has relatively little correlation with
the input-output network (less than 7%), though the correlation is increasing during the sample
period. This suggests that vertical integration is increasing from 1997 to 2018, relative to unrelated
diversification. This is consistent with Figure IV, which shows that conglomerate firms have become
more focused in central industries, rather than peripheral industries.
  In sum, the results in Figure VII show that the conglomerate network is not just a proxy for
existing measures of industry connectedness. Instead, the conglomerate network represents a unique
form of inter-industry connections.




III.C. Panel Tests


  Second, we estimate panel regressions with fixed effects to isolate the effect of changes in the
conglomerate network on within-industry-pair changes in comovement. To estimate a panel model
with yearly observations, we cannot use the time-series covariance as our dependent variable. In-
stead, to motivate our empirical model, note that the squared difference of two industries' growth
rates at  = 0, is as follows:

                                                n               n                  n                n              2
                2               2
(15)   (gj - gk ) = (j - k ) + 2 (j - k )            hi,j i -         hi,k i   +         hi,j i -         hi,k i
                                               i=1              i=1                i=1              i=1
26                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



In expectation, the squared difference of growth rates is:


                   E (gj,1 - gk,1 )2 = E (gj,
                                           2            2
                                              1 ) + E (gk,1 ) - 2E (gj,1 gk,1 )

                                          2   2                   2
(16)                                   = 2  +   (HHIj + HHIk ) - 2  CoHHIj,k .


To test this relationship empirically, we estimate a more generalized version of the model's predic-
tion in the following regression:


(17)                       (gj, - gk, )2 = 1 Shared In-Links (Co-HHI)jk,

                                            + 2 Shared Out-Linksjk,

                                            + (HHIj, + HHIk, )

                                            +  + jk +  Controlsjk, + jk,


where gi, represents industry i's growth rate at time  , Shared In-Links (Co-HHI)ij, , and Shared
Out-Linksij, represent network connections at time  ,  is a time fixed effect, ij is an industry pair
fixed effect, and Controls include time-varying industry-pair control variables, discussed below. This
regression is estimated using undirected industry-pairs because the explanatory variables represent
undirected links. We include Shared Out-Links in our regression tests, even though they do not
appear in the theoretical formulation, because shocks might transfer in the opposite direction than
we have assumed.
     The regression above does not include the transmission network because it is derived from the
covariance of growth rates at the initial period. If we allow for higher order connections in the
network, we need to include the transmission network. As shown in Equation 13, the covariance
of growth rates after one cycle in the network is a function of HHI, CoHHI, and the transmission
network. We estimate a more general empirical model, as follows:


(18)          (gj, - gk, )2 =1 Transmissionjk, + 2 CoHHIjk,

                               + (HHIj, + HHIk, ) +  + jk +  Controlsjk, + jk,


where the Transmission variable is defined as a dummy variable of H  F F  H to reflect industries
that are two links away in the transmission network.
                                     THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                               27



  In both regressions, the industry pair fixed effects, ij account for time-invariant cross-sectional
variation in industry pairs (directed or undirected). This controls for any cross-industry trait that
remains stable over time, such as the nature of the product (e.g., goods vs. services), the level of
government regulation, access to capital, and the importance of intangible assets. We also include
time fixed effects,  to control for economy-wide fluctuations and to isolate within-industry pair
fluctuations. Finally, we also run specifications that use a dummy variable that represents the
presence of a connection in the network, without regard to the strength of the connection. For the
shared links networks, this dummy variable is identical in the in-links and out-links networks.
  The regressions also include variables to control for customer-supplier relationships and product-
market similarities. We measure the customer-supplier connections between industry pairs using
data from the industry-by-industry total requirement table from the Benchmark Input-Output
(IO) Accounts released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). These data measure the dollar
amount of intermediary industry output required per dollar of final demand. We use the most
recent data for years 1997, 2002, 2007, 2012, and 2017. For example, from year 1997 to 2001, we
use the 1997 total requirement table. In a few cases, our industry pairs cannot be matched to the
IO industries, however our results are qualitative unchanged if we drop these industry pairs from
the sample instead.
  Second, we control for time-varying asset similarities between industry pairs based on the text-
based product similarity measure of Hoberg and Phillips (2016) (HP). To convert their similarity
measures to our industry pairs, we identify stand-alone firm-pairs with positive HP similarity in
each industry pair. We then calculate the average similarities between these firm pairs in our
industry-pairs to proxy for asset similarity. Specifically, for industry pair (i, j ), with m stand-alone
firm-pairs (k, l) with positive HP similarity, where k denotes firms in industry i and l denotes firms
                                                                       HPk,l
in industry j , the asset similarity of industry pair (i, j ) is   m
                                                                       m     ,   where HPk,l is the text-based
product similarity of the firm pair (k, l). We assign a zero to industry pairs with missing similarity
scores because this implies the HP measure is below a minimum threshold.
  In sum, these regressions are designed to isolate how time-series variation in the comovement of
two industries' growth rates is explained by time-series variation in the strength of the connection
28                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



between the industries in the conglomerate network. If two industries' connection through con-
glomerates becomes stronger, we expect to see stronger comovement in their growth rates. After
presenting these baseline results, we consider sampling bias and endogeneity in robustness tests.


III.D. Summary Statistics

     Table III provides summary statistics for all of variables used in the panel regressions. In the
median industry-year, sales growth is 2.67%, asset growth is 1.1%, investment rate is 4.40%, and
employment growth is -0.90%. Squared differences in these rates vary considerably. In an average
year, the squared difference of sales growth is 20.88%, compared to 5.56% at the median. Asset
growth is similar, but squared differences in investment rates and employee growth rates are much
lower. This indicates that there is less variation across industries in investment rates and employee
growth than sales and asset growth. All of the network measures are skewed because the network is
sparse, with most industry pairs having no connection. The dummy variables indicates that 1.4%
of industry-pairs are connected in the conglomerate network, which is similar in magnitude to the
Hoberg-Phillips measure and the IO links.


III.E. Baseline Results

     Table IV presents estimates of the relationship between shared in-links and out-links on the
comovement of industry growth rates. For sales growth and asset growth, an increase in the
strength of shared links is negatively correlated with the squared differences in growth rates. Thus,
consistent with our prediction, as industries become more closely connected in the conglomerate
network, their growth rates comove more closely. Because we control for year fixed effects and
industry-pair fixed effects, these results are not driven by cross-sectional differences in the nature
of industries, nor are they explained by economy-wide fluctuations in the time-series of growth rate
levels or correlations. In addition, the results are not driven by customer-supplier relationships or
asset similarities.
     Shared out-links are statistically related to comovement in investment rates, but shared in-links
are not. This might reflect that investment rates reflect cash-flow shocks, rather than growth rate
shocks. In this case, the strength of shared out-links would correspond to the transmission of
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         29



level shocks in the opposite direction, rather than growth shocks. This may also explain why the
input-output and Hoberg-Phillips measures reverse directions for investment growth.
  Also consistent with the model, the sum of HHI is positively correlated with squared differences
in growth rates with a high degree of statistical significance. This reflects that industries with
greater internal concentration have weaker connections to other industries. Thus, an increase in an
industry's HHI reduces the comovement of its growth rate with other industries.
  It is easiest to interpret the magnitude of the dummy variable for the squared difference of growth
rates. For all three outcome variables, the presence of a connection reduces the squared difference
in growth rates by about 8.5% of the average squared difference and about 31% of the median
squared difference. The squared difference in the investment growth rate is reduced by 56% of the
median if there exists a conglomerate connection compared to industry pairs without a connection.
For comparison, a one standard deviation increase in the sum of HHI is associated with an increase
of squared differences in growth rates equal to 45% of the median for sales growth and 29% of the
median for asset growth.
  Next, Table V presents the estimates of the transmission network on the comovement of industry
growth rates. The estimates show that the transmission network is negatively and significantly
related to difference in industry growth rates for sales, asset, and investment growth. This means
that when two industries become connected through two links of the transmission network, their
growth rates comove more closely. As before, the sum of industry HHIs has the opposite relationship
to the transmission network, consistent with the model's prediction.
  We also estimate industry-level tests of the effect of distance in the conglomerate network on
the comovement of industry growth rates. In particular, we estimate each industry's exposure
to the growth rates of other industries through the conglomerate network at different distances.
To calculate industry j 's exposure to industries that are at a distance of one, we calculate the
weighted average of the growth rates of all other industries, where the weights are the strength of
the connections between industry j and the other industries in the transmission network. For a
distance of two, we take the average growth rate of all industries that are exactly two links away
from industry j in the transmission network. Similarly, we calculate the average growth rate of
30                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



industries that are at industry j 's maximum distance, excluding industries that are not connected
at any distance to industry j .
     Table VI shows that industries growth rates are higher when the growth rates of connected
industries' growth rates are higher. The effect is largest for industries that are at a distance of one,
while the results are still positive for industries that are at a distance of two in the transmission
network for sales growth. This shows that industries comove with other industries in the network,
even if they are not directly connected. Growth rates of industries at the maximum distance are
uncorrelated. As expected, the longer is the distance between two industries in the network, the
weaker is their comovement. Because these results control for IO-weighted growth rates of other
industries, year fixed effects, and industry fixed effects, the results are not driven by customer-
supplier links, macroeconomic fluctuations, or cross-sectional heterogeneity in industry traits.
     To provide additional evidence that the results are driven by the conglomerate network, we
calculate a placebo variable in which industries are randomly assigned a transmission strength using
the empirical distribution of linkages in the data. If the results were driven by macroeconomic
factors, rather than connections in the conglomerate network, the results would persist in the
placebo test. However, Table VI shows that the placebo variable is unrelated to an industry's
growth rate. Thus, these regression results provide strong support for the model's prediction that
industries' growth rates comove more strongly if they have stronger connections in the conglomerate
network.




                       IV. Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment


     As an additional analysis of the propagation of industry shocks within the conglomerate network,
we study the effect of the United States granting Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to
China. PNTR was granted by Congress in October 2000 and became effective when China joined
the World Trade Organization (WTO) at the end of 2001. Before the conferral of PNTR, the
tariff rates of US imports from China required annual renewals, which had imposed a great amount
of uncertainty on the trade relations between China and US. Although PNTR did not change
the import tariff rates that the United States actually applied to Chinese goods, it removed the
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                             31



uncertainty associated with these annual renewals. Without the yearly renewal of favorable rates,
US import tariffs would have increased substantially.
  Pierce and Schott (2016) show that granting PNTR to China caused declines in employment
within US industries that were most at risk of higher tariffs without PNTR (exposed industries).
We exploit the same shock to test whether employment growth declined for industries that were
not directly affected by PNTR, but were connected to the exposed industries through the conglom-
erate network. This allows us to test whether a specific identifiable shock transmits through the
conglomerate network.
  Following Pierce and Schott (2016), we measure the NTR gap as the difference between the
non-NTR rates to which tariffs would have risen in the industry if annual renewal had failed and
the NTR tariff rates that were locked in by PNTR. This shock is time-invariant for each industry
and therefore absorbed by industry fixed effects. However, as in Pierce and Schott, we can identify
the effect of the NTR gap through its interaction with a dummy variable, P ost, which is equal to
one from 2001 onward to indicate years after the passage of PNTR.
  To identify industries that could potentially receive the NTR shock from the exposed industries
through the conglomerate network, we use the transmission network, F  H . We use the 1999 network
to ensure it is exogenous to the NTR shock in 2000. For each industry k in the transmission network,
we weight the NTR gap by the entries in the kth column of F  H . These entries represent the shocks
from row industries that transmit to industry k. We also normalize the measure by the sum of the
                                                                         k=i Transmissionk,i ОNTR   gapk
column, excluding industry i. Therefore, Transmission NTR gapi =                                           .
                                                                              k=i Transmissionk,i

As above, this variable is identified through the interaction with the post dummy variable. If
the employment shock transmits through the conglomerate network, we expect to find a negative
coefficient on the interaction between the strength of the conglomerate network and the NTR gap.
  We estimate the model using industry level employment data from the US Census Bureau's
County Business Patterns (CBP) files from 1997 to 2018. These data offer the most detailed view
of the United States' industrial structure available to the public. They provide annual data on
employment at a detailed industry level, which covers nearly all establishments with paid employees
in the private sector of the United States. Therefore, unlike the Compustat Segment data, the
industry employment in CBP files contain the universe of firms, both publicly listed and private.
32                                 THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



     Table VII presents the results of these tests. Column 1 replicates the findings in Pierce and
Schott (2016). US industries directly exposed to the NTR shock experience a significant decline
in employment. Column 2 shows that this shock transmits through the conglomerate network.
Industries with greater network connections to the industries directly exposed to the NTR shock
also experience declines in employment. These results provide further evidence that economic
shocks transmit across industries through conglomerate firms.
     In columns 3 and 4 of Table VII, we provide two more robustness checks. In column 3 we create
a placebo variable identical to the interaction between the transmission network and the NTR gap
by randomly assigning industries to the actual network weights in the transmission network, as
above. We find that there is no correlation between this placebo network and employment growth.
This implies that our main results are not caused by a general network-wide trend. Finally, in
column 4, we include the strength of network connections from the 1997 input-output network.
We find that downstream industries are affected by the shock, though upstream industries are not,
consistent with Pierce and Schott (2016). However, we still find that the transmission network is
significantly related to employment in connected industries.
     These tests are important because they allow us to exploit the cross-sectional variation in the
exposure to an identifiable shock. We also use the predetermined conglomerate network prior to
the NTR shock to rule out reverse causality and control for input-output relations to control for
alternative explanations. In addition, our dependent variable is not based on public firm filings
in Compustat. Even after these controls, we still find that the conglomerate network serves as a
conduit to spread economic shocks.




                                       V. Robustness Tests


     Though the above results show that inter-industry strength in the conglomerate network is cor-
related with the strength of the comovement of industry growth rates, there are potential concerns
related to sampling bias, endogeneity, and industry definitions. Below, we address these concerns
in robustness tests.
                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         33



V.A. Employment Growth from CBP Data

  One potential concern with the baseline results is that the dependent and explanatory variables
are both derived from data restricted to publicly-traded firms that are subject to reporting require-
ments for segment-level accounting data. Therefore, the results may be driven by measurement
errors within publicly traded firms. Second, the results may not generalize to the full economy,
including private firms. Even though we show that employment fell after the tariff rate shock, to
fully address this concern, we estimate the main regressions using industry level employment data
from the US CBP data, as above.
  Table VIII presents the estimated regressions of the growth rate in employment on the conglom-
erate network. The results are consistent with the baseline results. In particular, a stronger CoHHI
link between industries is associated with strong comovement in their growth rates of employment.
There is no significance of shared out-links for employment growth. In sum, the consistency of
these results helps alleviate the concern that our network is not generalizable beyond Compustat
segments data.


V.B. Lagged Explanatory Variables

  A second potential concern with our baseline results is that the dependent variable and ex-
planatory variables are concurrent yearly observations. Thus, both variables could be driven by
an omitted variable. Alternatively, it is possible that reverse causation drives our results such that
growth rates cause firms to increase the size of their operations in industries with correlated growth
rates. To test for a causal relationship between the conglomerate network and the comovement of
growth rates requires exogenous variation in the conglomerate network, which we do not observe.
However, to better understand the potential for a causal relationship between the network and
growth rates, we run robustness tests using lagged explanatory variables.


V.C. Compustat Truncation Bias

  To alleviate concerns that using large publicly traded firms to construct our network creates
truncation bias in our results, we run a series of robustness tests. Though we cannot directly
measure the effect of excluding small, private firms, we can test how changing the size threshold
34                                 THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



of the available Compustat data affects our results. Therefore, we estimate the main tests using
a sample that excludes observations of firms that are below the 25th percentile of sales in a given
year. Internet Appendix Table I shows that our results are nearly identical as in the main tests that
use the full Compustat sample. In Internet Appendix Table II, we use a more extreme threshold of
the 50th percentile of sales. The magnitude of the results are smaller, but they are still statistically
significant. These tests suggest that our results are likely to be stronger if we had a larger sample
that included smaller, private firms.
     A related concern is that Compustat data includes some firms that are incorporated out of
the country but file financial statements in the U.S. However, there are many foreign firms that
compete in U.S. product markets but who are not included in Compustat. To test whether the
foreign-incorporated firms influence our results, we re-estimate our main tests after excluding foreign
firms. Internet Appendix Table III shows that the results are nearly identical when we exclude
foreign firms.
     Finally, we also directly compare Compustat data to the Economic Census data published by the
US Census Bureau. For each industry, we calculate the ratio of Compustat sales to Census sales
to measure how well the public firms in Compustat represent the total sales in the industry. We
then divide industries into those that have above-median representation by Compustat firms and
those with below-median representation. We find that the total Census-level sales of the average
industry with above-median representation is statistically identical to the Census-level sales of the
average industry with below-median representation. This means that large and small industries,
as measured by Census data, are equally represented by Compustat data. This helps alleviate any
concerns that Compustat data is biased towards large industries because it is biased towards large
firms. Because we construct industry-level networks, these results suggest that our network is not
systematically biased against certain industries.



V.D. Industry Definitions

     As argued above, the NAICS codes that we use to define industries boundaries are not arbitrary.
However, to address the concern that the particular industry definitions we use has a substantial
effect on our results, we reconstruct our network measures using SIC 3-digit industry definitions.
                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                          35



These are considerably more coarse than the NAICS codes we use in our main tests: the number
of industry-pairs in the network based on 3-Digit SIC codes is only about 25% of the number of
industry-pairs in the main specifications. Internet Appendix Table IV shows that our main results
are robust to constructing the network using these more coarse industry definitions.



                                          VI. Conclusion


  To organize an analysis of the economy, researchers typically partition economic activity into a
set of isolated industries, grouped together by common suppliers, production processes, technology,
or customers. At the same time, economic activity is grouped together by common control derived
from ownership, typically organized as firms. These two groupings create overlapping boundaries
of economic activity, in which industries are groupings of firms, but at the same time, some firms
are groupings of industries. In this paper, we organize these overlapping groupings into a unified
network of industries and firms. Using this network perspective, we show that economic activity
transmits across the economy through conglomerate firms that span multiple industries.
  The core of our model is an affiliation network in which industries are affiliated with firms
and firms are affiliated with industries, but firms have no direct connections with other firms and
industries have no direct connections with other industries. This creates a directed, and weighted
network in which shocks transmit from firms to industries in proportion to a firm's market share
of total industry sales and from industries to firms in proportion to the fraction of a firm's sales
attributed to the industry. From the affiliation network, we create three inter-industry networks
that vary in the interpretation and strength of their connections. In the first network, inter-industry
connections represent the strength of the links from an industry through conglomerate firms, back
to other industries. The connections in the second network represent two industries' commonality
of shared in-links from overlapping conglomerate firms. The final network represents the strength
of shared out-links from industries to common firms.
  An important new perspective offered by our network is a microfoundation for the widely-used
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). We show that HHI is a special case of a more general measure
we call CoHHI which represents the shared in-links of an industry. If the same firms command
more similar market shares in two industries then the industries have a higher CoHHI. This reflects
36                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



a measure of cross-industry sales concentration through overlapping firms. Furthermore, just as
statistical variance is a special case of covariance, HHI is a special case of CoHHI. This derivation
also provides an economic rationale for HHI's specific formulation as the sum of squared market
shares, which is an ad hoc choice made in the original papers by Hirschman and Herfindahl.
     The conglomerate network also provides predictions on the covariance of growth rates across
industries. Assuming idiosyncratic firm and industry shocks, we show that the volatility of an
industry's growth equals a common volatility of industry growth rates plus firm-level volatility
weighted by the HHI of the industry. The covariance of industry growth rates is equal to firm-
level volatility weighted by the CoHHI between the two industries. Thus CoHHI describes the
comovement of growth rates across the economy.
     We test the predictions of our model using a panel of segment level data from 1997 to 2018. We
show that the stronger is the connection between two industries in the conglomerate network, the
stronger is the comovement of their growth rates of sales, asset levels, investment, and employment.
These results persist after controlling for industry-pair fixed effects, year fixed effects, changes in
industry HHIs, customer-supplier links, and asset similarity measures. To help identify a causal
relationship, we use lagged values of network connections and find qualitatively similar results. We
also exploit the cross-sectional variation in industries' exposure to tariff rate shocks following the
granting of normal trade relations to China. We find that employment falls more in industries that
have stronger connections to the industries directly affected by the tariff rate shock.
     We believe our results have far-reaching implications. First, they help explain how idiosyncratic
shocks aggregate to macroeconomic fluctuations. Second, they provide a new perspective on the
incidence of diversified conglomerates across industries and time. Third, the conglomerate network
generates a new measure of cross-industry concentration, CoHHI, and gives an economic micro-
foundation to HHI. Given the prevalence of HHI in academic research and among policy-makers,
we believe this measure will be useful for understanding the organizational structure of economic
activity within and across industries.
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         37



                                           References


Acemoglu, D., Carvalho, V. M., Ozdaglar, A., Tahbaz-Salehi, A., 2012. The network origins of
aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80, 1977Г2016.

Ahern, K. R., Harford, J., 2014. The importance of industry links in merger waves. Journal of
Finance 69, 527Г576.

Alchian, A. A., Demsetz, H., 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization. The
American Economic Review 62.

Ant┤
   on, M., Ederer, F., Gin┤
                          e, M., Schmalz, M., 2018. Common ownership, competition, and top
management incentives. Working Paper.

Atalay, E., HortaИ
                 csu, A., Roberts, J., Syverson, C., 2011. Network structure of production. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 5199Г5202.

Azar, J., Schmalz, M., Tecu, I., 2018. Anticompetitive effects of common ownership. Journal of
Finance 73, 1513Г1565.

Barab┤
     asi, A. L., 2016. Network Science. Cambridge University Press.

Barrot, J.-N., Sauvagnat, J., 2016. Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks in
production networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1543Г1592.

Carvalho, V., 2014. From micro to macro via production networks. Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 28, 23Г48.

Carvalho, V. M., Gabaix, X., 2013. The great diversification and its undoing. American Economic
Review 103, 1697Г1727.

Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., Newman, M., 2009. Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM
Review 51, 661Г703.

di Giovanni, J., Levchenko, A. A., Mejean, I., 2014. Firms, destinations, and aggregate fluctuations.
Econometrica 82, 1303Г1340.

Erdos, P., R┤
            enyi, A., 1959. On random graphs I. Publicationes Mathematicae 6, 290Г297.

Gabaix, X., 2011. The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79, 733Г772.

Giroud, X., Mueller, H. M., 2019. Firms' internal networks and local economic shocks. American
Economic Review 109, 3617Г3649.

Herfindahl, O. C., 1950. Concentration in the steel industry. Ph.D. thesis.

Herskovic, B., Kelly, B., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2020. Firm volatility in granular
networks. Journal of Political Economy 128, 4097Г4162.
38                                THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



Hirschman, A. O., 1945. National power and the structure of foreign trade. University of California
Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.

Hoberg, G., Phillips, G., 2016. Text-based network industries and endogenous product differenti-
ation. Journal of Political Economy 124, 1423Г1465.

Hoberg, G., Phillips, G. M., 2021. Scope, scale, and competition: The 21st Century firm. Working
paper.

Jensen, M. C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American
Economic Review 76, 323Г329.

Kleinert, J., Martin, J., Toubal, F., 2015. The few leading the many: Foreign affiliates and business
cycle comovement. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 134Г159.

Lamont, O., 1997. Cash flow and investment: Evidence from internal capital markets. Journal of
Finance 52, 83Г109.

Lewellen, W. G., 1971. A pure financial rationale for the conglomerate merger. Journal of Finance
26, 521Г537.

Matsusaka, J. G., Nanda, V., 2002. Internal capital markets and corporate refocusing. Journal of
Financial Intermediation 11, 176Г211.

Pierce, J. R., Schott, P. K., 2016. The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing employment.
American Economic Review 106, 1632Г1662.

Scharfstein, D. S., Stein, J. C., 2000. The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional rent-
seeking and inefficient investment. Journal of Finance 55, 2537Г2564.

Sharifkhani, A., Simutin, M., 2021. Feedback loops in industry trade networks and the term
structure of momentum profits. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Shea, J., 2002. Complementarities and comovements. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 34,
412Г433.

Shin, H.-H., Stulz, R. M., 1998. Are internal capital markets efficient? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 531Г552.

Stein, J. C., 1997. Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources. Journal of
Finance 52, 111Г133.

Stigler, G. J., 1964. A theory of oligopoly. Journal of Political Economy 72, 44Г61.

Teece, D. J., 1980. Economies of scope and the scope of the enterprise. Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 1, 223Г247.
                                 THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                       39



Williamson, O. E., 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free Press,
New York.
40                                       THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                x
                               0.75                       0.3

                                          0.5       0.5
                                                                     0.3
                              p                                 q               y
                                         0.2        0.8              1.0

                                  0.25                    0.4
                                                z

                                                     Figure I
                           A Network with Two Industries and Three Firms
     This figure presents a graphical representation of an example network. The firms are x, y , and z ,
     and the industries are p and q . Blue arrows reflect matrix H , the effect of firms on industries. Red
     arrows reflect matrix F , the effect of industries on firms.
                                        THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                             41




                                                               0.53
                                                                             x             0.15
                     0.58                                                               0.30
0.43          p                 q           0.77                      0.39       0.33             y       0.30
                     0.23                                                               0.24

                                                                             z             0.40
                                                               0.37


       (a) Industry Transition Matrix F  H                             (b) Firm Transition Matrix HF 

                                                               0.50
                                                                             x
                                                                                          0.50
                     0.33
0.63          p                 q           0.34                      0.50                        y       1.00

                                                                                           0.68
                                                                             z
                                                               0.68


        (c) Industry Shared In-links H  H                                (d) Firm Shared In-links F F 

                                                               0.63
                                                                             x
                                                                                          0.09
                     0.41
0.29          p                 q            1.89                     0.31                        y       0.09

                                                                                          0.12
                                                                             z
                                                               0.22


       (e) Industry Shared Out-links F  F                               (f) Firm Shared Out-links HH 

                                                   Figure II
                         Three Transformations of the Conglomerate Network
         Panels A and B present transition matrices for industries (A) and firms (B). Panels C and D
        present projection matrices of shared in-links for industries (C) and firms (D). Panels E and F
               present projection matrices of shared out-links for industries (E) and firms (F).
42                                           THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                  100%




                                  10%
                    Prob(x  X )




                                   1%




                                  0.1%
                                         1            10               100              1000
                                               # of Inter-Industry Connections, X


                                                  Figure III
                        Degree Distribution of Binary Conglomerate Network
     This figure represents the distribution of degree centrality in log-log scale in the 1997 binary con-
     glomerate network. Circles represent the degree centrality of industries, indicating how many direct
     connections an industry has to other industries. The dashed line is the from the estimate of  in the
     power distribution P (k ) = ck - .
                                         THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                        43




                                                                            S.D. Degree/Mean Degree
                            1.1                                             Clustering coefficient
    Normalized Statistics



                            1.0
                                                                            Eigenvector centrality
                            0.9

                            0.8
                                                                            Power law 
                            0.7
                                                                            Mean degree

                                  2000    2005     2010       2015

                                             Figure IV
                      Time Series of the Binary Conglomerate Network
Five summary statistics are calculated yearly on the binary conglomerate network. Mean degree is
the number of inter-industry links into an average industry. Eigenvector centrality is the eigenvector
value for the largest eigenvalue of the network for an average industry. Clustering coefficient is the
fraction of industries that are connected to a node that are also connected to each other for the
average industry. Power law  is the estimate of the scaling parameter of the power law distribution
P (x) = Cx- . S.D. Degree/Mean Degree is the standard deviation of industry degree divided by the
average degree. All statistics are normalized by dividing by the values in 1997.
                                                                               M ining/Civil Engineering

                                                                                       Primary Metal
                                                                                   Fabricated Metal               U tilities/W holesale
                                                         Agriculture
                                                                                     Paper Mfg.
                                                                                                                        Wood Products
                                                                                               Printing
                                                                                                  Textile Mills
THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                         Chemicals                                 Nonmetallic Mineral

                                                                                                           Electrical Equip.
                                                                            Beverages     Misc.
                                      Oil/Gas/P ipelines
                                                                            Apparel
                                                                        Textile Products Computers
                                                         Petroleum                                                                    Construction
                                                         Products             Furniture



                                                                                   Machinery                      Transport Equip.

                                                                        Plastics
                                                                                                                                     T ransportation
                                                                             P ublishing/M ovies/Inf ormation


                                                                                         Figure V
                                                                 Conglomerate Network in Manufacturing in 2015
                           Each node in the network is a three-digit manufacturing industry, except non-manufacturing industries, which are aggregated at a
                           higher level and presented in boxes. Lines between industries represent Co-HHI measures above a minimum threshold. Because many
                           of the manufacturing industries are connected to credit and securities industries in the Co-HHI network, we omit these links for ease
                           of viewing the other Co-HHI connections. Data are from Compustat.
44
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                                45



                         Firms                                          Industries
                        Grief Inc.

                    Masco Corp.
                                                                      Paper, HHI: 7.3%
                  Newell Brands

              Procter & Gamble
                                                                           Co-HHI: 0.43%
                    Rogers Corp.

                       Sealed Air
                                                                      Chemicals, HHI: 2.0%
                        Westrock

            Schweitzer-Mauduit
                                                                           Co-HHI: 0.15%
                            Bayer

              Omnova Solutions
                                                                      Plastics, HHI: 16.4%
         Edgewell Personal Care

             Berry Global Group

                                              Figure VI
        The Affiliation Network of the Paper, Chemicals, and Plastics Industries
This figure represents the affiliation network of three manufacturing industries, defined at the three-
digit NAICS level: Paper, Chemicals, and Plastics. The listed firms are those that operate in at least
two of the three industries. Each industry contains additional firms not represented in the figure that
do not operate segments in at least two of these three industries. The width of the lines are scaled
by firms' market shares in each industry. There is a weak Co-HHI relationship between Plastics and
Paper not shown in the figure. Data are from Compustat for year 2015.
46                                               THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                   0.6
                                                                                   Transmission, Shared In-Links
                                   0.5

                     Correlation
                                   0.4
                                   0.3                                             Transmission, Shared Out-Links
                                   0.2
                                                                                   Shared In-Links, Shared Out-Links
                                   0.1

                                              2000      2005     2010     2015
                                                      (a) Conglomerate Network


                                   0.18
                     Correlation




                                   0.14
                                                                                   Shared Out-Links, HP
                                   0.10

                                   0.06

                                   0.02                                            Transmission, HP
                                                                                   Shared In-Links, HP
                                              2000      2005     2010     2015
                                          (b) Hoberg-Phillips (HP) and Conglomerate Network




                                   0.07                                            Transmission, IO
                     Correlation




                                                                                   Shared In-Links, IO
                                   0.05                                            Shared Out-Links, IO

                                   0.03

                                   0.01

                                              2000      2005     2010     2015
                                           (c) Input-Output (IO) and Conglomerate Network

                                                  Figure VII
                        Yearly Cross-Sectional Correlation of Industry Relations
     Each panel presents the yearly cross-sectional correlation of an industry-pair measure, excluding
     own-industry pairs. Panel A presents the correlations of the conglomerate network measures, Panel
     B presents the correlations of the conglomerate network measures with Hoberg-Phillips (HP) measures
     of industry connections, and Panel C presents the correlations of the conglomerate network with the
     Input-Output network (IO).
                                                                   Table I

                                        Most Central Industries in the Conglomerate Network
This table lists the most central industries in the conglomerate network, using four different networks. The binary network is an undirected,
unweighted network that records any connection between industries through conglomerate firms. The transmission network represents directed,
weighted connections through the transmission from industries to firms and back to industries. The shared in-link network represents an
undirected, weighted network of industry connections based on common conglomerate firms that span industries. The shared out-link network
represents an undirected, weighted network of industry connections based on firms' common exposures to industry shocks. Panel A presents
industries based on degree centrality. For the binary network, this is a count of links. For the weighted networks, the degree centrality is
the sum of the weights per industry. Eigenvector centrality is calculated as Katz-Bonacich centrality with an attenuation factor equal to
90% of the max attentuation. This measure accounts for the centrality of the industries to which an industry is connected, but also allows




                                                                                                                                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK
all industries a minimum level of centrality. The top five industries listed are the industries that appeared most often in the yearly top five
industry list across 1997 to 2018.


  Binary Network                          Transmission Network               Shared In-Link Network        Shared Out-Link Network
  Panel A: Degree Centrality
  General industrial machinery            Motor vehicle parts                Cheese; natural/processed     General industrial machinery
  Personal/business credit                Electric services                  Frozen specialties            Electric services
  Patent owners and lessors               Petroleum refining                 Roasted coffee                Gas production/distribution
  Mortgage banks/dep. functions           Motor vehicles/bodies              House refrig./freezers        Crude petroleum/nat. gas
  Other plastics/mechanical rubber        Apparel and accessories            Cookies and crackers          Computer systems design
  Panel B: Eigenvector Centrality
  Personal/business credit                Petroleum refining                 Roasted coffee                Electric services
  Mortgage banks/dep. functions           Crude petroleum/nat. gas           Cheese; natural/proc.         Gas production/distribution
  Computer integrated systems             Motor vehicle parts                Frozen specialties            Crude petroleum/nat. gas
  General industrial machinery            Electric services                  Cookies and crackers          Natural gas transmission
  Patent owners and lessors               General industrial machinery       Groceries & rel. prods.       Petroleum refining




                                                                                                                                                  47
48                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                 Table II

        The Conglomerate Network and Growth Rate Covariance: Cross-Sectional Tests
     This table presents coefficient estimates from regressions where the dependent variable is the
     industry-pair time-series covariance of sales growth, asset growth, and investment rates, including
     own-industry covariance (variance). Industry pair covariances are calculated using yearly observa-
     tions from 1997 to 2018. The dependent variable is calculated as the average CoHHI measure over
     the sample period. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Standard
     errors are clustered at the industry level. Statistical significance is indicated by  ,  , and  for
     significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                            Sales growth Asset growth Investment rate
                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)
              Shared in-links (Co-HHI)          5.171           3.028             0.129
                                               (1.097)         (1.085)           (0.133)
              Same industry dummy               8.864          10.354             0.184
                                               (0.571)         (0.660)           (0.087)
              Constant                          0.406           0.293             0.007
                                               (0.029)         (0.029)           (0.001)
              Adjusted R2                       0.016           0.014             0.009
              Observations                     249,856         250,096           254,679
                                                        Table III

                                         Summary Statistics: Panel Data
       This table presents summary statistics for the variables used in the regression analysis. All variables are in
       percentages. Summary statistics are presented for non-directed industry-pair observations.


                                                                                       Percentile




                                                                                                                               THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK
                                                       Mean         S.D.       25th       50th        75th     Observations
Sales growth                                  -0.274              32.654 -12.292          2.668      14.639      3, 827, 922
Asset growth                                  -0.954              32.751 -12.480          1.102      13.506      3, 781, 760
Investment rate                                 5.524              5.276   2.537          4.395       6.966      4, 113, 580
Employment growth                             -1.309               9.785 -6.085         -0.897        3.446      3, 316, 726
(Sales growthi - Sales growthj )2              20.884             35.911   0.947          5.557      24.139      3, 570, 850
(Asset growthi - Asset growthj )2              21.693             36.750   0.997          5.844      25.814      3, 482, 085
(Investment growthi - Investment growthj )2     0.584              2.971   0.018          0.089       0.326      4, 112, 106
(Employment growthi - Employment growthj )  2   1.687              3.278   0.092          0.458       1.674      3, 269, 717
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                        0.039              1.112   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989
Shared out-links                                0.162              3.269   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989
Shared links dummy                              1.396             11.731   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989
Transmission                                    0.064              1.403   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989
Transmission dummy                              1.396             11.731   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989
HHI                                            52.977             31.230  26.546         47.127      83.672      4, 113, 989
Sum of HHI                                    102.521             44.546  66.740        103.022     132.622      4, 113, 989
Input-Output link                               1.132              9.542   0.000          0.004       0.063      4, 113, 989
Hoberg-Phillips similarity                      0.037              0.437   0.000          0.000       0.000      4, 113, 989




                                                                                                                               49
50                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                  Table IV

                     Comovement of Industry Growth and Shared Network Links
     This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable
     is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of industry i for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B),
     and investments (Panel C). Variable definitions are provided in the text. All regressions include
     industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses)
     are in percentages. Statistical significance is indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01,
     0.05, and 0.10.

                                                           Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                 -22.494                       -21.710
                                                (2.583)                       (2.594)
      Shared out-links                                         -4.897         -3.552
                                                               (1.214)        (1.147)
      Shared links dummy                                                                     -1.722
                                                                                              (0.215)
      Sum of HHI                                  2.513          2.508          2.511          2.499
                                                 (0.112)        (0.112)        (0.112)        (0.112)
      Input-Output link                           1.027          1.025          1.029          1.036
                                                 (0.361)        (0.361)        (0.361)        (0.361)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity               -20.894 -20.580 -20.808 -20.598
                                                (4.362) (4.355) (4.360) (4.355)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects          Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                  0.068         0.068          0.068          0.068
      Observations                               3,563,872     3,563,872      3,563,872      3,563,872
                                          continued on next page
                             THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         51




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -23.258                    -22.459
                                        (2.635)                    (2.643)
Shared out-links                                     -5.042        -3.634
                                                     (1.455)       (1.363)
Shared links dummy                                                              -1.881
                                                                                 (0.226)
Sum of HHI                               1.688         1.682         1.685           1.672
                                        (0.116)       (0.116)       (0.116)         (0.116)
Input-Output link                        0.193         0.189         0.194           0.201
                                        (0.367)       (0.367)       (0.367)         (0.367)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -29.959 -29.653 -29.878 -29.656
                                        (5.658) (5.641) (5.654) (5.639)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.054         0.054        0.054        0.054
Observations                            3,474,363     3,474,363    3,474,363    3,474,363
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -0.247                      -0.227
                                        (0.249)                    (0.251)
Shared out-links                                     -0.113        -0.096
                                                     (0.044)       (0.044)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.049
                                                                                 (0.011)
Sum of HHI                               0.286         0.286         0.286           0.286
                                        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.008)
Input-Output link                      -0.173        -0.173        -0.173       -0.172
                                        (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.025)       (0.025)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.389         0.394         0.391           0.394
                                        (0.265)       (0.265)       (0.265)         (0.265)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.138         0.138        0.138        0.138
Observations                            4,106,177     4,106,177    4,106,177    4,106,177
52                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                  Table V

                   Comovement of Industry Growth and the Transmission Network
     This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable is
     (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of industry i for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B), and
     investments (Panel C). Transmission dummy represents industry pairs that are two links away
     in the transmission matrix. Shared links dummy represents industries that are one link away in
     the shared links matrix. All regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects.
     Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is
     indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                          Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
             Panel A: Sales growth
             Transmission dummy                        -1.231         -1.201        -1.185
                                                       (0.073)         (0.073)      (0.073)
             Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                               -20.453
                                                                     (2.588)
             Shared links dummy                                                     -1.282
                                                                                    (0.216)
             Sum of HHI                                  2.403          2.408         2.398
                                                        (0.113)        (0.113)       (0.113)
             Input-Output link                           1.029          1.034         1.040
                                                        (0.361)        (0.361)       (0.361)
             Hoberg-Phillips similarity               -20.873 -21.055 -20.798
                                                       (4.362) (4.366) (4.360)
             Industry-pair and year fixed effects           Yes          Yes            Yes
             Adjusted R2                                  0.068         0.068          0.068
             Observations                               3,563,872     3,563,872      3,563,872
                                          continued on next page
                      THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                               53




                                         Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)
Panel B: Asset growth
Transmission dummy                     -1.244      -1.212       -1.192
                                       (0.077)      (0.077)     (0.078)
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                           -21.224
                                                    (2.636)
Shared links dummy                                              -1.437
                                                                (0.227)
Sum of HHI                               1.577       1.582        1.572
                                        (0.116)     (0.116)      (0.116)
Input-Output link                        0.194       0.199        0.204
                                        (0.367)     (0.367)      (0.367)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -29.939 -30.119 -29.854
                                        (5.657) (5.667) (5.650)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes         Yes          Yes
Adjusted R2                              0.054        0.054        0.054
Observations                           3,474,363    3,474,363    3,474,363
Panel C: Investment rate
Transmission dummy                     -0.044      -0.044       -0.043
                                       (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                           -0.175
                                                    (0.249)
Shared links dummy                                              -0.033
                                                                (0.011)
Sum of HHI                               0.282       0.282        0.282
                                        (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)
Input-Output link                      -0.173      -0.173       -0.172
                                       (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.025)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.385       0.384        0.387
                                        (0.265)     (0.265)      (0.265)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes         Yes          Yes
Adjusted R2                              0.138        0.138        0.138
Observations                           4,106,177    4,106,177    4,106,177
                                                                                                                                   54
                                                          Table VI

                                Industry-Level Growth and Transmission Network Links
This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable is the industry growth rate of
sales (Panel A), growth rate of assets (Panel B), and investment rates (Panel C). Transmission-weighted growth is the growth
rate of all other industries, weighted by their transmission link in the conglomerate network. Transmission-weighted placebo
growth randomizes the transmission strength across industries. Average growth at a distance of two is the average growth
rate of industries that are exactly two links away from the focal industry. Average growth at longest distance is the average
growth rate of industries that are at the maximum distance from the focal industry. IO-weighted growth is the growth rate
of other industries weighted by their IO strength to the focal industry.Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in
percentages. Statistical significance is indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                                            Dependent variable: gj




                                                                                                                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK
                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Transmission-weighted growth                  19.157         18.233                       18.260        18.026
                                                    (2.111)        (2.262)                      (2.289)       (2.297)
      Transmission-weighted placebo growth                                          2.677
                                                                                   (1.815)
      Average growth at distance of two                                                         12.928
                                                                                                (6.720)
      Average growth at longest distance                                                                      -0.827
                                                                                                              (1.995)
      IO-weighted growth                                            9.460         13.826         9.214         8.988
                                                                   (3.322)        (3.309)       (3.350)       (3.386)
      Industry & year fixed effects                     Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                     0.053         0.061          0.052         0.061         0.063
      Observations                                    11,517        10,275         10,282        10,157         9,920
                                                  Continued on next page
                                                         Dependent variable: gj
                                         (1)       (2)            (3)             (4)      (5)
Panel B: Asset growth
Transmission-weighted growth           16.082    15.006                     14.993      14.694
                                       (1.915)   (2.066)                    (2.097)     (2.099)
Transmission-weighted placebo growth                             2.878
                                                                (1.821)
Average growth at distance of two                                          -3.368
                                                                            (6.816)
Average growth at longest distance                                                      -0.214
                                                                                        (1.688)




                                                                                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK
IO-weighted growth                                3.810          6.463       3.584       3.637
                                                 (3.541)        (3.533)     (3.559)     (3.576)
Industry & year fixed effects            Yes       Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                            0.036      0.041          0.034       0.040       0.042
Observations                           11,377     10,161         10,168      10,045       9,834
Panel C: Investment rate
Transmission-weighted rate             15.588    15.498                     15.025      15.821
                                       (2.516)   (2.773)                    (2.738)     (2.790)
Transmission-weighted placebo rate                             -0.934
                                                               (1.163)
Average rate at distance of two                                            -1.355
                                                                            (7.611)
Average rate at longest distance                                                        -0.249
                                                                                        (1.512)
IO-weighted rate                                  7.651        10.110        8.479       7.332
                                                 (3.505)       (3.504)      (3.485)     (3.559)
Industry & year fixed effects            Yes       Yes            Yes          Yes        Yes
Adjusted R2                            0.471      0.469         0.465        0.468       0.470
Observations                           12,356     11,024        11,032       10,899      10,877




                                                                                                  55
 56                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



                                                Table VII

                   Transmission of Tariff Shocks Through the Conglomerate Network
This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable is the industry
growth rate of employment. NTR Gap is the difference between the non-Normal Trade Relations tariff rate
and the NTR tariff rate. Post О Transmission NTR Gapi is the transmission gap weighted by the transmission
matrix from the conglomerate network. IO Customer and IO Supplier are inter-industry connections from
the input-output network. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical
significance is indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.


                                                   Dependent variable: Employment growth
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
        Post О NTR Gapi                       -7.420        -5.756        -7.428        -2.250
                                               (1.457)      (1.674)       (1.453)        (1.999)
        Post О Transmission NTR Gapi                        -4.640                      -4.091
                                                            (2.074)                      (2.166)
        Post О Placebo NTR Gapi                                             0.460
                                                                           (2.193)
        Post О IO Customer NTR Gapi                                                     -7.683
                                                                                         (3.207)
        Post О IO Supplier NTR Gapi                                                     -2.060
                                                                                         (4.976)
        Industry and year fixed effects           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
        Adjusted R2                             0.176         0.176         0.175         0.178
        Observations                             5,375         5,375        5,375          5,358
                                                          Table VIII

                                Comovement of Employment Growth and Network Links
This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the
growth rate of industry i employment. Variable definitions are provided in the text. All regressions include industry-pair fixed
effects and year fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is
indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.



                                                                    Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                               (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                   -0.542                       -0.569




                                                                                                                                    THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK
                                            (0.231)                      (0.232)
Shared out-links                                           0.093          0.137
                                                          (0.114)        (0.114)
Shared links dummy                                                                     -0.047
                                                                                       (0.020)
Transmission                                                                                         -0.150
                                                                                                      (0.145)
Transmission dummy                                                                                                  -0.047
                                                                                                                    (0.014)
Sum of HHI                                   0.036         0.036          0.036          0.035         0.036          0.035
                                            (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.007)        (0.007)
Input-Output link                            0.279         0.278          0.279          0.279         0.287          0.287
                                            (0.036)       (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.036)       (0.025)        (0.025)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity                   0.583         0.589          0.581          0.589         0.580          0.582
                                            (0.478)       (0.478)        (0.478)        (0.478)       (0.338)        (0.338)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Adjusted R2                                  0.169          0.169         0.169          0.169          0.169         0.169
Observations                               3,264,827      3,264,827     3,264,827      3,264,827      6,529,654     6,529,654




                                                                                                                                    57
58                                   THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                                Table IX

               Comovement of Industry Growth and Lagged Shared Network Links
     This table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the dependent variable is
     (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of industry i for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B), and
     investments (Panel C). Explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are
     provided in the text. All regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects.
     Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is
     indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                          Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                -13.645                     -13.254
                                               (2.897)                     (2.911)
      Shared out-links                                       -2.607         -1.789
                                                             (1.107)        (1.095)
      Shared links dummy                                                                  -0.620
                                                                                           (0.225)
      Sum of HHI                                 0.136         0.132          0.135          0.129
                                                (0.120)       (0.120)        (0.120)        (0.120)
      Input-Output link                        -0.006        -0.007         -0.005        -0.004
                                                (0.342)      (0.342)        (0.342)        (0.342)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity              -13.092       -12.924       -13.044        -12.951
                                               (5.489)       (5.483)       (5.487)        (5.483)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects        Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
      Adjusted R2                                0.066          0.066         0.066         0.066
      Observations                             3,278,544      3,278,544     3,278,544     3,278,544
                                         continued on next page
                             THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                         59




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -16.219                    -15.881
                                        (2.556)                    (2.561)
Shared out-links                                     -2.528        -1.544
                                                     (1.169)       (1.132)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.661
                                                                                 (0.236)
Sum of HHI                             -1.230        -1.234        -1.231       -1.237
                                        (0.119)      (0.119)       (0.119)       (0.119)
Input-Output link                        0.010         0.007         0.011           0.010
                                        (0.358)       (0.358)       (0.358)         (0.358)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -7.429        -7.257        -7.389       -7.283
                                        (5.486)      (5.484)       (5.485)       (5.484)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.056         0.056        0.056        0.056
Observations                            3,202,103     3,202,103    3,202,103    3,202,103
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -0.154                      -0.146
                                        (0.251)                    (0.253)
Shared out-links                                     -0.047        -0.037
                                                     (0.045)       (0.046)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.037
                                                                                 (0.011)
Sum of HHI                               0.317         0.317         0.317           0.316
                                        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)         (0.009)
Input-Output link                      -0.247        -0.247        -0.247       -0.247
                                        (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.029)       (0.029)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.626         0.629         0.627           0.630
                                        (0.284)       (0.284)       (0.284)         (0.284)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.115         0.115        0.115        0.115
Observations                            3,712,631     3,712,631    3,712,631    3,712,631
60                                          THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK



                                           Internet Appendix
                                    "The Conglomerate Network"
                         Kenneth R. Ahern, Lei Kong, and Xinyan Yan



                                       Internet Appendix Table I

                   Comovement of Industry Growth and Shared Network Links
                Robustness to Excluding Firms Below the 25th Percentile of Sales
     This table replicates Table IV of the main paper, but uses observations from networks that exclude
     firms with sales below the 25th percentile of sales per year. The table presents coefficient estimates
     from panel regressions where the dependent variable is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of
     industry i for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B), and investments (Panel C). Variable definitions
     are provided in the text. All regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects.
     Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is
     indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                            Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                 -18.747                       -17.932
                                                (2.615)                       (2.629)
      Shared out-links                                          -5.021         -3.727
                                                                (1.310)        (1.244)
      Shared links dummy                                                                     -1.295
                                                                                              (0.221)
      Sum of HHI                                   2.511          2.505          2.508         2.498
                                                  (0.111)        (0.111)        (0.111)       (0.111)
      Input-Output link                            0.465          0.462          0.466         0.470
                                                  (0.322)        (0.322)        (0.322)       (0.322)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity               -16.455 -16.170 -16.376 -16.216
                                                (4.279) (4.271) (4.277) (4.273)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects          Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                  0.061          0.061          0.061          0.061
      Observations                               3,252,468      3,252,468      3,252,468      3,252,468
                                          continued on next page
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                    61




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -18.059                    -17.229
                                        (2.609)                    (2.617)
Shared out-links                                     -5.062        -3.812
                                                     (1.474)       (1.410)
Shared links dummy                                                              -1.441
                                                                                 (0.233)
Sum of HHI                               2.657         2.651         2.654           2.643
                                        (0.114)       (0.114)       (0.114)         (0.114)
Input-Output link                      -0.150        -0.154        -0.149       -0.145
                                        (0.326)      (0.325)       (0.326)       (0.325)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -20.197 -19.936 -20.124 -19.975
                                        (5.538) (5.527) (5.534) (5.527)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.052         0.052        0.052        0.052
Observations                            3,161,000     3,161,000    3,161,000    3,161,000
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -0.271                      -0.238
                                        (0.279)                    (0.281)
Shared out-links                                     -0.181        -0.161
                                                     (0.043)       (0.043)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.051
                                                                                 (0.010)
Sum of HHI                               0.194         0.193         0.194           0.193
                                        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.008)
Input-Output link                      -0.002        -0.002        -0.002       -0.002
                                        (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.129         0.135         0.132           0.133
                                        (0.214)       (0.215)       (0.215)         (0.215)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.185         0.185        0.185        0.185
Observations                            3,713,045     3,713,045    3,713,045    3,713,045
62                                          THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                      Internet Appendix Table II

                   Comovement of Industry Growth and Shared Network Links
                       Robustness to Excluding Firms Below the Median Size
     This table replicates Table IV of the main paper, but uses observations from networks that exclude
     firms with sales below the median sales level per year. The table presents coefficient estimates
     from panel regressions where the dependent variable is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of
     industry i for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B), and investments (Panel C). Variable definitions
     are provided in the text. All regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects.
     Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is
     indicated by  ,  , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                           Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                  -9.299                        -8.279
                                                 (2.825)                      (2.847)
      Shared out-links                                         -6.341         -5.525
                                                               (1.643)        (1.592)
      Shared links dummy                                                                     -0.963
                                                                                              (0.241)
      Sum of HHI                                  2.429          2.421          2.424          2.417
                                                 (0.119)        (0.119)        (0.119)        (0.119)
      Input-Output link                           1.321          1.327          1.328          1.332
                                                 (0.365)        (0.365)        (0.365)        (0.365)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity                  0.618          0.851          0.723          0.785
                                                 (4.989)        (4.983)        (4.986)        (4.987)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects          Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                  0.063         0.063          0.063          0.063
      Observations                               2,593,920     2,593,920      2,593,920      2,593,920
                                          continued on next page
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                    63




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -10.991                     -9.946
                                        (2.671)                    (2.686)
Shared out-links                                     -6.566        -5.591
                                                     (1.684)       (1.624)
Shared links dummy                                                              -1.180
                                                                                 (0.258)
Sum of HHI                               3.702         3.693         3.697           3.688
                                        (0.119)       (0.119)       (0.119)         (0.119)
Input-Output link                        0.544         0.549         0.550           0.557
                                        (0.370)       (0.370)       (0.370)         (0.370)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -15.681 -15.428 -15.581 -15.498
                                        (5.282) (5.275) (5.279) (5.276)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.049         0.049        0.049        0.049
Observations                            2,509,535     2,509,535    2,509,535    2,509,535
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -0.020                        0.043
                                        (1.395)                     (1.417)
Shared out-links                                     -0.338        -0.343
                                                     (1.107)       (1.125)
Shared links dummy                                                                   0.393
                                                                                    (0.377)
Sum of HHI                               2.198         2.198         2.198           2.202
                                        (0.140)       (0.140)       (0.140)         (0.141)
Input-Output link                        1.606         1.606         1.606           1.601
                                        (0.126)       (0.126)       (0.126)         (0.126)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -0.145        -0.140        -0.139       -0.155
                                        (3.767)      (3.766)       (3.766)       (3.768)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects      Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Adjusted R2                            -0.013        -0.013        -0.013       -0.013
Observations                           2,981,489     2,981,489     2,981,489    2,981,489
64                                          THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                      Internet Appendix Table III

                   Comovement of Industry Growth and Shared Network Links
                                 Robustness to Excluding Foreign Firms
     This table replicates Table IV of the main paper, but uses observations from networks that
     exclude firms incorporated outside of the U.S. The table presents coefficient estimates from panel
     regressions where the dependent variable is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of industry i
     for sales (Panel A), assets (Panel B), and investments (Panel C). Variable definitions are provided
     in the text. All regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects. Coefficients
     and standard errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is indicated by
      
        , , and  for significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                           Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                 -21.811                       -20.918
                                                (2.448)                       (2.471)
      Shared out-links                                         -6.244         -4.365
                                                               (1.362)        (1.284)
      Shared links dummy                                                                     -2.050
                                                                                              (0.236)
      Sum of HHI                                  1.800          1.793          1.797          1.784
                                                 (0.113)        (0.113)        (0.113)        (0.113)
      Input-Output link                           0.490          0.488          0.494          0.498
                                                 (0.329)        (0.330)        (0.330)        (0.330)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity               -16.236 -15.930 -16.157 -15.973
                                                (4.323) (4.310) (4.320) (4.311)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects          Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                  0.070         0.070          0.070          0.070
      Observations                               3,371,361     3,371,361      3,371,361      3,371,361
                                          continued on next page
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                    65




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -22.676                    -22.294
                                        (2.223)                    (2.235)
Shared out-links                                     -3.901        -1.875
                                                     (1.579)       (1.479)
Shared links dummy                                                              -2.084
                                                                                 (0.237)
Sum of HHI                               1.588         1.583         1.586           1.571
                                        (0.112)       (0.112)       (0.112)         (0.112)
Input-Output link                      -0.817        -0.820        -0.815       -0.808
                                        (0.340)      (0.340)       (0.340)       (0.340)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -17.680 -17.447 -17.644 -17.428
                                        (5.050) (5.036) (5.048) (5.036)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.058         0.058        0.058        0.058
Observations                            3,289,294     3,289,294    3,289,294    3,289,294
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                 0.013                       0.084
                                        (0.240)                     (0.242)
Shared out-links                                     -0.356        -0.365
                                                     (0.078)       (0.078)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.103
                                                                                 (0.017)
Sum of HHI                               0.661         0.661         0.661           0.661
                                        (0.022)       (0.022)       (0.022)         (0.022)
Input-Output link                      -0.433        -0.432        -0.432       -0.432
                                        (0.036)      (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.036)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.096         0.101         0.102           0.100
                                        (0.302)       (0.302)       (0.302)         (0.302)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.067         0.067        0.067        0.067
Observations                            3,855,336     3,855,336    3,855,336    3,855,336
66                                         THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK




                                     Internet Appendix Table IV

                    Comovement of Industry Growth and Shared Network Links
                               Robustness to Coarse Industry Definitions
     This table replicates Table IV of the main paper, but uses observations from networks based
     on 3-Digit SIC codes. The table presents coefficient estimates from panel regressions where the
     dependent variable is (gk - gj )2 , where gi is the growth rate of industry i for sales (Panel A),
     assets (Panel B), and investments (Panel C). Variable definitions are provided in the text. All
     regressions include industry-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects. Coefficients and standard
     errors (in parentheses) are in percentages. Statistical significance is indicated by  ,  , and  for
     significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.

                                                           Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                                   (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
      Panel A: Sales growth
      Shared in-links (Co-HHI)                -18.393                      -16.487
                                               (5.047)                      (4.984)
      Shared out-links                                        -4.906        -4.582
                                                              (0.919)       (0.909)
      Shared links dummy                                                                   -1.041
                                                                                            (0.207)
      Sum of HHI                                 2.570          2.562         2.568           2.555
                                                (0.231)        (0.231)       (0.231)         (0.231)
      Input-Output link                        -0.171         -0.170        -0.170         -0.169
                                                (0.053)       (0.053)       (0.053)         (0.053)
      Hoberg-Phillips similarity               -1.504         -1.309        -1.403         -1.270
                                                (4.592)       (4.596)       (4.592)         (4.574)
      Industry-pair and year fixed effects         Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
      Adjusted R2                                 0.066         0.066          0.066          0.066
      Observations                               845,868        845,868       845,868        845,868
                                         continued on next page
                                  THE CONGLOMERATE NETWORK                                    67




                                                  Dependent variable: (gk - gj )2
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel B: Asset growth
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -13.935                   -11.982
                                        (4.709)                   (4.726)
Shared out-links                                     -5.010        -4.774
                                                     (0.946)       (0.941)
Shared links dummy                                                              -1.160
                                                                                 (0.223)
Sum of HHI                               0.019         0.013         0.018           0.006
                                        (0.237)       (0.237)       (0.237)         (0.237)
Input-Output link                      -0.303        -0.302        -0.302       -0.301
                                        (0.057)      (0.056)       (0.056)       (0.056)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity             -22.009 -21.804 -21.876 -21.797
                                        (4.361) (4.354) (4.357) (4.375)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Adjusted R2                              0.053         0.053         0.053           0.053
Observations                            821,164        821,164      821,164         821,164
Panel C: Investment rate
Shared in-links (Co-HHI)               -0.615                      -0.561
                                        (0.248)                    (0.247)
Shared out-links                                     -0.149        -0.137
                                                     (0.034)       (0.033)
Shared links dummy                                                              -0.034
                                                                                 (0.011)
Sum of HHI                             -0.106        -0.106        -0.106       -0.106
                                        (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)
Input-Output link                      -0.003        -0.003        -0.003       -0.003
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Hoberg-Phillips similarity               0.308         0.314         0.311           0.315
                                        (0.235)       (0.234)       (0.234)         (0.234)
Industry-pair and year fixed effects      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Adjusted R2                              0.295         0.295         0.295           0.295
Observations                            929,323        929,323      929,323         929,323
