                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE DYNAMICS AND SPILLOVERS OF MANAGEMENT INTERVENTIONS:
         EVIDENCE FROM THE TRAINING WITHIN INDUSTRY PROGRAM

                                        Nicola Bianchi
                                       Michela Giorcelli

                                      Working Paper 28833
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28833


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We thank Philipp Ager, John Asker, Andy Atkenson, Simon Board, Ryan Boone, Bruno
Caprettini, Dora Costa, Alessandra Fenizia, Mitch Hoffman, Taylor Jaworski, Giampaolo Lecce,
Adriana Lleras-Muney, Claudia Martinez, Niko Matouschek, Joel Mokyr, Giuseppe Nicoletti,
Jagadeesh Sivadasan, Nico Voigtlaender, Melanie Wasserman, as well as seminar and conference
participants at U. Bocconi, U. of Bologna, Chicago Booth, Columbia GSB, Empirical
Management Conference, Erasmus University Rotterdam, HBS, KU Leuven, MIT, Monash U.,
Mountain West Economic History Conference, NBER Summer Institute, NYU Stern, OECD
Productivity Forum, PUC-Rio de Janeiro, PUC-Santiago, Queen's Smith School of Business,
UBC, UCLA, UCSD, U. Torcuato Di Tella, U. of New South Wales, U. of Queensland, U. of
Sydney, and Yale U. We are grateful to Dmitri Koustas and James Lee for kindly sharing with us
the war contracts data and the 1939 census data, respectively. Juan Rojas and Zhihao Xu provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2021 by Nicola Bianchi and Michela Giorcelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including  notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamics and Spillovers of Management Interventions: Evidence from the Training Within
Industry Program
Nicola Bianchi and Michela Giorcelli
NBER Working Paper No. 28833
May 2021
JEL No. J24,L2,M2,M5,N34,N64,O15,O32,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the long-term and spillover effects of management interventions on firm
performance. Under the Training Within Industry (TWI) program, the U.S. government provided
management training to firms involved in war production between 1940 and 1945. Using a newly
collected panel dataset on all 11,575 U.S. firms that applied to the program, we find that the TWI
training had positive and long-lasting effects on firm performance and the adoption of beneficial
managerial practices. Moreover, it generated complementarities among different types of training
and had positive spillover effects on the supply chain of trained firms.


Nicola Bianchi
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
nicola.bianchi@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Michela Giorcelli
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 9262
315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
mgiorcelli@econ.ucla.edu
1    Introduction
Economists have documented large and persistent variations in productivity across establish-
ments in both developed and developing countries (Syverson, 2004; Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009), which are strongly correlated with the adoption of
different managerial practices (Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997; Bloom and Van Reenen,
2007). Moreover, more recent papers have shown that management has causal effects on firm
performance, confirming its role in driving differences in productivity (Bloom et al., 2013a;
Giorcelli, 2019).
    However, much less is known about the long-term dynamic impact of management on firm
outcomes and its spillover effects on other companies. On the one hand, the so-called "Toyota-
way" hypothesis states that a single management intervention can put firms on a virtuous
cycle of continuous improvements (Liker, 2004). For example, after an initial positive shock to
management, complementarities among managerial areas or positive spillovers along the supply
chain could make it easier for firms to get better over time (Womack, Jones, and Roos, 1990).
On the other hand, the beneficial effects of management interventions may be not sustainable
over time if turnover of good managers and changes in market conditions lead firms to abandon
good practices (Bloom et al., 2020).
    This paper studies the long-term dynamic and spillover effects of management interventions
on firm performance, using evidence from a unique historical episode, the Training Within
Industry (hereafter, TWI) program. The TWI program was a voluntary U.S.-government-
sponsored program that offered free in-plant management training to U.S. firms involved in
war production between 1940 and 1945. It encompassed interventions in three main areas,
called J-modules. The Job-Instructions (J-I) module taught supervisors and managers how to
establish standard procedures for operations, the Job-Relations (J-R) module taught how to
manage and motivate workers, and the Job-Methods (J-M) module taught how to introduce
improvements to current production processes. While the initial plan of the U.S. government
was to train all the 11,575 U.S. applicant firms in all the three J-modules, limited funding
and personnel constraints made this goal unreachable. As a result, only 7 percent of applicants
received training in all three J-modules, 48 percent received no training at all, and the others
received training in either one or two J-modules.
    We use a new panel dataset with information on the population of 11,575 U.S. firms
that applied to the TWI program. For each applicant, we digitized detailed information on
its participation in the program, the J-module training received (if any), and its upstream
and downstream companies. We then matched this information to their balance sheets and
income statements from 1935 to 1955. Overall, applicant firms were large companies operating

                                               1
in different economic sectors and geographical areas. In 1939, they employed 40 percent of
the U.S. manufacturing workforce. In spite of their prominence in the U.S. economy, the data
indicate that they were not well managed, which confirms the need of management training.
   Our empirical strategy measures the effects of the TWI program by comparing applicant
firms that received the training to applicant firms that did not receive it, over a period of time
from five years before to ten years after the training period. We show that trained and nontrained
firms had statistically similar characteristics at baseline and were located in statistically similar
counties. Moreover, the probability of being trained in a given location was not autocorrelated
over time, indicating that the TWI administration did not favor firms located in certain
regions during the implementation of the program. Finally, and more importantly for our
difference-in-differences specification, trained and nontrained firms were following statistically
indistinguishable trends in performance before the start of the TWI program.
   The historical records revealed that the fact that only some firms were eventually trained
depended on idiosyncrasies in the implementation of the TWI program. For organizational
purposes, applicant firms were divided into smaller geographical groups, called subdistricts.
The in-plant training was then carried out by TWI instructors, whom the TWI administration
trained to teach one J-module before assigning them to a given subdistrict. The lack of sufficient
manpower and the inability of TWI instructors to teach in multiple subdistricts or to teach
more than one module created imbalances in the composition of instructors across subdistricts
and over time. As a result, some applicants received training only in some J-modules, while
others did not receive any training at all.
   We find four key results. First, the effects of the TWI training on firm performance were
positive and lasted for at least ten years after the program implementation. For example, sales
of trained firms increased by 5.3 percent within one year of the TWI training, compared with
nontrained applicants. This effect peaked at 21.7 percent in period eight and then decreased to
16 percent in period ten. The effects on productivity were large and persistent, spanning from
a 6-percent increase within one year of the training to a 27-percent increase after ten years.
These results were large and significant in all economic sectors, but manufacturing and service
firms enjoyed the largest benefits.
   Second, after assessing the overall effect of the TWI program, we start opening the black
box of training by establishing a link between the content of the J-modules and the adoption of
different managerial practices. The data indicate that trained firms achieved higher productivity
by improving only the managerial practices related to the specific J-module received. For
example, firms trained in J-R learned how to motivate workers and resolve internal disputes.
Consistent with their training, they increased spending for performance-based bonuses, became


                                                 2
more likely to report spending for on-the-job training, and experienced fewer strikes. We find this
result analyzing both plant-level survey data and firm-level financial statements. Overall, our
initial findings support the "Toyota-way" hypothesis. Trained firms were able to improve their
performance for many years after training. Moreover, they experienced long-lasting changes in
managerial practices.
   Third, we document the existence of complementarities among managerial practices by
exploiting the fact that some applicant firms received training in multiple J-modules. For
example, firms that received the J-R training with another module experienced fewer strikes
and were more likely to report spending for on-the-job training than firms that received the
J-R module by itself. This finding is one of the first empirical tests of a core component of the
"Toyota-way" hypothesis. Due to complementarities, receiving one type of training can decrease
the cost of further improvements in other managerial areas, making it easier for trained firms
to keep getting better over time.
   Fourth, the TWI program generated positive spillover effects on the supply chain of trained
firms. Specifically, after applicants received the training, their upstream and downstream firms
started becoming more productive. Remarkably, both the trained applicants and the firms in
their supply chain improved their management practices in similar ways, which suggests that
there was a transfer of managerial knowledge from the trained firms. For example, firms in the
supply chain of applicants that received the J-R training also became less likely to experience
worker strikes and more likely to report spending for on-the-job training, mimicking the same
changes implemented by the trained firm. In addition to sharing their newly acquired knowledge,
trained applicants became more likely to select better upstream and downstream firms after
receiving the training. These findings suggest another channel through which the program might
have allowed trained firms to achieve long-lasting improvements.
   Conversely, we do not find evidence of spillovers on other U.S. war contractors that had
been eligible to participate in the TWI program but did not apply. The fact that these firms
were not damaged by the presence of trained firms nearby does not necessarily mean they were
immune to losing customers to the trained firms. While it is true that the trained firms may
have gained higher market shares at the expense of nonapplicant companies, in fact they could
have done this without poaching the latter's current customers--because of the strong economic
growth experienced in the U.S. during the post-WWII era.
   Notably, trained firms were able to sustain their increased productivity in the long run
even in the face of high turnover of top managers after WWII. This result indicates that
the TWI program had a strong firm-specific component that stayed within the firm even
after many trained managers left. Finally, we find that other war-related factors, such as war


                                                3
contracts awarded by the government, exposure of manpower to the WWII draft, or shifts to
war production, did not play a big role in determining the effects of the TWI training.
      The contribution of this paper is fourfold. First, it contributes to the growing literature on
management and firm performance. While recent RCTs have documented large and positive
effects on firm performance of management consulting (for example, Bloom et al., 2013a; Bruhn,
Karlan, and Schoar, 2018) and mixed effects of management training (McKenzie and Woodruff,
2014; Gosnell, List, and Metcalfe, 2020), the existing evidence is mostly focused on the short
term. To the best of our knowledge, only two papers have estimated the long-term impact of
management interventions. Bloom et al. (2020) measured the effects of management consulting
on the adoption of management practices, although not on financial performance, between seven
and nine years after an RCT involving seventeen Indian textile firms. Giorcelli (2019) estimated
the effects of management training on the performance of 130 small and medium-sized Italian
firms over fifteen years.
      While the TWI program was primarily a management training scheme, it also had a
consulting component, so our results are related to both of those papers.1 Specifically, our
paper complements this prior work by (i) investigating the channels that determine the long-
term dynamics of management interventions, and (ii) focusing on large businesses. It tracks
the effects of management training on firms in the supply chain of trained companies and
on other nonapplicant firms. Moreover, it explores complementarities among different areas of
management training.
      Second, our paper contributes to the literature on personnel and organizational economics.
Previous works have shown that a key correlate of both plant and worker productivity is the
adoption of human resource management practices (Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997;
Lazear, 2000; Lazear and Shaw, 2007; Gosnell, List, and Metcalfe, 2020), which in turn can be
improved by managers' skills (Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton, 2015; Hoffman and Tadelis, 2021).
Our paper contributes to these findings by studying the role of human resource management
practices (taught via the J-R module) in a large-scale experiment on thousands of firms that
operated in different sectors, rather than leveraging data from a single firm or from a few firms
in the same industry. Moreover, it corroborates prior suggestive evidence on complementarities
between human resources practices and other areas of management (Bloom and Van Reenen,
2011) by exploiting as-good-as-random variation in the type of training received by applicant
firms.
      Third, this paper contributes to the large literature on spillover effects across firms. Previous

1
    Although the TWI lectures were standardized as a training program, most of the in-class time was spent on
    student-led discussions on how to apply the J-modules to firm-specific problems.

                                                      4
works have documented sizable spillover effects determined by the opening of large plants
(Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2010; Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez, 2019), tech-
nological externalities (Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout, 2008), an increase in trade (Pavcnik, 2002),
and worker mobility (Stoyanov and Zubanov, 2012). In relation to management interventions,
Bloom et al. (2020) documented the spillover of some positive managerial practices across plants
within the same firm. Our paper complements their findings by tracking the flow of managerial
knowledge along the supply chain.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the literature on the relationship between the U.S. gov-
ernment's wartime economic policies and the post-war economic boom. Existing works have
documented that large public investments in manufacturing during WWII did not substantially
increase industrialization in the long term (Jaworski, 2017), but had more persistent positive
effects on population growth (Koustas and Li, 2019; Fishback and Cullen, 2013), employment,
and wages (Garin, 2019). Moreover, Gross and Sampat (2020) shows that large government-
sponsored R&D programs during WWII impacted both the direction and the location of
U.S. inventions after the war. We argue that the publicly funded wartime diffusion of "soft"
management technologies, which had a long-lasting effect on firm performance, represented a
previously unexplored channel through which government interventions affected the post-war
boom.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the origin and development
of the TWI program. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the empirical framework
and discusses the identification strategy. Section 5 examines the long-run effects of the TWI
program on firm performance and the complementarities among different types of training.
Section 6 analyzes the effects of the TWI program on nontrained firms in the economy. Section
7 discusses war-related events and heterogeneous effects. Section 8 concludes.

2    Historical Background
2.1 Set-up of the TWI Program
From the onset of WWII in September 1939, the Allied forces needed a large amount of war
supplies. Many U.S. companies started receiving an increasing number of war-related orders,
especially from France and Britain, that were well in excess of their productive capacity (TWI
Administration, 1940). As the war escalated, it became apparent that if and when the United
States would join the Allies by declaring war, that event would make the situation even more
critical. A great fraction of men of working age would then be called up to serve, depriving the
workforce of many productive employees.
    The U.S. government responded to these concerns by launching the Training Within Indus-


                                                5
try program. The TWI program was aimed at providing in-plant management training to U.S.
war contractors to increase their production and productivity and to teach them how to make
new workers productive in the shortest possible amount of time.
      The TWI administration was established in August 1940 by the National Defense Advisory
Commission (after the fall of France on June 22, 1940) and was later moved to be under the
jurisdiction of the newly established War Manpower Commission (WMC) on April 18, 1942. It
remained under the supervision of the WMC until it ceased all operations in September 1945
after Japan's surrender. Overall, the TWI maintained the same organization and functioned
under the same leadership throughout its existence, in spite of the shift in jurisdiction in 1942
(Dooley, 1945; p. 106).
      The TWI program was set up to operate as a decentralized service. In September 1940, the
TWI administration divided the U.S. into twenty-two geographical districts (Figure 1 and Table
A1). These districts were centered around established industrial areas, which often crossed state
boundaries. Each of them had its own headquarters and was headed by a District Director.2
To better reach peripheral areas, the TWI administrators decided to decentralize the program
even further and divided each district into smaller geographical units, which we call subdistricts,
headed by resident representatives. In total, they created 364 subdistricts (Dooley, 1945; p. 7).
      While the TWI program had the ambitious goal of offering management training to all U.S.
war contractors, a limited budget and a lack of manpower made this initial plan not viable. More
importantly, the TWI administration soon realized that the success of the program hinged on
the full support of trained firms' top management. As a result, the policy of the program became
to train only firms that wanted to be part of it (TWI Administration, 1944). Accordingly, the
TWI program established different application windows.3 The only condition for applying was
that firms had to have a war contract with the U.S. government. Moreover, firms could apply
only once. In total, there were ten application windows: one each in the years 1940, 1941, and
1945, two each in 1943 and 1944, and three in 1942. Within each subdistrict and application
window, eligible firms that applied received the TWI training in the order in which they had
applied.




2
    Most district directors were business executives who volunteered their expertise to the program. They were
    called "dollar-a-year" men, since they worked for free for the TWI. In addition to the directors, the TWI
    program was run by men and women with extensive business experience who temporarily left the private
    sector, hence, the title of training "within industry."
3
    Each window was closed when a target number of firms to be trained in each district was reached. However, as
    outlined in Section 3, even these limited targets were often overly optimistic and many applicant firms ended
    up without training due to lack of resources.

                                                        6
2.2 Content of the TWI Management Training
The TWI training was divided into three so-called J-modules, as follows (TWI Administration,
1944):4

       Job-Instructions (J-I): This module gave supervisors "practice in how to break in men
        on new jobs." As a result, trained firms started establishing standard procedures for
        operations, improving lighting, enhancing job safety measures, keeping the factory floor
        tidy to reduce accidents and facilitate the movement of materials, performing regular
        maintenance of machines, and recording the reasons for breakdowns. Overall, this module
        improved the factory operation practices described in Bloom et al. (2013a).5

       Job-Relations (J-R): This module gave supervisors "practice in how to promote team-
        work." Firms trained in J-R started relying more heavily on performance-based incentive
        systems for workers and managers, investing more in on-the-job training, and defining
        more precisely job descriptions and responsibilities; one major result was a decrease in
        worker complaints and strikes at these firms. Overall, this module acted upon the practices
        related to human resources described in Bloom et al. (2013a).

       Job-Methods (J-M): This module helped supervisors "simplify and improve methods of
        doing a job." Firms trained in J-M learned to constantly innovate and improve their
        business processes. For example, they started managing their inventory more efficiently,
        improving production planning, and tracking production to prioritize customer orders by
        delivery deadline. After the end of WWII, they became more likely to develop a marketing
        research unit and to introduce new product lines. This module mainly operated on the
        inventory control and sales and order practices described in Bloom et al. (2013a).

The TWI program was initially thought of as a combination of management consulting and
training. However, almost immediately after its implementation in 1940, the TWI administra-
tion realized that it lacked the resources to provide effective consulting tailored to the individual
needs of each war contractor. As a result, for the whole duration of the program, the TWI
4
    In designing their intervention, the leaders of the TWI service adapted to the 1940s context a popular training
    program used during WWI. In 1917, the Emergency Fleet Corporation of the United States Shipping Board
    initiated a training program to increase the number of shipyard workers tenfold. To do so, they hired Charles
    R. Allen, a vocational instructor from Massachusetts. Allen developed a four-step system for training new
    workers--Show, Tell, Do, Check-- as documented in his 1919 book The Instructor, The Man and The Job. This
    four-step methodology formed the basis for the TWI program developed over twenty years later (Huntzinger,
    2005).
5
    When this program was exported to Japan after the end of WWII, this module was split into two components:
    one was related to standard procedures for operations and maintenance of machines; the other one, called
    Job-Safety (J-S), focused on workers' safety.

                                                         7
administration focused primarily on preparing the instructors for in-plant training (Dooley,
1945; p. 16).
      The content of the J-modules was constant across all trained firms and formalized in
training manuals that the instructors had to follow closely. This standardization was considered
a necessary step to ensure the quality of the TWI training and to allow an understaffed
organization to serve a vast group of war contractors. In spite of their rigid format, the J-
modules were designed to incorporate the specific challenges faced by each trained firm. The
first lecture of each J-module was a supervisor-led demonstration that had the goal of sharing
how bad habits could improve by following the core concepts of TWI training. All the following
meetings were a combination of formal lectures and "student presentations," in which the
workers under training were asked to show how they could apply the TWI teachings to their
job (Dooley, 1945; p. 32).
      In short, each J-module had been designed to share at least three key characteristics. First,
the content was basic and easily learned. Instead of introducing novel concepts, the J-modules
were based on accepted principles taught in an effective way.6 Second, the program limited the
time dedicated to instructors' lectures in favor of practical demonstrations in which the workers
could learn by doing. Third, the J-modules intended to ignite a virtuous cycle of improvements
within trained firms by stressing the importance of disseminating the TWI trainings to all
workers of the firm and by teaching how to apply the scientific method in approaching current
and future challenges (Dooley, 1945; p. 41).

2.3 Implementation of the Training
In addition to designing the content of the J-modules, the main responsibility of the TWI
administration was the training of the instructors who delivered the TWI program to the
plants of applicant firms.
      Most instructors were men and women with extensive business experience who were sent by
their employers to volunteer for the TWI program either part-time or full-time (Dooley, 1945;
p. 4). Others were paid staff already working for a government agency. In spite of their different
backgrounds, prospective instructors were selected based on their prior expertise in business
and teaching.
      Upon recruitment, candidates had to attend a "TWI institute," a fifty-hour course, to
become an instructor; they were taught by a TWI staff member either in their district of

6
    As stated by the Director of the TWI program, "There is nothing new about TWI programs--they are built
    on accepted principles. The only new thing is that something was done about getting them used." (Dooley,
    1945; p. ix) As an example, upon completion of the program, trained workers received an instruction card to
    keep in their pockets with the main takeaways of the modules they had attended (Figure A1).

                                                       8
residence or in Washington, DC. During the first part, candidates had to attend a full J-module.
The second part was divided between lectures on the fundamental concepts of a J-module and
practice in teaching the course (Dooley, 1945; p. 202).
   Although the original plan was to prepare well-rounded instructors able to teach all three J-
modules, the urgency needed to reach war contractors quickly induced the TWI administration
to form training specialists. As a result, each instructor was trained to teach only one J-module
(Dooley, 1945; p. 58). After being certified, TWI instructors usually returned to their subdistrict
of residence where they visited participating firms (often including their employer)--in the order
of those firms' applications-- to teach the J-module in which they had been trained. After
volunteering in a single subdistrict and application window, they returned to their previous
employer to resume their regular job.
   In each firm, the TWI training targeted managers, line executives, supervisors, and other
employees with "functional responsibility for planning of training" (Dooley, 1945; p. 17). In
each plant of the participating firms, the instructors delivered their J-modules to groups of at
most ten workers each. Training one group in one module required five meetings of two hours.
Most applicant firms had hundreds of managers and supervisors who were slated to received
the training. Therefore, the need to create small groups of at most ten workers implied that the
delivery of a J-module could take weeks or even months within each firm. In total, 1,750,650
workers were trained in at least one J-module between 1940 and 1945 (Dooley, 1945; p. 126).
   Once the last group of targeted employees had attended the training, firms had to pick at
least one representative who acted as a point of contact between the firm's top management
and the TWI program. The TWI administration used firms' representatives to check on the
continuing adoption of TWI criteria and to collect post-training data on firm performance
(Dooley, 1945; p. 166).
   The historical accounts indicate that all J-modules were a resounding success. For example,
an electric manufacturing company recorded a 50-percent decrease in defective products within
one month of the delivery of the J-I module. A steel company that received the J-R training
reported a 54-percent decrease in complaint cases, which induced its grievance committee to
change the meeting schedule from three times a week to three times a month. A warehouse that
received the J-M module documented the introduction of an improvement in the operation
of wrapping large rolls of cloth that resulted in a 48-percent decrease in man-hours (TWI
Administration, 1944). Our analysis will investigate the effects of the program using a more
systematic approach, as outlined in Section 4.




                                                 9
3      Data
We collected and digitized several types of data on the firms that applied to the TWI training.
We matched separate datasets using firm name, municipality, and state. What follows is a
description of these data sources and key summary statistics. Additional details on the data
collection process and the definitions of the variables can be found in Appendix B.

3.1 Firm-Level Government Records During WWII
We started our data collection by identifying all firms that were eligible to participate in
the TWI program. Because the only application requirement was that firms had to be war
contractors located in the United States, we retrieved the list of eligible companies from
the tabulation of war supply contracts published by the Civilian Production Administration
in 1946.7 This dataset includes information on all contracts for war supplies worth at least
$50,000 and awarded between June 1940 and September 1945. By restricting the sample to
war contractors based in the United States, we obtained a list of 25,393 companies eligible to
participate in the TWI program.
      We then used the monthly records of the TWI Service--compiled between August 22,
1940, and September 19, 1945, and stored at the NARA Archives--to identify the firms that
applied to the TWI program. Out of 25,393 eligible firms, we found applications from 11,575
companies. For each application, the monthly records indicate the application date, the district
and subdistrict in which the applicant firm was located, whether it eventually received the
TWI training, in which of the J-modules it was trained, and the year in which each module
was delivered.
      Out of 11,575 applicants, 6,056 were eventually trained in at least one J-module. Among
them, 62 percent got two J-module trainings, 24 percent got one J-module training, while the
remaining firms received all three J-module interventions (Figure 2, Panel A). The bulk of the
TWI training was carried out between 1943 and 1945, when the U.S. involvement in the war
was most intense. Only 8 percent of trained firms received a J-module intervention between
1940 and 1942, while the other firms were trained starting in 1943 (Figure 2, Panel B).
      From the NARA Archives, we also collected data from the plant-level surveys that the
TWI administration conducted in treated firms before and after the training. Specifically, the
surveys indicate whether a plant was performing each of eleven managerial practices linked to
the teachings of the TWI program before the start of each J-module training, three months
after the TWI training, and then each year thereafter until 1945.
      Finally, we collected information on the workforce composition of applicant firms by digitiz-
7
    Dmitri Koustas kindly shared the digitized version of this dataset with us (Koustas and Li, 2019).

                                                       10
ing the Selective Service's so-called replacement schedules, accessible at the NARA Archives.
After Executive Order 9279 of December 5, 1942, firms in which at least one worker had been
drafted had to submit a replacement schedule to their regional Bureau of Manpower Utilization.
In these documents, firms described the composition of their labor force, specifically indicating
the share of African-American workers and of women, as well as the average years of education
and age of all their employees. Moreover, they had to propose a replacement for each drafted
worker and indicate how long it would take for the new workers to become fully productive.8 We
used this information to determine the labor force composition, as well as the share of drafted
employees, of each firm between 1941 and 1945.9 Finally, firms had to indicate the name of
the companies with which they had an existing contract, as well as the list of products bought
from and sold to them. We used this information to identify the TWI applicants' upstream and
downstream firms, as described in greater detail in Section 6.1 and Appendix B.

3.2 Data on Firm Performance
We constructed a panel dataset of firm outcomes between 1935 and 1955 using information from
the annual reports collected by the Mergent Archives. Specifically, we relied on the Historical
Annual Reports, a collection of over one million corporate documents covering more than 100
years.10 For each firm in our sample, we searched the database of Mergent's historical annual
reports available at the University of California, Irvine library, using firm name, municipality,
and state. We then digitized the information contained in the documents in order to link data
on firm performance to the other data sources.
    We were able to find a match for all the 11,575 applicant firms. Moreover, we retrieved
information on 11,536 of the 13,857 nonapplicants in order to investigate the spillover effects
of the program on nonparticipating firms (Section 6.2).11
    The annual reports are a very rich source of information. The balance sheets report, among
other variables, the value of inventory, current assets, investments, and capital. The income
statements often include information on spending in several areas, such as maintenance and
repair of machinery, worker injuries, and on-the-job training. We used these variables to create
measures of firm performance, such as sales revenues, productivity, and profitability, and to

8
   Through the replacement schedules, they could also ask for draft exemptions for some categories of their
   workers. Managers were usually deferred "in support of national health, safety, or interest" (category II-A).
9
   While the replacement schedules started being submitted in 1942, the first schedule contained data on both
   1941 and 1942.
10
   https://www.ftserussell.com/data/mergent-archives.
11
   We believe that the lower matching rate among nonapplicants is due to their smaller size. Even though there
   is not a formal threshold on firm size in order to be included in the Mergent's Historical Annual Reports
   Collection, in practice publicly traded firms, firms issuing bonds, and larger firms are more likely to be
   included because it is easier to retrieve their financial information.

                                                      11
estimate the adoption of various managerial practices (for more details, see Appendix B).

3.3 Characteristics of Applicant Firms
In 1939, the year before the TWI program started, applicant firms had, on average, six plants
and $191.78 million in sales (in 2020 USD), and had been in operation for eight years (Table 1,
column 1). They were fairly heterogeneous in terms of employment: while the average number
of employees per firm was 1,038, it ranged from a low of 543 to a high of 11,283 workers.
Out of all applicant firms, 86 percent were operating in the manufacturing sector, 9 percent in
transportation, 3 percent in agriculture, and 2 percent in service.12 Between 1940 and 1945, they
were awarded 0.68 war contracts per year with an average value of $25 million. Moreover, all
characteristics were perfectly balanced between trained and nontrained applicants at baseline,
a fact that we will explore more in Section 4 (Table 1, column 7).
     At least for the manufacturing sector, it is possible to compare the applicant firms to
the average U.S. firm using data from the 1939 Manufacturing Census.13 The applicant firms
included 60,521 manufacturing establishments, equal to 9.8 percent of all U.S. manufacturing
establishments reported in the 1939 Manufacturing Census. Moreover, they employed 12,018,503
workers, which is equal to 40 percent of the total U.S. manufacturing labor force in 1939.
In short, the average number of employees per establishment was equal to 49 in the 1939
Manufacturing Census and to 199 in our sample.
     In spite of their large size, applicant firms did not appear to be well managed. For example,
inventory accounted for more than 80 percent of current assets, indicating that these firms were
not proficient in production planning. Interestingly, the poor management of inventory was one
of the main bad practices highlighted by Bloom et al. (2013a). Moreover, expenses for workers'
injuries were higher than spending for performance-based bonuses, suggesting that these firms
were more likely to react to problems instead of setting up systems to reward positive behavior.
Finally, it should be noted that all these firms suffered major disruptions from WWII: 57 percent
of them had to start producing products in a different 2-digit SIC code and, on average, 23
percent of their workers were drafted and ended up leaving their jobs. To summarize, in spite
of their large size and high sales, several pieces of evidence indicate that the TWI applicants
could have greatly benefited from management training.



12
   The information on the firm's sector is not included in the annual financial reports. To retrieve this piece
   of information, we imputed to each firm the 3-digit SIC codes--specifically, the classification published in
   1939--associated with the firm's products listed in their replacement schedule in 1941 (see Appendix B).
13
   We used data from the 1939 Manufacturing Census that James Lee digitized and kindly shared with us (Lee,
   2015).

                                                      12
4     Identification Strategy
4.1 Baseline Specification
We estimate the effect of receiving TWI training on firm performance with the following
difference-in-differences event-study equation:

                    10
        yi =               (TWIi  Years after TWI= i ) +   TWIi +   Appi + cs +                    i ,     (1)
                    =-5


where the dependent variable, yi , is one of several key performance metrics, such as logged sales,
total factor productivity (TFP), and return on assets (ROA) of firm i in period  .14 TWIi is an
indicator that equals 1 if firm i received the TWI training. Years after TWI= i is a dummy
equal to 1 when a calendar year is  years before or after the year in which firm i received its
first TWI training. The excluded year is  = -1. The regression controls for the application
date to the program (Appi ) because it may be correlated with unobservable characteristics
affecting firm performance.15 Specifically, we include fixed effects for the application window in
which firm i submitted its application and for the number of days between the opening of the
application window and the application date. County c, sector s, and period  fixed effects cs
control for nonlinear variation in outcomes over time and within sectors and counties. Standard
errors are clustered at the subdistrict and application-window level.
     Unless otherwise specified, the sample contains a balanced group of firms that were always
active between period -5 and period 10.16 Finally, because equation (1) is an event study,
we need to impute values of Years after TWI= i to applicant firms that never received any
training. To this end, we assume that they would have been treated contemporaneously with
the first trained firm in their subdistrict and application window. However, our results do not
crucially depend on this imputation. In Section 5.1, we show that alternative choices for the
timing assigned to nontrained applicants generate similar findings.




14
   TFP is calculated using the methodology proposed by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) and the estimated
   factor weights are reported in Table B2. The results are robust to alternative TFP calculations (Figure A5).
   ROA is computed as the ratio between profits and fixed gross assets. Appendix B includes a longer discussion
   of the construction of all variables and more details on the calculation of TFP.
15
   For example, early applicants might have been quicker in recognizing the value of the TWI program and
   therefore might have been better managed even before the intervention.
16
   In Section 5.1, we show that estimating equation (1) on all available firms, and therefore including those that
   entered the sample after the first period or exited before the last, leads to qualitatively similar findings.

                                                       13
4.2 Tests of the Identification Strategy
In our main specification, each coefficient  captures the effect of the TWI program between
period  and -1, compared to firms operating in the same sector that applied to the program on
the same date and from the same county, but which did not get any training. The identifying
assumption is that, conditional on nonlinear trends correlated with county-sector pairs and the
application date, the performance of firms with and without TWI training would have been on
parallel trends in the absence of the TWI program. While the identification assumption cannot
be tested directly, here we discuss four pieces of evidence that corroborate our identification
strategy.
       As it is standard for difference-in-differences regressions, we start by testing whether firms
with and without TWI training were on parallel trends before the beginning of the intervention.
We estimate equation (1) using only data from the five periods before the start of the TWI
training. The estimated coefficients are all precisely estimated zeros. Therefore, this finding
clearly rejects the hypothesis that firms with and without TWI training experienced different
pre-TWI trends in their sales, TFP, and ROA (Figure A2, Panels A-C). The results remain
unchanged if we compute the pre-TWI trends separately for any combination of J-modules,
instead of pooling all trained firms in one group (Figure A2, Panels D-F).
       Even if trained and nontrained firms followed parallel pre-TWI trends, the TWI adminis-
tration might still have chosen to offer their free training to the contractors that were more
important for war production, for instance on the basis of their large size or the value of
war contracts they received. Therefore, as a second piece of evidence, we show that firm
characteristics in period -1, the year before the start of the program, do not predict the
probability of receiving the training. Specifically, we regress the dummy variable TWIi on
fifteen different variables, as well as fixed effects for application date and county-sector pairs.17
We then test the joint significance of these firm variables. The p -value associated with this
test is 0.32 and therefore fails to reject the hypothesis of no correlation between the training
and firm characteristics (Table 2, Panel A, column 1). Similarly, we can replace the dependent
variable with several indicators for the different combinations of J-modules received by trained
firms (for example, only J-R vs. J-R and J-M). The test of joint significance fails to find any
correlation between different types of training and baseline firm characteristics (Table 2, Panel
17
     The regressors, all measured in period -1, are: the logs of sales, value added, number of employees, number of
     plants, foundation year, the value of inventory, capital, current assets, investments, number of workers' strikes,
     monetary compensation for workers' injuries, performance-based bonus payments, number of subsidiaries,
     as well as distance to the nearest railroad station and distance to the nearest port. Adding the inverse
     hyperbolic sine function of the number and value of government contracts makes some observations drop due
     to collinearity, but leads to the same finding of zero correlation between firm characteristics and training
     (Table 2, Panel B).

                                                           14
A, columns 2 to 8). Finally, we show the same lack of correlation between the TWI training
and firm-level variables even when we split the sample by year of training (Table A2, Panel
A). Overall, these findings indicate that the TWI administration did not favor applicant firms
with better preexisting characteristics, not even in the last stages of WWII when the need to
increase production became more pressing.
       Next, we show that the TWI administration did not choose to favor firms that were located
in the most industrialized or economically developed areas of the United States before the start
of the program. In fact, the baseline characteristics of the counties in which applicant firms were
located do not predict the probability of receiving the training. We regress the variable TWIi
on fourteen county-level variables from the 1940 Census, imputed to each applicant firm based
on its location, as well as fixed effects for application date and subdistrict-sector pairs.18 A
p -value of 0.48 indicates that the null hypothesis of zero correlation cannot be rejected (Table
2, Panel C, column 1). Moreover, a similar exercise using county characteristics from either
the 1920 Census or the 1930 Census confirms this finding, which rules out the hypothesis that
the previous result depended on the fact that the Great Depression had eroded much of the
cross-county variation in economic outcomes (Table 2, Panels D-E, column 1). We obtain the
same findings if we replace TWIi with indicators for different combinations of J-modules (Table
2, Panels C-E, columns 2-8). Finally, as shown for firm-level characteristics, we do not find any
correlation between county variables and training even when we break down applicant firms
by training year (Table A2, Panels C-E). These results show that the coefficients of the TWI
training did not conflate differential post-WWII economic trends between richer and poorer
U.S. counties.
       As a last piece of evidence, we show that there is no autocorrelation within subdistricts in
the share of trained firms (Table A3). This finding rules out the possibility that the TWI ad-
ministration favored over time applicant firms located in certain subdistricts (even though these
areas were not necessarily more developed at baseline, as shown in the previous paragraph).

4.3 Assignment of Instructors
At this point, it would be natural to wonder why, after controlling for application date and
county-sector pairs, the delivery of the training was essentially as good as random. We argue that
this was due to the way in which different types of TWI instructors were assigned to subdistricts
and application windows, combined with several constraints on resources and personnel that
18
     The regressors are: log number of manufacturing establishments, log number of manufacturing employees, log
     average manufacturing wage, log total expenses in manufacturing, log of the manufacturing value added, log
     value of manufacturing production, farms per capita, unemployment share (available only in 1930 and 1940),
     log population, population per square mile, share of male residents, share of African-American population,
     share of urban population, share of illiterate population (available only in 1920 and 1930).

                                                       15
the TWI administration faced throughout its existence.
   The TWI administration would have certainly preferred to send enough instructors to train
all war contractors in all three J-modules, but several bottlenecks made this goal unreachable.
First, the TWI staff was not large enough to prepare the needed number of TWI instructors
for in-plant training. At its peak in July 1944, the TWI administration had only 415 staff
members. Moreover, the size of the TWI staff was much smaller during most of WWII and
many employees were working only part-time for the program (Dooley, 1945, p. 14). Second,
the lack of manpower was compounded by the fact that both the courses to certify instructors
and the TWI training itself had to be carried out in small classes of at most ten students,
severely limiting scalability. Third, as discussed in Section 2.3, TWI instructors were trained
to be specialists who could teach only one J-module. This decision sped up the delivery of the
training, but meant that some applicant firms could not receive one or more J-modules because
there were not enough instructors who could teach them in their subdistrict and application
window. To summarize, a small staff, as well as instructors with inflexible teaching skills, created
variation across subdistricts and application windows in the number of firms eventually trained
and the type of trainings they received.
   We find three results that corroborate the historical accounts. First, within a subdistrict
and application window, the share of instructors who could teach a given J-module is positively
and strongly correlated with the probability that firms were trained in the same J-module
(Table C1). For example, firms located in subdistrict and application windows in which most
TWI instructors could teach the J-I module had a 21.5-percentage-points higher probability of
receiving the J-I module as the first TWI training, equal to a 119-percent increase from the
mean (Table C1, column 1). This effect implies that the allocation of instructors to subdistricts
and application windows drove large differences in the type of training received by firms.
   Second, the share of instructors who could teach a given J-module is not correlated with the
baseline characteristics of firms that applied in the same subdistrict and application window
(Table C2, Panels A and B). Similarly, there is no correlation between the share of instructors
and the characteristics of counties in 1920, 1930, and 1940 (Table C2, Panels C-E). These two
findings indicate that the TWI administration did not take into consideration the preexisting
characteristics of applicants and counties before assigning the TWI instructors to a subdistrict
and application window.
   Third, within a given subdistrict, there is no autocorrelation in the share of instructors who
could teach a given J-module (Table C3). This result is consistent with the historical data,
which indicate that the TWI instructors were assigned to only one subdistrict and application




                                                16
window.19 In fact, most instructors could volunteer to the TWI program only for a short length
of time before returning to their regular employers. The lack of reassignment across application
windows within a subdistrict led to an as-good-as-random assignment of new instructors in
every period.
       To conclude, our empirical strategy is designed to compare firms that are in the same county
and industry and that applied to the program on the same day, but that are located in different
TWI subdistricts. In spite of their many similarities (as shown in Section 4.2), these firms could
have received different types of TWI training. In this section, we showed that these differences in
training are driven mainly by the assignment of TWI instructors to subdistricts and application
windows. Moreover, we showed that the assignment of TWI instructors did not depend on the
characteristics of applicant firms, the characteristics of the counties, or prior assignments in the
same subdistrict. These results are consistent with the idea that the TWI administration did
not act strategically in assigning their resources to applicant firms.
       Based on these findings, we can modify the baseline equation (1) by instrumenting the
training variables with the share of instructors who could teach different J-modules assigned to
the subdistrict and application window in which firm i applied to the program. As expected,
the IV and OLS estimates are close and lead to the same conclusions (Table C4). Considering
that all the available evidence in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 points to the unbiasedness of the OLS
estimation of equation (1), we will focus on OLS regressions for the remainder of the analysis
due to their higher precision and easier interpretation.

5       Dynamic Effects of the TWI Program
In this section, we estimate the dynamic effects of the TWI program up to ten years after
the training. In order to show more clearly that each J-module induced changes in different
managerial practices, Section 5.1 limits the sample to firms that received either one J-module
or no training at all. In Section 5.2, we expand the sample to all applicants, including firms
that received two or three J-modules, in order to study complementarity effects among different
types of management training.

5.1 Effects on Firm Performance and Managerial Practices
Firm exit. We start our analysis by investigating if firms that received the TWI training ex-
perienced a lower exit rate than nontrained applicants. First, we estimate the following Kaplan-

19
     The strong correlations between instructors and training in Table C1 corroborate the precision of the data.
     In fact, the presence of widespread and undocumented reallocation of instructors across subdistricts and
     application windows would produce substantial measurement error. In this case, we should expect to find a
     small and possibly insignificant relationship between the original assignment of instructors and the training
     delivered to firms.

                                                         17
                                                                          ^t (t) =
Meier survival function separately for trained and nontrained applicants: S                        t t
                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                         (1 - n  ),
                                                                                                                

where n is the number of firms that survived until time  and d is the number of firms that
closed down at time  . Compared with nontrained applicants, firms that received the training
experienced a significantly lower exit rate (Figure A3, Panel A). Out of all trained firms, 90
percent survived for at least ten years after the beginning of the TWI program, compared to 64
percent of nontrained firms. The log-rank test rejects the null hypothesis of equality between
the two survival functions at the 1 percent of significance. Second, we regress an exit dummy
on an indicator for participation in the TWI program, controlling for application date and
county-sector fixed effects via the following OLS regression: Exiti =  TWIi +   Appi + cs + i ,
where the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one for firms that dropped from the
sample by the tenth year after the start of the TWI program, cs are county-sector fixed effects,
and the other variables are defined after equation (1). These estimates indicate that trained
applicants experienced a 26-percentage-point lower exit rate by the end of the tenth year after
the beginning of the TWI program, corroborating the results of the Kaplan-Meier functions
(Table A4).

Firm performance. The estimates of equation (1) indicate that the TWI training had a
long-lasting impact on firm performance. Annual sales of trained firms increased by 5.3 percent
within one year of the TWI training, compared with nontrained applicants (Figure 3, Panel A).
This differential effect reached a peak of 21.7 percent in period eight and then decreased to 16
percent in period ten. The treatment effects on productivity and profitability show monotonic
increases in the post-TWI years. Specifically, the TFP of trained firms exceeded the TFP of
nontrained firms by between 6 percent in period 0 and 27 percent in period ten (Figure 3, Panel
B). Similarly, their ROA increased by up to 11 percent by the tenth year after training (Figure
3, Panel C).
       We can further explore the increase in productivity by focusing on the different components
of the production function (Table A5). In addition to the aforementioned increase in revenues
from sales, we find that trained firms experienced a 1-percent decrease in capital and an 8-
percent decrease in intermediate goods after the TWI program, compared with nontrained
applicants.20 These changes are associated with an increase in TFP and explain why TFP
increased more than annual sales. Finally, trained firms experienced a 6-percent increase in

20
     A decrease in the value of intermediate goods used for production is consistent with the nature of the TWI
     program. One of the main goals of the TWI training was to increase production efficiency in a period in which
     the overall availability of inputs was scarce. Moreover, better human resource management (especially though
     the J-R module) decreased the cost of scaling up the workforce. Therefore, trained firms may have replaced
     externally sourced intermediate goods with internal labor. This hypothesis is consistent with the fact that
     trained firms experienced an increase in the number of employees (Table A5, column 5) and the number of
     subsidiaries (Table A6, column 4).

                                                         18
the number of employees, compared with nontrained applicants. This variation contributed to
decrease productivity, but it was not large enough to overcome the increase in sales and the
decrease in intermediate goods.
   At least three things are worth noting about these results. First, since most of the training
was carried out between 1942 and 1945 (Figure 2, Panel B), for most trained firms the war
ended within three years after the program began. However, the effects kept increasing after
period three. We will further explore how war-related factors may have influenced the results
in Section 7. Second, the estimation of single-difference event studies indicates that firms with
and without training had followed the same, and not just parallel, trends before the TWI
program (Figure 3, Panels D-F). This finding reinforces the notion that the delivery of the
TWI training was not correlated with preexisting firm conditions. Finally, while the effects of
the TWI program are fairly large, their magnitude is either in line with, or smaller than, the
effect sizes found in similar studies (Figure A4). For instance, our treatment effects on sales are
4 percentage points smaller than the effects on output found by Bloom et al. (2013a) and at
most 6 percentage points smaller than the effects on sales found by Giorcelli (2019). Moreover,
they are consistent with the historical records that documented large effects of the program of
firm productivity (Section 2.3).
   The results are robust to a variety of modifications to the baseline specification and sample
(Figure A5). Specifically, we replace county-sector-period fixed effects with either firm and
period or with district-sector-period fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors at different
levels of aggregation. We also impute values of Years after TWI= i to nontrained firms using
the values of the last, instead of the first, trained firm in their subdistrict and application
window. Moreover, we match trained and nontrained firms using different propensity-score-
matching algorithms (Table A7).
   Next, we investigate how the higher attrition of nontrained firms affected these findings.
First, we reestimate equation (1) allowing for firm entry and exit, instead of using a balanced
sample (Figure A3, Panels B and C). The treatment effects in the unbalanced sample are larger
than the baseline treatment effects in the balanced sample. Second, we bound the treatment
effects by hypothesizing extreme cases of attrition. Specifically, the exit regressions indicate
that attrition was 26 percentage points lower among trained applicants (Table A4). Therefore,
to rebalance the sample, we remove all trained applicants either in the top or bottom quartile
of the distribution of sales (Figure A3, Panel D) or TFP (Figure A3, Panel E) in period -1. The
two resulting event studies are close to the baseline, indicating that attrition based on initial
performance is not able to generate substantial bias in the main results.
   Over time, trained firms undertook a number of structural changes that transformed them


                                                19
into larger and more complex organizations. Compared with nontrained firms, the number of
plants of trained firms increased by 6.4 percent by period ten, the number of their employees
by 13.5 percent, the number of their managers by 11.4 percent, and the number of their
controlled subsidiaries by 5 percent (Table A6). These findings are consistent with prior work
that highlights the positive relationship between productivity and firm size (Syverson, 2011).
     From a financial perspective, the TWI training was a success. The direct costs of the program
were $155 million (in 2020 USD), which implies that the direct costs per trained supervisor were
equal to $88.5.21 Obviously, the highest costs were indirect, namely, the opportunity cost of the
time dedicated to the program by the employees of participating firms. Trained employees had
to spend ten hours to receive the certification in one of the three TWI modules and possibly
many more hours to implement the TWI concepts within their firms. Although we do not have
data on the time the trained supervisors took to spread the TWI training within their firms,
the available evidence suggests that the program was cost-effective for most firms. Assuming a
hourly wage for managers and supervisors of $45, supervisors would have needed to dedicate at
least 3,400 hours or 21 months of their time to the TWI training in order to make the program
unprofitable for their firm by the tenth year after training.22

Managerial practices. In the last portion of this section, we estimate the heterogeneous
effects of different types of managerial training and their relationship with the adoption of
specific managerial practices. Specifically, we replace the indicator TWIi in equation (1) with
a dummy variable for each of the three J-modules. As a reminder, supervisors learned how
to break in new employees through the J-I module, how to manage human resources through
the J-R module, and how to introduce improvements to business processes through the J-M
module. The results indicate that all three trainings had positive and permanent effects on sales
and TFP, while only J-R and J-M increased the ROA (Figure A6). Moreover, the J-R module
had the largest effects on every outcome.
     In order to explain the different effects of the J-modules on firm outcomes, we investigate
what changes to managerial practices they induced. We start by analyzing data from the plant-
level surveys the TWI administration conducted in each trained firm before the program, three


21
   The direct costs were the sum of $92.3 million of appropriations and $62.5 million from the U.S. Office of
   Education to pay the TWI instructors (Dooley, 1945; p. 122). Moreover, 1.75 million supervisors were trained
   through the TWI program.
22
   The hourly wage of $45 (2020 USD) comes from an annual wage of $5,000 (1940 USD) for "personnel work-
   ers" from the 1940 Occupational Outlook Handbook (https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=osu.
   32435051428019&view=image&seq=7). Moreover, compared with nonapplicants, 6,056 trained applicant firms
   reported higher profits of $44.2 million by the tenth year after training. Therefore, ($45/h  6
                                                                                                 3,400 hours)+$88.5
                                                                                                  ,056 firms        
   1.75 mil. trained supervisors $44.2 mil. higher profits.

                                                        20
months after the program, and then each year after training until 1945.23 In general, the survey
data show a clear relationship between the content of the J-modules and changes in managerial
practices (Table A8). The J-I program highlighted the importance of having the workplace
properly arranged and ensuring worker safety (Dooley, 1945; p. 33). In the TWI surveys,
firms that received the J-I training reported a drop in machine repairs and an increase in
the probability of keeping a reliable record of breakdowns after the training, which can explain
the increase in output and TFP.
     In contrast, firms that received the J-R module became more likely to offer on-the-job
training, performance-based bonus schemes, and a process for workers to submit suggestions to
higher management. Moreover, they were more likely to formalize the tasks and responsibilities
attached to different positions. These changes should have increased labor productivity, which
in turn should have increased output and TFP.
     Finally, firms that were trained in the J-M module found new ways to cut inefficiencies
or increase revenues. They reported a drop in unused inputs, as well as an increased reliance
on production planning and marketing activities. The decreased inventory, in turn, reduced
capital utilization with positive effects on TFP. Furthermore, better production planning may
have reduced bottlenecks, while a higher focus on marketing may have increased the customer
base, leading to higher output.
     One caveat in the interpretation of these results is that the self-reported nature of the
TWI surveys may have pushed firms to overstate the adoption of good managerial practices.
To provide additional evidence on actual changes in spending, we can validate the survey
data using information from the firms' financial reports (Table 3). Compared with nontrained
firms, firms that received the J-I training started spending more for regular maintenance and
less for machine repairs and worker injuries.24 In contrast, firms trained in the J-R module
became more likely to invest in performance-based bonus payments and on-the-job training
programs. Moreover, they became less likely to experience worker strikes. Finally, firms that
received the J-M training decreased their inventory, while they became more likely to increase
the number of product lines and to invest in marketing activities. Remarkably, the only changes
in the implementation of managerial practices that these firms documented in their financial
23
   The survey data were collected only for firms that eventually got treated. As a result, this analysis cannot
   include nontrained firms.
24
   The survey data indicate that firms that received the J-I module reported more injuries after the program,
   while the financial data show that the same firms spent less for worker injuries after the TWI. The two
   findings may signal that the J-I module induced trained firms to improve both their safety protocols and the
   reporting of injuries. As a result, trained firms may have started documenting more injury cases, including
   minor accidents, while experiencing a decrease in the severity of injuries. Although we cannot directly test it,
   this hypothesis is consistent with the historical reports on the effects of the J-I module published in the 1944
   J-I manual for TWI instructors.

                                                        21
statements were related to the specific training they had received, which highlights the critical
role played by the TWI training.25
       In short, all trained firms experienced increases in productivity and profitability, but for
different reasons. The fact that firms trained in the J-R module reported the largest treatment
effects attests to the importance of human resource management in driving firm performance.
This result is consistent with the idea that many management practices do not affect perfor-
mance directly, but only through the mediation of employees' effort (Bender et al., 2018). In
this sense, it is not surprising that improving human resources generated the largest benefits of
TWI training.
       Finally, as pointed out by Bloom et al. (2020), one of the main reasons why management
interventions do not always lead to permanent improvements is that beneficial practices are
implemented in the short term, but may be abandoned over time. In our case, however, the
adoption of good managerial practices induced by the TWI training lasted throughout the
period under consideration, which in turn sustained long-lasting effects on firm performance. In
this sense, the evidence from the TWI training is consistent with the "Toyota Way" hypothesis
that better management is able to start a "multiplier effect of ongoing further improvements"
(Bloom et al., 2020; p. 217).

5.2 Complementarity among Managerial Practices
At the core of the "Toyota Way" hypothesis is the idea that managerial practices are comple-
mentary. According to this view, the costs of adding new managerial practices fall as others are
adopted, allowing firms to continuously improve. This form of complementarity is therefore able
to transform a single management intervention into a stream of improvements, the so-called
kaizen approach.
       So far, testing this hypothesis has proven to be quite challenging. In most papers that
study management interventions, the firms studied received a service--either consulting or
training--that improved a "bundle" of managerial practices at the same time. These settings
prevent the analysis of complementarities, because all participating firms experienced contem-
poraneous improvements in multiple areas. However, due to the way it was implemented, the
TWI program offers a unique opportunity to overcome these common challenges. As noted
earlier, some firms received training in only one J-module, while others received training in
multiple J-modules. We can therefore test whether receiving training in both areas x and y
led to a higher adoption of beneficial practices associated with area x, compared with receiving
training in area x exclusively.
25
     These results, as well as the main findings in Sections 5.2 and 6.1, are robust to different clustering of the
     standard errors (Table A9) and to corrections for multiple concurrent testing (Table A10).

                                                         22
       In the empirical analysis, we replace the indicator TWIi in equation (1) with a dummy
variable for each of the three J-modules. Moreover, for each J-module, we add an indicator
that equals one for firms that received that module along with another type of training and
we interact it with a Post-TWIi dummy. The coefficients of these new interactions measure
the additional effect that stems from receiving each module together with another training,
compared with receiving each module by itself. If there are no complementarities, the coefficients
of these interactions will be small and not statistically significant.
       The data indicate that there were moderate complementarities for the J-R and J-M modules,
but none for the J-I module (Table 4). Firms that received the J-M training with another module
introduced 6.8 percent more product lines and were 2.7 percent more likely to report spending
for marketing activities, compared with firms that received the J-M module alone. Firms that
received the J-R training with another module experienced 9.6 percent fewer strikes and were
2.6 percent more likely to report spending for on-the-job training, compared with firms that
received the J-R module by itself.26
       Remarkably, after the TWI program was exported to Japan in the post-WWII period, the J-
M training became the main inspiration for Toyota's kaizen approach (Dinero, 2005; p. 48). It is
therefore interesting to observe that the J-M module was one of the two modules that benefited
from complementarities, one of the main features that characterize kaizen. Conversely, the lack
of complementarities associated with the J-I module is most likely due to the nature of its
content. Teaching how to use firm machinery safely and effectively did not seem to become
easier with improvements in other areas, possibly because establishing the formal set of rules
required by this module was all that was needed.

6       Effects on Other Firms
One of the unusual features of the TWI program is the fact that it targeted many large-size firms
that accounted for a substantial share of the U.S. workforce in the 1940s. The large scale of the
program offers a unique opportunity to study whether management training is able to generate
spillover effects on other firms not directly targeted by the intervention. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study that examines training spillovers across firms systematically.

6.1 Spillover and Selection Effects on Supply Chain
We started our analysis by examining whether the TWI training generated spillovers on firms
in the supply chain of trained applicants. To do so, we first identified applicants' upstream and
downstream firms by combining information on their products with information on applicants'

26
     These findings are robust to two alternative specifications (Tables A11 and A12).

                                                        23
products that are available in the replacement schedules.27 Overall, we found data on 1,816
upstream and downstream firms linked to 1,572 firms that applied to the TWI program.
       Next, we estimate equation (1) using as the dependent variable financial data from these
upstream and downstream firms. Moreover, we replace the indicator TWIi with a dummy
variable for each of the three J-modules. This specification allows us to study whether the
specific type of training received by an applicant had effects on the practices adopted by
nontrained firms in its supply chain.
       The results indicate that firms in the supply chain became more productive after trained
firms received the TWI training, even though the sales of the former group did not increase
(Table 5, Panel A). On the one hand, these results may be due to the fact that these firms were
now working with companies that had themselves become more productive. On the other hand,
they may indicate that upstream and downstream firms were exposed to the specific J-modules
received by the applicant firm with which they had a business relationship.
       To test whether there was indeed a spillover of managerial knowledge, we estimate whether
firms in the supply chain started implementing the same managerial practices taught to trained
companies. Remarkably, we find evidence that each J-module induced upstream and down-
stream firms to improve the managerial practices related to its content, following the same
pattern that we described in Section 5.1. For example, firms in the supply chain of applicants
that received the J-R training became less likely to experience worker strikes and more likely
to report spending for on-the-job training. And firms in the supply chain of applicants that
received the J-M training decreased the size of their inventory, increased the number of product
lines, and became more likely to report spending for marketing activities.
       There are four additional things to note about these findings. First, these results apply to
both firms that were already in the supply chain of applicants at the time of the TWI training
and to firms that entered only after the TWI program (Table 5, Panel B). Second, with the
exception of the decrease in inventory, the effect sizes tend to be smaller than the main treatment
effects on applicant firms. This is not surprising because spillovers are often smaller than direct
effects. Third, the J-I module does not show any evidence of spillovers on the supply chain.
This result could be due to its content--which involved basic tasks performed by lower-skilled
workers and, therefore, less likely to be discussed by managers working for different firms--or
to its smaller direct effects on applicant firms. Fourth, the spillovers associated with the J-M
module tend to be larger when the trained firm was operating in the manufacturing sector
(Table A13, Panel A).28
27
     More details are available in Appendix B.
28
     The results do not depend on two other characteristics of trained firms, that is, the size of the workforce at
     baseline and the location (Table A13, Panels B and C).

                                                         24
       Finally, we study whether trained applicants became more likely to have better upstream
and downstream firms. To do so, we focus exclusively on firms that entered the supply chain of
applicants after the TWI program. Then, we regress their characteristics observed in the year
before their entry into the supply chain of an applicant on the TWIi indicator, which is one if
the applicant received a form of TWI training.29 The coefficients of TWIi indicate that, after
experiencing the TWI program, trained applicants were more likely than nontrained applicants
to enter into a business relationship with more productive and larger upstream and downstream
firms (Table A14).
       Overall, these findings indicate another channel through which the TWI training could
have had long-lasting effects on trained firms. After fixing their own internal processes, trained
applicants could experience additional improvements by transmitting the key concepts of the
TWI program to firms in their supply chain. Interestingly, the TWI program itself emphasized
the importance of spreading the J-modules both within and outside the firm in order to
maximize the so-called "multiplier principle" of training (Dooley, 1945; p. 6). Consistent with
this finding, using modern data from the Census Bureau's Management and Organizational
Practices Survey (MOPS), Bloom et al. (2013b) finds that 76 percent of respondents mentioned
the supply chain (customers and suppliers) as a source of new management ideas.

6.2 Spillover Effects on Nonapplicant Firms
The TWI program was open to all U.S. war contractors, but only 46 percent of them applied.
Compared with applicants, nonapplicant firms were on average less productive, had fewer plants
and employees, and reported lower sales in 1939, the year before the beginning of the TWI
program (Table A15). In spite of these differences, applicants and nonapplicants were operating
in the same sectors, had a workforce with similar gender and racial composition, and were
equally affected by the war. For example, comparable shares of their employees (23 percent for
applicants vs. 20 percent for nonapplicants) were drafted during WWII.
       In this section, we use data on nonapplicant firms to answer two questions. First, we
investigate whether the TWI training had spillover effects on the nonapplicants located near
trained firms. On the one hand, nonapplicant firms could have benefited from spillovers of
managerial knowledge. On the other hand, these firms could have been harmed by the improved
performance of trained firms. To estimate these effects, we divided the 364 subdistricts into
52 groups of adjacent subdistricts. For each nonapplicant firm, we computed the number of
applicant firms located in the same cluster of subdistricts and their average distance from the
nonapplicant firm. Next, we regress nonapplicants' economic outcomes on one of these two
29
     These regressions also include fixed effects for district-sector combinations, the application window, and the
     number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application.

                                                         25
measures of indirect exposure to the TWI program interacted with period dummies, in which
period 0 identifies the modal treatment year within each of the 52 groups of subdistricts.30
       The results of these regressions indicate the lack of spillovers (Figure A7 and Table A16).
Specifically, having a greater number of trained firms nearby had no correlation with the
performance of nonapplicants or with their adoption of managerial practices. It is important
to note that these findings do not necessarily rule out the possibility that trained firms drew
business away from nonapplicants. Given that the U.S. economy was growing after WWII,
trained firms might have gained market share at the expense of nonapplicants even without
poaching their existing customers.
       Second, we investigate what the effects of the TWI program would have been, had it been
implemented with a group of firms with characteristics more similar to those of nonapplicants.
To do so, we replicate the estimation of equation (1) on a smaller sample of applicant firms that
we matched to nonapplicants based on their features in 1939. Specifically, the matching process
was based on propensity scores and used a nearest-neighbor algorithm without replacement.
The matching variables were the number of plants and employees in 1939, TFP in 1939, distance
from the nearest port and railroad station, sector, and fixed effects for the 22 TWI districts.
The result is a group of 2,223 applicant firms with features that more closely mirror those of
nonapplicants (Table A15, column 6). Estimating the main specification on this sample reveals
similar effects on sales and TFP and smaller effects on ROA (Figure A8), which nevertheless
remain significant and persistent.
       In short, the baseline treatment effect that we estimated in Section 5.1 measures the
consequences of training on the average firm that was willing to participate in the TWI program.
This result, which is unbiased for voluntary participants, is the one that is more common in the
literature on management interventions. In fact, in most cases it is not possible to force firms to
open their plants to consultants or trainers. In order to keep attrition low, especially when the
sample size is small, many studies need to preselect a group of firms that have shown interest
in receiving the intervention. The estimates using the smaller sample of matched applicants
provide a better description of the effects of the TWI program on the average war contractor,
rather than the more productive and larger average applicant firm. The two sets of estimates
remain very close, suggesting that the effect of the TWI program did not significantly depend
on the level of firm performance at baseline.31
       In addition to turning down free training during WWII, there is no evidence that the
nonapplicants attempted to implement the TWI concepts during the post-WWII years, even

30
     The regressions also include firm and period fixed effects.
31
     We will test this hypothesis directly in Section 7.

                                                          26
though the program was proving effective among trained firms. This fact might be even more
surprising if we consider that, after the end of the war, the TWI Foundation (now a private
entity) successfully exported the J-modules to 27 countries, including Japan, where they inspired
the implementation of lean production (Dinero, 2005; p. 42). Two main reasons could explain
low interest for the TWI training in the United States (Dinero, 2005; p. 15).
    First, in the post-WWII period, U.S. firms might have perceived external trainers as poten-
tially interfering with their processes and limiting their agency, instead of as a source of help
(Breen, 2002; p. 264). All U.S. firms were facing a large increase in domestic demand. Moreover,
they were expanding their market share in foreign countries, due to the fact that many foreign
factories had been damaged or destroyed during WWII. In this period of economic bonanza,
low-productivity firms might have been shortsighted enough to consider training a nuisance.
This possible explanation is consistent with the fact that we did not find negative horizontal
spillovers and with the fact that U.S. firms refocused on training only when their worldwide
dominance was threatened by Japanese products in the late 1970s (Cusumano, 1985).
    Second, although the TWI printed materials were available for purchase after the war, U.S.
firms that wanted to implement the J-modules could not rely on the TWI administration. The
lack of carefully vetted and highly prepared TWI instructors, as well as the absence of any
follow-up, were possibly important enough reasons for making a self-taught TWI training likely
to be less successful than the original program had been.

7    War-Related Events and Other Heterogeneities
In this section, we perform several heterogeneity analyses to show how firms with different
characteristics responded to the TWI program. As a general caveat, we cannot usually leverage
exogenous variation along the dimensions used for these heterogeneity tests. Therefore, these
results should not be interpreted as causal estimates, but as correlations between firm variables
and the baseline treatment effects.

Switching to War Production. So far, we have explored mechanisms that are consistent
with the "Toyota-way" hypothesis. Complementarities in management practices, as well as ver-
tical spillovers, can explain why the TWI training was able to generate long-lasting results. Here,
we test whether the disruptions generated by WWII might have contributed to diminishing the
efficacy of the TWI program over time.
    We start this analysis by considering the fact that many U.S. war contractors had to change
their product lines to produce war items (Section 3.3). This change in production might have
made the TWI training less effective. During the TWI in-plant training, workers might have
applied the J-modules to solve the challenges they were facing while producing a given war


                                                27
item. After switching to a very different peacetime good, these workers might have faced a new
set of problems. Although the J-modules were designed to be widely applicable to different
situations, it might have been difficult to implement them for different production processes.
   To test this hypothesis, we estimate equation (1) separately for firms that did and did not
produce war items in different 2-digit SIC codes (Figure A9). As expected, firms that had to
switch to different products during the war benefited less from the TWI training. However,
the data also indicate that changing to wartime production was not enough to totally erase
the effect of the program. Firms that produced items in different 2-digit SIC codes reported
significant increases in their sales, TFP, and ROA.

Loss of Human Capital. The draft represented another major war-related disruption to
firm processes. More than half of the male population aged 18 to 45 in 1940 (50 million people)
served during WWII (Jaworski, 2014). Data from the replacement schedules indicate that all
war contractors in our sample lost workers due to the draft, experiencing mobilization rates of
their workforce between 13 and 33 percent. Losing experienced workers to the war might have
slowed down the application of the TWI concepts within trained firms, due to the higher influx
of untrained and inexperienced new hires. We test this hypothesis by estimating equation (1)
separately for firms in different tertiles of the distribution of drafted workers (Table A10, Panels
A-C).
   Firms in the highest tertile, and therefore those with the highest number of drafted employ-
ees, experienced a lower increase in sales, TFP, and ROA, but the gap between those and firms
in lower tertiles is small. In short, there is no evidence that the draft substantially interfered
with the efficacy of the TWI training. This result is not necessarily surprising when we recall
that the TWI program was introduced to teach firms how to deal with the challenges raised by
the draft.
   Relatedly, we can test whether the loss of human capital after the war was responsible for
smaller treatment effects. Specifically, we use the names of the top executives that are included
in the firms' financial reports to measure the share of top managers leaving the firm between the
end of the training and 1955, the last year available in our sample. Between 4 and 73 percent
of top executives left their firms in the years after the program. We then estimate equation (1)
separately for firms in different tertiles of the distribution of top management's turnover (Table
A10, Panels D-F).
   The results on sales and TFP indicate that the effect sizes of the program are larger for firms
in which more managers stayed within the firm over the first ten post-training years. However,
even for firms in the top tertile of management's turnover, the treatment effects are positive,
large, and persistent. For ROA, there is not a clear pattern correlated with the turnover of top


                                                28
managers. Moreover, there is no differential implementation of managerial practices between
firms with a low versus a high share of managers leaving (Table A17).
   These results are relevant because they inform the ongoing debate about whether im-
provements in management accrue to the firm or to individual managers. The fact that our
results are only slightly lower among firms with higher turnover of managers indicates that
the TWI training was able to create firm-specific "managerial capital" (Bruhn, Karlan, and
Schoar, 2010) that remained within the trained firms, even after trained managers left. These
findings are different from the ones reported by Bloom et al. (2020), who document a drop
in the implementation of good managerial practices when managers leave the firm; and by
Huber, Lindenthal, and Waldinger (2019), who find that the loss of managers can harm a firm's
profitability.
   However, it is possible to reconcile our findings with this prior work. In the TWI context,
trained firms were growing after the end of the war, significantly increasing the number of
managers in their ranks (Table A6). Therefore, these firms may have been able to retain the
benefits of the TWI program by training the large number of newly hired managers on the
importance of the J-modules, even if many top executives who were at the firm at the time
of the TWI program were leaving. Consistent with this hypothesis is the fact that the TWI
program promoted the diffusion of its principles to nontrained workers within the trained firms
(the "multiplier effect" discussed in Section 5.1). Moreover, Friedrich (2020) shows that more
productive firms are more likely to use internal promotions to hire managers. If this tendency
applied to our sample, trained firms would have started relying more heavily on internal talent,
already exposed to the TWI training, to replace departing managers.

Relations with the U.S. Government. Here, we test whether the relationship of trained
firms with the federal government strengthened after the TWI training. For example, it is
plausible to assume that the Department of War might have preferred to assign war contracts
to firms that had been trained in at least one J-module. After all, one of the main goals of the
program was to make these firms more productive in order to meet the Allies' military needs.
   We test this hypothesis by estimating equation (1) with dependent variables that describe
the relationship of trained firms with the federal government. We find that the probability of
having war supply contracts, their number and value, as well as the value of subsidies given to
war contractors after WWII, were not different between firms with and without training (Table
A18 and Figure A11). These results show that improved outcomes are not automatically tied
to trained firms having tighter economic relationships with the U.S. government. Moreover, the
TWI training does not predict higher war-related government spending in a county, reinforcing
the idea that the federal government did not use the TWI program as a tool to assign more


                                              29
resources (Table A18, Panel D).
   Overall, the data reject the hypothesis that the documented improvements in firm perfor-
mance stemmed from closer ties with the federal government. First, in Section 4.2, we estab-
lished that the value and number of war supply contracts before the TWI were not correlated
with the probability of receiving training (Table 2, Panel B). Therefore, closer government ties
before the program cannot explain selection into treatment. Second, in this section, we found
that the value and number of war supply contracts did not increase disproportionately among
trained firms after the TWI program. Therefore, closer government ties after the program
cannot explain differences in sales and productivity between trained and nontrained firms.

Other Heterogeneities. The TWI program is one of the few management interventions that
targeted firms operating in different sectors, namely, manufacturing, transportation, services,
and agriculture. Therefore, it is interesting to ask whether the benefits of the program differed
across fields. The results indicate that firms operating in all sectors experienced significant
increases in productivity after training, but manufacturing and service firms saw the largest
increase (Figure A12, Panel A). This finding is consistent with the fact the the J-modules were
designed with the manufacturing sector in mind.
   In the next set of results, we test whether firms in different U.S. Census Bureau regions
benefited differently from the TWI training (Figure A12, Panel B). We find that firms in every
region experienced similar long-lasting increases in productivity. This finding indicates that our
results do not crucially depend on the local economic conditions that firms may have faced
during and after WWII.
   Next, we test whether the year in which firms received the training affected the efficacy of
the program. The overall pattern of treatment effects is similar among all firms that participated
in the program, but firms trained earlier experienced more benefits (Figure A12, Panel C). This
finding can be explained by the fact that such firms received more followups from the TWI
service before it permanently shut down in 1945.
   In addition, we estimate equation (1) separately for firms in different quartiles of the
distribution of workforce size in the year before receiving the TWI training (Figure A12, Panel
D). The results do not indicate any clear pattern that is correlated with the size of trained
firms at baseline. Moreover, we estimate the treatment effects for firms in different quartiles of
the distribution of TFP in the year before receiving the TWI training (Figure A12, Panel E).
The results indicate that the program was more beneficial for firms that were less productive
at baseline. However, all firms, including those in the top quartile of preexisting productivity,
experienced large, significant, and long-lasting increases in TFP.
   Finally, we show that the effects of the program did not significantly change among firms


                                               30
that received more instructors with experience in the private sector (Figure A12, Panel F).
These findings suggest that our results are not driven by the specific instructors who provided
the training to war contractors. We can conclude that, in line with the goal of the program, the
TWI administration was able to standardize the content of the TWI training and to guarantee
the same level of quality among all trained companies.

8    Conclusions
This paper studies the long-term and spillover effects of management training on firm per-
formance and the adoption of managerial practices, using evidence from the Training Within
Industry (TWI) Program. To perform this analysis, we linked newly digitized information on
the participation of 11,575 firms in the TWI program to data from twenty years of those firms'
balance sheets and income statements. We compare applicant firms that received the training
to applicant firms that did not receive any intervention, both of which groups were statistically
indistinguishable before the start of the program, and control for nonlinear trends correlated
with the application date, sector, and county.
    We find that the TWI training had a positive and long-lasting impact on firm performance
until at least ten years after its implementation. Moreover, we establish a direct link between
the content of the training and the adoption of managerial practices by trained firms. There
are several channels that can explain a long-term effect of training on firm outcomes. First, we
document the existence of complementarities among different types of training, which implies
that receiving more training decreases the costs of improvements in new areas. Second, we find
positive spillovers on firms in the supply chain of trained applicants. Third, we document the
fact that trained firms were able to retain most of the benefits of the TWI training even after a
large share of their trained executives had left the company. Overall, our findings are consistent
with the so-called "Toyota-way" hypothesis, which states that management interventions can
generate a virtuous cycle of growth within firms.
    We argue that these findings are relevant for both firms and policy makers. Firms routinely
use internal training to improve the productivity of their workforce (Acemoglu and Pischke,
1998; Konigs and Vanormelingen, 2015). However, the effectiveness of these policies is usually
evaluated over a limited time period, on small samples, usually without randomizing the content
of the training, and without evaluating spillovers outside the trained firm (McKenzie and
Woodruff, 2014). Our research addresses these open issues by showing that management training
can have long-lasting effects, that the content of training matters, and that positive spillovers
can take place along the supply chain. Therefore, these factors should be taken into account to
ensure the success of management training interventions.


                                                 31
References
Acemoglu, Daron and J     orn-Steffen Pischke. 1998. "Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
  Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 79119.
Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2015. "Structural Identification
  of Production Functions." Econometrica, 83(6): 24112451.
Alfaro-Urena, Alonso, Isabela Manelici, and Jose P. Vasquez. 2019. "The Effects of
  Multinationals on Workers: Evidence from Costa Rica." working paper, UC Berkeley.
Bender, Stefan, Nicholas Bloom, David Card, John Van Reenen, and Stefanie
  Wolter. 2018. "Management practices, workforce selection, and productivity." Journal of
  Labor Economics, 36(S1): S371쵹409.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Management
  Practises across Firms and Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 13411408.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2011. "Human resource management and
  productivity." In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4, , ed. David Card and Orley
  Ashenfelter, 16971767. Elsevier B.V.
Bloom, Nicholas, Aprajit Mahajan, David J. McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2020.
  "Do Management Interventions Last? Evidence from India." American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 12(2): 198219.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David Mckenzie, and John
  Roberts. 2013a. "Does Management Matter? Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 128(1): 151.
Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, and Itay Saporta-
  Eksten. 2013b. "Management in America." CES Working Paper 13-01.
Breen, William J. 2002. "Social Science and State Policy in World War II: Human Relations,
  Pedagogy, and Industrial Training, 19401945." Business History Review, 76(2): 233266.
Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2010. "What Capital is
  Missing in Developing Countries?" The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
  100(2): 629633.
Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2018. "The Impact of Consulting
  Services on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Mexico."
  Journal of Political Economy, 126(2): 635687.
Cusumano, Michael A. 1985. The Japanese Automobile Industry: Technology and Manage-
  ment at Nissan and Toyota. Harvard University Press.
Dinero, Donald. 2005. Training Within Industry: The Foundation of Lean. Productivity Press;
  HAR/COM Edition.
Dooley, Channing R. 1945. "The Training Within Industry Report 1940-1945." War
  Manpower Commission. Bureau of Training.
Fishback, Price and Joseph A. Cullen. 2013. "Second World War spending and local
  economic activity in US counties, 1939-58." Economic History Review, 66(4): 975992.
Foster, Lucia, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm
  Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?" American Economic
  Review, 98(1): 394425.
Friedrich, Benjamin. 2020. "Internal Labor Markets and the Competition for Managerial
  Talent." working paper, Northwestern University.
Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David A. Rivers. 2020. "On the identification of


                                            32
  gross output production functions." Journal of Political Economy, 128(8): 29733016.
Garin, Andy. 2019. "Public Investment and the Spread of "Good-Paying" Manufacturing
  Jobs: Evidence from World War II's Big Plants." working paper, UI Urbana-Champaign.
Giorcelli, Michela. 2019. "The Long-Term Effects of Management and Technology Transfers."
  American Economic Review, 109(1): 133.
Gosnell, Greer K., John A. List, and Robert D. Metcalfe. 2020. "The impact of
  management practices on employee productivity: A field experiment with airline captains."
  Journal of Political Economy, 128(4): 11951233.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. "Identifying
  agglomeration spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings." Journal
  of Political Economy, 118(3): 536598.
Gross, Daniel P. and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2020. "Inventing the Endless Frontier: The
  Effects of the World War II Research Effort on Post-War Innovation." NBER Working Paper
  27375.
Hoffman, Mitchell and Steven Tadelis. 2021. "People management skills, employee
  attrition, and manager rewards: An empirical analysis." Journal of Political Economy,
  129(1): 243285.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
  China and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 11031148.
Huber, Kilian, Volker Lindenthal, and Fabian Waldinger. 2019. "Discrimination,
  Managers, and Firm Performance: Evidence from Aryanizations in Nazi-Germany." Working
  paper, University of Munich.
Huntzinger, Jim. 2005. The Roots of Lean. Training Within Industry: The Origin of Japanese
  Management and Kaizen. LeanFrontiers.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn L. Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects
  of Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity." American Economic Review,
  86(3): 291313.
Javorcik, Beata, Wolfgang Keller, and James Tybout. 2008. "Openness and Industrial
  Response in a Wal-Mart World: A Case Study of Mexican Soaps, Detergents and Surfactant
  Producers." The World Economy, 31(12): 15581580.
Jaworski, Taylor. 2014. "'You're in the Army Now': The Impact of World War II on Women's
  Education, Work, and Family." Journal of Economic History, 74(1): 169195.
Jaworski, Taylor. 2017. "World War II and the Industrialization of the American South."
  The Journal of Economic History, 77(4): 10481082.
Konigs, Jozef and Stijn Vanormelingen. 2015. "The Impact of Training on Productivity
  and Wages: Firm-Level Evidence." Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2): 485497.
Koustas, Dmitri and Zhimin Li. 2019. "The Long-Run Effects of Government Spending
  on Structural Change: Evidence from Second World War Defense Contracts." Economics
  Letters, 178: 6669.
Lazear, Edward P. 2000. "Performance pay and productivity." American Economic Review,
  90(5): 13461361.
Lazear, Edward P. and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2007. "Personnel economics: The economist's
  view of human resources." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4): 91114.
Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2015. "The Value
  of Bosses." Journal of Labor Economics, 33(4): 823861.
Lee, James. 2015. "Measuring Agglomeration: Products, People, and Ideas in US Manufac-

                                             33
  turing, 1880-1990." Working paper, Harvard University.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin. 2003. "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
  to Control for Unobservables." Review of Economic Studies, 70(2): 317341.
Liker, Jeffrey K. 2004. The Toyota Way: 14 Management Principles from the World's
  Greatest Manufacturer. McGraw-Hill Education.
McKenzie, David J. and Christopher Woodruff. 2014. "What are we learning from
  business training and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?" World
  Bank Research Observer, 29(1): 4882.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecom-
  munications Equipment Industry." Econometrica, 64(6): 12631297.
Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
  from Chilean Plants." The Review of Economic Studies, 69(1): 245276.
Stoyanov, Andrey and Nikolay Zubanov. 2012. "Productivity Spillovers across Firms
  through Worker Mobility." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 168198.
Syverson, Chad. 2004. "Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example." Journal
  of Political Economy, 112(6): 11811222.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. "What Determines Productivity." Journal of Economic Literature,
  49(2): 326365.
TWI Administration. 1940. "Training Workers to Meet Defense Needs." TWI Bulletin #1.
TWI Administration. 1944. "Management and Skilled Supervision (How the TWI Programs
  Operate)." TWI Bulletin #20.
Womack, James, Daniel Jones, and Daniel Roos. 1990. The Machine That Changed the
  World. New York:Simon and Schuster.




                                           34
                                     Figures and Tables

                                     Figure 1: TWI Districts




                       Panel A: Applicant and nonapplicant eligible firms




                        Panel B: Trained and nontrained applicant firms

Notes . Map of the 22 TWI districts. The borders within the 22 districts identify the 364 subdistricts,
the level of aggregation at which the program was delivered. Panel A divides 25,393 war contractors
between 11,575 firms that applied to the TWI program (purple crosses) and 13,818 firms that did not
apply to the TWI program (blue triangles). Panel B divides applicant firms between 6,056 firms that
received the TWI training (green crosses) and 5,519 firms that did not receive the TWI training (red
triangles).




                                                  35
               Figure 2: Distribution of TWI Training Among Applicant Firms

                     .6



                     .5     0.48



                     .4

                                                                          0.32

                     .3



                     .2



                     .1                                                             0.07
                                          0.04      0.04        0.04


                     0
                            No            J-I       J-R         J-M       Two       All


                                        Panel A: Type of TWI training


                     .6



                     .5



                     .4
                                                                                 0.34


                                                 0.28              0.29
                     .3



                     .2



                     .1        0.08




                     0
                            1940-1942            1943              1944          1945



                                          Panel B: Year of training

Notes . This figure shows the distribution of the type of training received (Panel A) and year of training
(Panel B) for the 11,575 firms that applied to the TWI program. In Panel A, No=1 for firms that did
not get any TWI intervention; J-I = 1 for firms that received the Job-Instructions training; J-R = 1
for firms that received the Job-Relations training; J-M = 1 for firms that received the Job-Methods
training; Two = 1 for firms that received two trainings; All = 1 for firms that received all three
trainings.




                                                           36
                                                                                              Figure 3: Yearly Effects of TWI Training

           0.25                                                                                   0.25                                                                               0.25


           0.20                                                                                   0.20                                                                               0.20


           0.15                                                                                   0.15                                                                               0.15


           0.10                                                                                   0.10                                                                               0.10


           0.05                                                                                   0.05                                                                               0.05


           0.00                                                                                   0.00                                                                               0.00


           -0.05                                                                                 -0.05                                                                               -0.05
                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10              -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                Years after training                                                                   Years after training                                                               Years after training



                             Panel A: Log sales, DID                                                                     Panel B: TFP, DID                                                             Panel C: Log ROA, DID
           0.27                                                                                   0.61                                                                               0.12
                              TWI                                                                                    TWI                                                                                TWI
                              No TWI                                                                                 No TWI                                                                             No TWI
           0.22                                                                                   0.51                                                                               0.11

           0.17                                                                                   0.40                                                                               0.09
37




            0.11                                                                                  0.29                                                                               0.07

           0.06                                                                                   0.19                                                                               0.05

           0.01                                                                                   0.08                                                                               0.04

           -0.05                                                                                 -0.03                                                                               0.02

           -0.10                                                                                 -0.14                                                                               -0.00

           -0.15                                                                                 -0.24                                                                               -0.02
                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10              -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                Years after training                                                                   Years after training                                                               Years after training



               Panel D: Log sales, Single Difference                                                          Panel E: TFP, Single Difference                                            Panel F: Log ROA, Single Difference

     Notes . Panels A-C show difference-in-differences coefficients, while panels D-F show single-difference coefficients. These regressions also
     include fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the
     window and the firm application. The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is imputed using the distance from
     the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same subdistrict and application window. The dependent variables are log sales
     (Panels A and D), TFP computed with the Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) method (Panels B and D), log of return on assets (Panels
     C and F). The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one TWI training or no training at all. The vertical bars denote 95
     percent confidence intervals. The first vertical red line identifies the beginning of the TWI program. The second vertical red line identifies
     the end of World War II for most applicant firms. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
             Table 1: Summary Statistics for 11,575 Applicants to the TWI Program

                                                  All Applicant Firms                 Trained Firms   Nontrained Firms   Difference
                                        Mean       St. Dev.   Min           Max          Mean              Mean           p -value
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)             (7)

                                       Panel A: Data from annual financial statements in 1939
 Plants                                  6.08        1.90       3            14           6.09              6.07           0.588
 Employees                             1,038.32     378.53     543         11,283       1,036.99          1,039.77         0.686
 Foundation year                         1931        3.73     1912          1936        1930.96           1931.05          0.229
 Agriculture                             0.03        0.16        0            1           0.03              0.03           0.678
 Manufacturing                           0.86        0.34       0             1           0.86              0.86           0.746
 Transportation                          0.09        0.29       0             1           0.09              0.09           0.400
 Services                                0.02        0.14        0            1           0.02              0.02           0.624
 Sales                                  191.78      77.12     75.74       2,506.72       191.27            192.34          0.444
 Current assets                         18.40        8.02      5.31        170.72        18.47              18.33          0.341
 Total assets                            64.45       25.79    23.03        900.89         64.40             64.51          0.808
 TFP                                     3.87        0.49      2.68         5.02          3.87               3.86          0.316
 ROA                                     0.03        0.01      0.01         0.09          0.03              0.03           0.010
 Inventory                               15.37       6.24      5.21        181.02         15.36             15.38          0.854
 Injuries                                10.40       5.09      2.40        139.78         10.33             10.47          0.141
 Repairs                                 15.37       7.26      4.04        226.42         15.28             15.48          0.134
 Bonus payments                          8.27        3.97      1.97        118.42         8.22              8.32           0.176

                                       Panel B: Workforce data from replacement lists in 1941

 Share African-Americans                0.06         0.01     0.01          0.12          0.06             0.06            0.180
 Share women                            0.05         0.01     0.01          0.09          0.05             0.05            0.703
 Years of education                      8.51        1.36       5            12           8.50              8.52           0.457
 Age of workforce                       28.98        3.53      23            40           28.96            29.00           0.611

                               Panel C: WWII-related data from replacement lists and war contracts

 Share drafted employees (1942-1945)     0.23        0.03     0.13          0.33          0.23             0.23            0.180
 Switched 3-digit SIC (1940-1945)          1          0         1             1             1                1               --
 Switched 2-digit SIC (1940-1945)        0.57        0.50       0             1            0.57            0.57            0.556
 Switched 1-digit SIC (1940-1945)        0.37        0.48       0             1            0.37            0.38            0.257
 Number of contracts (1940-1945)        0.68         2.61       0            152          0.68             0.68            0.719
 Value of contracts (1940-1945)         25.11       293.01      0         27,145.94       23.87            26.48           0.507


Notes . Summary statistics for 11,575 firms that applied to the TWI program. Column 7 shows the p-value of
the difference between columns 5 and 6. Panel A includes variables from the firm's financial statements in 1939.
Plants is the total number of plants per firm; Employees is the number of employees per firm; Agriculture ,
Manufacturing , Transportation , and Services are indicators that equal one if a firm operates in agriculture,
manufacturing, transportation, or services, respectively; Sales, Current assets, Total assets, Inventory, Injuries,
Repairs, Bonus payments are expressed in 2020 million USD; TFP is the log of total factor productivity revenue,
estimated using the method proposed by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020); ROA is returns on assets,
measured as profits over total assets. Panel B includes variables from the wartime replacement schedules in
1941. Share African-Americans is the share of African-American workers; Share women is the share of female
workers; Year of education is the average years of formal education of the workforce; and Age of workforce is
the average age of the workers. Panel C shows data on the firm exposure to WWII from either the replacement
schedules and the war contracts. Share drafted employees is the share of employees drafted between 1942 and
1945; Switched x-digit SIC equals one if a firm's war products were in different x-digit 1939 SIC codes; Number
of contracts is the yearly number of war contracts between 1940 and 1945; and Value of contracts is the yearly
value of war contracts (in 2020 million USD).




                                                                     38
   Table 2: Correlation between Firm and County Characteristics and Training Received

                      TWI             J-I            J-R             J-M         J-I and J-R      J-R and J-M     J-I and J-M         All
                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)
                                Panel A: Regressions of training variables on firm characteristics in period -1
p -value of joint     0.32            0.76           0.69            0.55            0.92             0.14           0.76            0.65
significance
Observations         10,735          10,735         10,735          10,735          10,735           10,735         10,735          10,735
     Panel B: Regressions of training variables on firm characteristics, including number and value of government contracts, in period -1
p -value of joint     0.35            0.60           0.77            0.40            0.94             0.14           0.86            0.55
significance
Observations         10,727          10,727         10,727          10,727          10,727           10,727         10,727          10,727
                              Panel C: Regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1940
p -value of joint     0.48            0.25           0.36            0.21            0.45             0.47           0.86            0.51
significance
Observations         10,745          10,745         10,745          10,745          10,745           10,745         10,745          10,745
                              Panel D: Regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1930
p -value of joint     0.08            0.44           0.26            0.34            0.07             0.11           0.69            0.66
significance
Observations         10,859          10,859         10,859          10,859          10,859           10,859         10,859          10,859
                              Panel E: Regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1920
p -value of joint     0.45            0.32           0.32            0.35            0.15             0.46           0.68            0.50
significance
Observations         10,873          10,873         10,873          10,873          10,873           10,873         10,873          10,873


Notes . Panel A shows the p -value of the test of joint significance of the coefficients of fifteen firm
characteristics observed in period -1. The variables are: the logs of sales, value added, number
of employees, number of plants, foundation year, the value of inventory, capital, current assets,
investments, number of workers' strikes, monetary compensation for workers' injuries, performance-
based bonus payments, number of subsidiaries, as well as distance to the nearest railroad station
and distance to the nearest port. Panel B adds the inverse hyperbolic sine function of the number
and value of government contracts. The regressions also include fixed effects for county-sector pairs,
the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm
application. Panels C, D, and E show the p -value of the test of joint significance of the coefficients
of several county characteristics measured in 1940, 1930, and 1920, respectively. The county-level
variables are imputed to firms based on their location. These regressions include: log population,
log of the manufacturing value added, log number of manufacturing establishments, log number of
manufacturing employees, log average manufacturing wage, log total expenses in manufacturing, log
value of manufacturing production, farms per capita, unemployment share (available only in 1930 and
1940), population per square mile, share of male residents, share of black population, share of urban
population, share of illiterate population (available only in 1920 and 1930). County data are from
IPUMS NHGIS, www.nhgis.org. The regressions also include fixed effects for subdistrict-sector pairs,
the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm
application. Standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict-application window level.




                                                                     39
                                Table 3: Adoption of Managerial Practices
                     Log          Log         Log         Log        Log         Prob         Log          Log           Prob
                   repairs    maintenance   injuries     bonus      strikes    training    inventory   product lines   marketing
                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
J-I x Period 1    -0.010***    0.005***      -0.020**     -0.000      0.000       -0.001      -0.010       0.002          -0.001
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.011)      (0.003)        (0.001)
J-I x Period 5    -0.033***    0.014***     -0.043***     -0.000    0.006***   -0.051***       0.007       -0.002      -0.028***
                   (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.006)     (0.010)      (0.004)        (0.005)
J-I x Period 10   -0.057***    0.025***     -0.064***      0.000    0.030***   -0.062***       0.008       -0.004      -0.064***
                   (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.011)    (0.000)     (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.012)      (0.005)        (0.007)
J-R x Period 1      -0.000        0.000         0.004   0.414***      -0.000   0.043***       -0.005        0.002        0.001*
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.010)     (0.011)      (0.002)        (0.001)
J-R x Period 5      -0.000        0.000         0.011   0.431***   -0.268***   0.628***        0.008       -0.001      -0.023***
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.006)     (0.025)     (0.010)      (0.004)        (0.004)
J-R x Period 10     -0.000       -0.000        -0.000   0.459***   -0.268***    0.927***    0.033***       -0.000      -0.061***
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.009)    (0.001)     (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.010)      (0.005)        (0.006)
J-M x Period 1      0.000         0.000        -0.001      0.000      0.000        0.001   -0.015***     0.015***       0.043***
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.010)
J-M x Period 5      -0.000       0.000         0.001      -0.000    0.007***   -0.038***   -0.071***     0.538***       0.661***
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.009)    (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.009)        (0.024)
J-M x Period 10     -0.000       0.000         0.006      -0.000    0.013***   -0.062***   -0.100***     0.606***       0.930***
                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.009)    (0.000)     (0.002)     (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.009)        (0.008)
Observations       67,472       67,472       67,472      67,472     67,472      67,472      67,472        67,472        67,472
R2                 0.142        0.131        0.141        0.170     0.165       0.559       0.406         0.445         0.648


Notes: This table shows the coefficients of the interactions between the training variables and three
selected period dummies (out of 15 period dummies included). The omitted period is the year before the
TWI training (period -1). The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is imputed
using the distance from the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same subdistrict and
application window. All the dependent variables are logged with the exception of two dummy variables
that measure whether firms reported expenditures for on-the-job training (column 6; mean=0.06) or
for marketing activities (column 9; mean=0.05). The regressions also include the treatment variables
in isolation, as well as fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and
the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. The sample includes
applicant firms that either received only one TWI training or no training at all. Standard errors are
clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                             40
                       Table 4: Complementarity Effects on Managerial Practices
                          Log          Log         Log         Log         Log         Prob         Log          Log           Prob
                        repairs    maintenance   injuries     bonus       strikes    training    inventory   product lines   marketing
                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
J-I x Post             -0.038***    0.014***     -0.037***     -0.002     0.009***   -0.035***    0.009**        0.001       -0.026***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.003)
J-R x Post               -0.001       -0.001       -0.004    0.390***    -0.194***   0.543***    0.011***        0.004       -0.027***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.003)
J-M x Post               -0.004       -0.002        0.000       0.001     0.009***   -0.034***   -0.055***     0.334***       0.549***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.008)
J-I not alone x Post     0.006*     -0.013***       0.007      0.002      0.107***    0.015***    -0.011**        0.005       0.014***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.004)
J-R not alone x Post      0.000     -0.007***       0.004    -0.012***   -0.101***    0.026***      -0.006       -0.006       0.011***
                        (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.009)     (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.004)
J-M not alone x Post      0.004     0.006***       -0.004     -0.005*     0.107***    0.029***      -0.007     0.066***       0.027***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.009)
Observations           134,288       134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288       134,288        134,288
R2                      0.101         0.098       0.101       0.210       0.177       0.615       0.395         0.552          0.627


Notes: This table shows the coefficients of the interactions between the training variables and a post-
TWI dummy. All the dependent variables are logged with the exception of two dummy variables that
measure whether firms reported expenditures for on-the-job training (column 6; mean=0.18) or for
marketing activities (column 9; mean=0.17). J-x is one for all firms that received the J-x training,
while J-x not alone is equal to one for firms that received the J-x module with another type of TWI
training. The regressions also include the training variables in isolation, as well as fixed effects for
county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the
opening of the window and the firm application. The sample includes all applicant firms. Standard
errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                                41
                                 Table 5: Effects on Upstream and Downstream Firms
                             Log       TFP         Log              Log            Log           Log             Log        Prob        Log          Log           Prob
                             sales               repairs        maintenance      injuries       bonus           strikes   training   inventory   product lines   marketing
                              (1)       (2)        (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)              (7)        (8)        (9)          (10)          (11)
                                                                       Panel A: Baseline results
J-I x Post                    0.002   0.043***    0.029            -0.021         0.037         0.032         0.029         -0.027    -0.036**       -0.004        0.019
                            (0.006)    (0.013)   (0.027)          (0.034)        (0.028)       (0.025)       (0.021)       (0.025)     (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.023)
J-R x Post                   -0.001   0.060***    0.020            -0.048         -0.007        0.015       -0.113***     0.426***      0.007        -0.002        -0.027
                            (0.006)    (0.011)   (0.026)          (0.038)        (0.025)       (0.024)       (0.022)       (0.037)     (0.011)      (0.014)       (0.024)
J-M x Post                   -0.000   0.071***    0.020             0.045          0.009        -0.007        0.021       -0.053**   -0.269***      0.020*       0.321***
                            (0.006)    (0.018)   (0.022)          (0.039)        (0.023)       (0.025)       (0.018)       (0.024)     (0.052)      (0.011)       (0.042)
Observations                10,594     10,594    10,594            10,594        10,594        10,594           10,594     10,594     10,594        10,594        10,594
R2                          0.855      0.426     0.232              0.221        0.221         0.278            0.208       0.314      0.301        0.186         0.278

                                                           Panel B: Differentiating between old and new firms
J-I x Post                   -0.004     0.024     -0.021            0.021         -0.015        0.060         0.027         -0.006   -0.048***      -0.005         0.033
                            (0.005)    (0.018)   (0.036)          (0.055)        (0.039)       (0.038)       (0.031)       (0.037)     (0.010)     (0.018)        (0.037)
J-R x Post                    0.001   0.057***    0.018            -0.078         -0.012        0.019       -0.122***     0.461***      0.003       -0.000         0.029
                            (0.004)    (0.017)   (0.041)          (0.066)        (0.044)       (0.036)       (0.029)       (0.059)     (0.012)     (0.020)        (0.039)
J-M x Post                   -0.001   0.083***     0.016            0.020          0.004        -0.010        0.008         -0.042   -0.418***     0.039**       0.332***
                            (0.004)    (0.029)   (0.037)          (0.065)        (0.039)       (0.032)       (0.031)       (0.032)     (0.078)     (0.018)        (0.050)
J-I x Post x Pre-TWI firm     0.005     0.035      0.083           -0.079          0.087        -0.052        0.002         -0.035      0.017        0.001         -0.032
                            (0.007)    (0.024)   (0.051)          (0.073)        (0.053)       (0.048)       (0.042)       (0.046)     (0.022)     (0.025)        (0.039)
J-R x Post x Pre-TWI firm    -0.002      0.006     0.003            0.051          0.007        -0.006        0.016         -0.056      0.006       -0.003         -0.088
                            (0.007)    (0.021)   (0.050)          (0.079)        (0.050)       (0.050)       (0.043)       (0.073)     (0.017)     (0.028)        (0.059)
J-M x Post x Pre-TWI firm     0.000     -0.021    0.005             0.041          0.007        0.006         0.020         -0.021    0.243***      -0.030         -0.020
                            (0.007)    (0.034)   (0.046)          (0.084)        (0.053)       (0.044)       (0.040)       (0.049)     (0.091)     (0.023)        (0.062)
Observations                10,594     10,594    10,594            10,594        10,594        10,594           10,594     10,594     10,594        10,594        10,594
R2                          0.907      0.433     0.235              0.224        0.224         0.280            0.210       0.317      0.312        0.187         0.295


Notes . The sample used for this table includes 1,816 upstream and downstream firms linked to 1,572
firms that applied to the TWI program. Out of 1,816 upstream and downstream firms, 1,102 firms
are in the supply chain of applicant firms that received at most one training. We use these 1,102
firms to obtain the results included in this table. The training variables are: J-I = 1 for firms linked
to applicants that received the Job-Instructions training; J-R = 1 for firms linked to applicants that
received the Job-Relations training; J-M = 1 for firms linked to applicants that received the Job-
Methods training. The distance from the TWI intervention is imputed using the distance from the
TWI program of the applicant firm with which the upstream/downstream firm has a contractual
relationship. If an upstream/downstream firm joins the supply chain of an applicant firm after the
latter received the TWI program, period 0 identifies the year of entry in the supply chain. Pre-TWI
firm is equal to 1 for firms that were in the supply chain of applicants before the start of the TWI
program. In panel A, the regressions also include the training variables by themselves, the Pre-TWI
firm dummy by itself, a dummy for firms that are upstream with respect to the trained firm, as well
as fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window of the applicant firm,
and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. Panel B shows
the results of triple-difference specifications. These regressions also include the interaction between
the training variable and the Pre-TWI firm dummy, the interaction between the period fixed effects
and the Pre-TWI firm dummy, the training variables by themselves, the Pre-TWI firm dummy by
itself, a dummy for firms that are upstream with respect to the trained firm, as well as fixed effects
for county-sector-period combinations, the application window of the applicant firm, and the number
of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. Standard errors are clustered at
the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                 42
                                      Online Appendix
A     Additional Figures and Tables

                       Figure A1: Instruction Cards for Each J-Module




           Panel A: Job Instruction                             Panel B: Job Relations




                                       Panel C: Job Methods
Notes. The TWI training was designed to be simple and immediately usable. To emphasize these
features, the TWI administration prepared instruction cards for each J-Module that trained supervisors
could keep in their pockets while they were working. These instruction cards reported the main 4 steps
(and their sub-steps) that characterized each module. It is important to note that these 4 "theoretical"
steps did not constitute the entirety of the TWI trainings. A large portion of the class time was
dedicated to in-class student presentations on how to apply TWI concepts in their firms.




                                                  A1
                                                                                                Figure A2: Pre-TWI Trends

           0.10                                                                         0.10                                                                        0.10

           0.07                                                                         0.07                                                                        0.07

           0.05                                                                         0.05                                                                        0.05

           0.03                                                                         0.03                                                                        0.03

           0.00                                                                         0.00                                                                        0.00

           -0.03                                                                        -0.03                                                                       -0.03

           -0.05                                                                        -0.05                                                                       -0.05

           -0.07                                                                        -0.07                                                                       -0.07

           -0.10                                                                        -0.10                                                                       -0.10
                   -5             -4             -3             -2                 -1           -5            -4             -3             -2                 -1           -5             -4             -3             -2                 -1
                                         Years after training                                                        Years after training                                                         Years after training



                           Panel A: Sales, TWI                                                          Panel B: TFP, TWI                                                           Panel C: ROA, TWI
           0.10                                                                         0.10                                                                        0.10
                           J-I                  J-R                  J-M                               J-I                  J-R                  J-M                                J-I                  J-R                  J-M
                           J-I and J-R          J-R and J-M          J-I and J-M                       J-I and J-R          J-R and J-M          J-I and J-M                        J-I and J-R          J-R and J-M          J-I and J-M
           0.07                                                                         0.07                                                                        0.07
                           All                                                                         All                                                                          All

           0.05                                                                         0.05                                                                        0.05
A2




           0.03                                                                         0.03                                                                        0.03

           0.00                                                                         0.00                                                                        0.00

           -0.03                                                                        -0.03                                                                       -0.03

           -0.05                                                                        -0.05                                                                       -0.05

           -0.07                                                                        -0.07                                                                       -0.07

           -0.10                                                                        -0.10                                                                       -0.10
                   -5             -4             -3             -2                 -1           -5            -4             -3             -2                 -1           -5             -4             -3             -2                 -1
                                         Years after training                                                        Years after training                                                         Years after training



                        Panel D: Sales, all trainings                                                Panel E: TFP, all trainings                                                 Panel F: ROA, all trainings

     Notes . Coefficients of the interactions between pre-TWI period dummies and either a single TWI dummy variable (Panels A, B, and C)
     or dummies with different combinations of training (Panels, D, E, and F). The omitted period is -1, one year before the TWI training.
     The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontrained firms is imputed using the distance from the TWI intervention of the first
     participating firm in the same subdistrict and application window. The dependent variables are: logged annual sales (Panels A and D), TFP
     computed with the Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) method (Panels B and E), logged return on assets (ROA), computed as the ratio
     between profits and fixed gross assets (Panels C and F). The sample used for these graphs includes all 11,575 firms that applied to the
     TWI program. The vertical bars denote 95 percent confidence intervals. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and
     application windows.
                                                                                        Figure A3: Influence of Higher Attrition Among Nontrained Applicants

                                            1                                                                                          0.29                                                                                                                              0.29
                                                                                                                                                              Balanced                                                                                                                          Balanced
                                                                                                                                                              Unbalanced                                                                                                                        Unbalanced
                                                                                                                                       0.25                                                                                                                              0.25
           Estimated Survival Probability




                                            .9                                                                                         0.21                                                                                                                              0.21

                                                                                                                                       0.17                                                                                                                              0.17

                                            .8                                                                                         0.13                                                                                                                              0.13

                                                                                                                                       0.09                                                                                                                              0.09

                                            .7                                                                                         0.05                                                                                                                              0.05

                                                                                                                                       0.01                                                                                                                              0.01
                                                         TWI Training
                                                         No training
                                            .6                                                                                        -0.03                                                                                                                             -0.03
                                                 0   1      2       3       4      5      6      7       8        9    10                     -5    -4       -3       -2       -1       0    1    2     3     4  5        6        7        8        9   10                     -5    -4       -3       -2       -1       0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                                        Years since TWI Training                                                                                            Years after training                                                                                                              Years after training



            Panel A: Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve                                                                                         Panel B: Sales, Unbalanced sample                                                                                                  Panel C: TFP, Unbalanced sample
                                                                                       0.23                                                                                                             0.28
                                                                                                         Baseline                                                                                                              Baseline
                                                                                                         No top performers                                                                                                     No top performers
                                                                                       0.20                                                                                                             0.24
                                                                                                         No bottom performers                                                                                                  No bottom performers

                                                                                       0.17                                                                                                             0.20
A3




                                                                                       0.13                                                                                                             0.16

                                                                                       0.10                                                                                                             0.12

                                                                                       0.07                                                                                                             0.08

                                                                                       0.03                                                                                                             0.04

                                                                                       0.00                                                                                                             0.00

                                                                                      -0.03                                                                                                            -0.04
                                                                                              -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5        6        7        8        9   10                     -5    -4       -3       -2       -1       0    1    2     3     4  5        6        7        8        9   10
                                                                                                                           Years after training                                                                                                              Years after training



                                                                                    Panel D: Sales, Treatment-effect bounds                                                                          Panel E: TFP, Treatment-effect bounds
     Notes . Panel A shows the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for applicants that received one training and for applicants that did not receive any
     training. Panels B and C show the treatment effects on log sales (Panel B) and log TFP (Panel C) using an unbalanced sample, allowing
     for firm exit and entry. Panels D and E bound the treatment effects by estimating extreme cases of attrition. Specifically, the regressions
     on exit indicate that trained applicants were 25-percentage-points less likely to exit the sample, compared with nontrained applicants. In
     Panels D and E, we assume that this difference in attrition affected either all the top performers or all the bottom performers among the
     trained applicants. In "No top performers," we remove all trained applicants in the top quartile of the distribution of sales (Panel D) or
     TFP (Panel E) in period -1. In "No bottom performers," we remove all trained applicants in the bottom quartile of the distribution of sales
     (Panel D) or TFP (Panel E) in period -1.
                            Figure A4: Comparison with Effect Sizes in the Literature

          0.35                                                                                                          0.35
                                           Higuchi et al. (2016)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Giorcelli (2019)
          0.30                                                                                                          0.30

          0.25                                                                                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                                                               Giorcelli (2019)
                                                                                                    Giorcelli (2019)
          0.20                                                                                                          0.20

                                                                                                                                               Bloom et al. (2013)
          0.15                                                                                                          0.15

                                     Bloom et al. (2013)            Giorcelli (2019)
          0.10                                                                                                          0.10

          0.05                                                                                                          0.05

          0.00                                                                                                          0.00

         -0.05                                                                                                          -0.05
                 -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    0     1    2     3     4  5          6       7      8       9     10                -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0    1    2     3     4  5       6     7      8     9     10
                                                 Years after training                                                                                          Years after training



                                      Panel A: Sales                                                                                                 Panel B: TFP
          0.45                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                   Bruhn et al. (2018)
          0.40
                                                                                                                        0.00
          0.35

          0.30
                                                                                                                        -0.05
          0.25
                                                                                             Giorcelli (2019)
          0.20                                                                                                          -0.10

          0.15
                                                                                                                        -0.15
          0.10

          0.05                                                               Giorcelli (2019)
                                                                                                                        -0.20
          0.00
                                                                                                                                                         Bloom et al. (2013)
         -0.05                                                                                                          -0.25
                 -5   -4   -3   -2    -1    0     1    2     3     4  5          6       7      8       9     10                -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0    1    2     3     4  5       6     7      8     9     10
                                                 Years after training                                                                                          Years after training



                                Panel C: Employees                                                                                             Panel D: Inventory

Notes . Bloom et al. (2013a) shows results on output, instead of sales. All variables are logged.




                                                                                                                   A4
                                                                       Figure A5: Robustness Checks of Main Results on Sales and TFP

            0.27                                                                                 0.22                                                                                  0.24
                              Firm FE                                                                               Sub-App                                                                               Baseline
                              County-Sector FE                                                                      Sub                                                                                   Alt. timing
            0.23                                                                                 0.19                                                                                  0.20
                              District-Sector FE                                                                    County
                                                                                                                    Firm
            0.19                                                                                 0.16                                                                                  0.17

            0.14                                                                                 0.13                                                                                  0.14

            0.10                                                                                 0.10                                                                                  0.10

            0.05                                                                                 0.07                                                                                  0.07

            0.01                                                                                 0.04                                                                                  0.04

           -0.04                                                                                 0.00                                                                                  0.00

           -0.08                                                                                 -0.03                                                                                 -0.03
                   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3      -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                   Years after training                                                                  Years after training                                                               Years after training



          Panel A: Sales, Alternative fixed effects                                              Panel B: Sales, Alternative clustering                                                   Panel C: Sales, Alternative timing
            0.33                                                                                 0.27                                                                                  0.63
                              Firm FE                                                                               Sub-App                                                                               Baseline
                              County-Sector FE                                                                      Sub                                                                                   Alt. timing
            0.28                                                                                 0.23                                                                                  0.54
                              District-Sector FE                                                                    County
                                                                                                                    Firm
            0.22                                                                                 0.19                                                                                  0.46
A5




            0.17                                                                                 0.15                                                                                  0.37

            0.12                                                                                 0.12                                                                                  0.29

            0.06                                                                                 0.08                                                                                  0.20

            0.01                                                                                 0.04                                                                                  0.12

           -0.04                                                                                 0.01                                                                                  0.03

           -0.09                                                                                 -0.03                                                                                 -0.05
                   -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3      -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                   Years after training                                                                  Years after training                                                               Years after training



           Panel D: TFP, Alternative fixed effects                                                Panel E: TFP, Alternative clustering                                                     Panel F: TFP, Alternative timing
     Notes . The dependent variable is the log of yearly sales revenues in panels A to C and TFP, estimated using the Gandhi, Navarro, and
     Rivers (2020) method, in panels D to F. Panels A and D show treatment effects including firm fixed effects or district-sector-time fixed
     effects, instead of county-sector-time fixed effects. Panels B and E show the effect of clustering the standard errors at the subdistrict, county,
     or firm level, instead of at the level of subdistricts and application windows. In panels C and F, the distance from the TWI intervention
     for the nontrained firms is imputed using the distance from the TWI intervention of the last, instead of the first, trained firm in the same
     subdistrict and application window.
                                                                         Figure A6: Effects of Different J-Modules on Firm Performance

           0.45                                                                               0.45                                                                                0.45
                              J-I                                                                                 J-I                                                                                J-I
           0.40               J-R                                                             0.40                J-R                                                             0.40               J-R
                              J-M                                                                                 J-M                                                                                J-M
           0.35                                                                               0.35                                                                                0.35

           0.30                                                                               0.30                                                                                0.30

           0.25                                                                               0.25                                                                                0.25

           0.20                                                                               0.20                                                                                0.20

           0.15                                                                               0.15                                                                                0.15

           0.10                                                                               0.10                                                                                0.10

           0.05                                                                               0.05                                                                                0.05

           0.00                                                                               0.00                                                                                0.00

           -0.05                                                                              -0.05                                                                               -0.05

           -0.10                                                                              -0.10                                                                               -0.10
                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                Years after training                                                                Years after training                                                               Years after training



                                  Panel A: Sales, DID                                                                 Panel B: TFP, DID                                                             Panel C: Log ROA, DID
           0.80                                                                               0.80                                                                                0.80
                              J-I                                                                                 J-I                                                                                J-I
           0.70               J-R                                                             0.70                J-R                                                             0.70               J-R
                              J-M                                                                                 J-M                                                                                J-M
           0.60                                                                               0.60                                                                                0.60
                              No TWI                                                                              No TWI                                                                             No TWI
           0.50                                                                               0.50                                                                                0.50
A6




           0.40                                                                               0.40                                                                                0.40

           0.30                                                                               0.30                                                                                0.30

           0.20                                                                               0.20                                                                                0.20

           0.10                                                                               0.10                                                                                0.10

           0.00                                                                               0.00                                                                                0.00

           -0.10                                                                              -0.10                                                                               -0.10

           -0.20                                                                              -0.20                                                                               -0.20

           -0.30                                                                              -0.30                                                                               -0.30
                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                Years after training                                                                Years after training                                                               Years after training



                    Panel D: Sales, Single Difference                                                      Panel E: TFP, Single Difference                                            Panel F: Log ROA, Single Difference

     Notes . Panels A-C show difference-in-differences coefficients, while panels D-F show single-difference coefficients. These regressions also
     include fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the
     window and the firm application. The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is imputed using the distance from
     the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same subdistrict and application window. The dependent variables are log sales
     (Panels A and D), TFP computed with the Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) method (Panels B and D), log of return on assets (Panels
     C and F). The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one TWI training or no training at all. The vertical bars denote 95
     percent confidence intervals. The first vertical red line identifies the beginning of the TWI program. The second vertical red line identifies
     the end of World War II for most applicant firms. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
                                                                                                      Figure A7: Horizontal Spillovers

            0.0016                                                                                    0.0046                                                                                     0.0098
                                Treated, same sector                                                                       Treated, same sector                                                                       Treated, same sector
                                Treated, diff. sector                                                                      Treated, diff. sector                                                                      Treated, diff. sector
            0.0012                                                                                    0.0034                                                                                     0.0073
                                Not treated, same sector                                                                   Not treated, same sector                                                                   Not treated, same sector
                                Not treated, diff. sector                                                                  Not treated, diff. sector                                                                  Not treated, diff. sector
            0.0008                                                                                    0.0023                                                                                     0.0048

            0.0003                                                                                    0.0011                                                                                     0.0024

           -0.0001                                                                                    -0.0001                                                                                    -0.0001

           -0.0005                                                                                    -0.0013                                                                                    -0.0026

           -0.0010                                                                                    -0.0025                                                                                    -0.0050

           -0.0014                                                                                    -0.0037                                                                                    -0.0075

           -0.0018                                                                                    -0.0048                                                                                    -0.0100
                     -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                        Years after training                                                                       Years after training                                                                       Years after training



            Panel A: Sales, # nearby applicants                                                         Panel B: TFP, # nearby applicants                                                         Panel C: ROA, # nearby applicants
            0.0006                                                                                    0.0018                                                                                     0.0029
                                Treated, same sector                                                                       Treated, same sector                                                                       Treated, same sector
                                Treated, diff. sector                                                                      Treated, diff. sector                                                                      Treated, diff. sector
            0.0004                                                                                    0.0013                                                                                     0.0022
                                Not treated, same sector                                                                   Not treated, same sector                                                                   Not treated, same sector
                                Not treated, diff. sector                                                                  Not treated, diff. sector                                                                  Not treated, diff. sector
            0.0003                                                                                    0.0009                                                                                     0.0015
A7




            0.0001                                                                                    0.0005                                                                                     0.0007

           -0.0000                                                                                    0.0000                                                                                     0.0000

           -0.0002                                                                                    -0.0004                                                                                    -0.0007

           -0.0003                                                                                    -0.0008                                                                                    -0.0014

           -0.0005                                                                                    -0.0013                                                                                    -0.0021

           -0.0006                                                                                    -0.0017                                                                                    -0.0029
                     -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10             -5   -4   -3   -2    -1     0       1    2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                        Years after training                                                                       Years after training                                                                       Years after training



           Panel D: Sales, distance to applicants                                                     Panel E: TFP, distance to applicants                                                       Panel F: ROA, distance to applicants

     Notes . The sample used for these graphs includes 11,536 war contractors that did not apply to the TWI program and for which we found
     financial statements (out of 13,818 total nonapplicants). In panels A-C, the coefficients shown are the interactions between the log number
     of applicants in the area and period dummies. The number of applicants is divided between trained and nontrained firms and between firms
     in the same or different sector (agriculture, manufacturing, transportation, or services). Panels D-F use the log of the average distance from
     applicant firms, instead of the log number of firms. In order to compute the number of nearby applicant firms and their average distance to
     nonapplicant firms, we divided the 364 subdistricts into 52 groups of 7 adjacent subdistricts. Period 0 coincides with the modal treatment
     year within each of the 52 groups of subdistricts. All regressions also include firm fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the
     subdistrict level.
                                                                                      Figure A8: Effects of TWI Training on Matched Sample
                   0.35                                                                                    0.35                                                                                     0.35
                                     Baseline                                                                                 Baseline                                                                                 Baseline
                                     Matched                                                                                  Matched                                                                                  Matched
                   0.30                                                                                    0.30                                                                                     0.30

                   0.25                                                                                    0.25                                                                                     0.25

                   0.20                                                                                    0.20                                                                                     0.20

                   0.15                                                                                    0.15                                                                                     0.15

                   0.10                                                                                    0.10                                                                                     0.10

                   0.05                                                                                    0.05                                                                                     0.05

                   0.00                                                                                    0.00                                                                                     0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                    -0.05                                                                                    -0.05

                  -0.10                                                                                    -0.10                                                                                    -0.10
                          -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                             Years after training                                                                     Years after training                                                                     Years after training



                                                Panel A: Sales                                                                           Panel B: TFP                                                                             Panel C: ROA
     Notes . These graphs replicate the estimation shown in Figure 3 on a smaller sample of applicant firms matched to nonapplicants based on their
     characteristics in 1939. The matching was based on propensity scores, using a nearest-neighbor algorithm without replacement. The variables used for
     the matching were the number of plants and employees in 1939, TFP in 1939, distance from the nearest port and railroad station, sector, and fixed effects
     for the 22 TWI districts. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
A8




                                                                           Figure A9: Change in Status Quo, Switching to War Production
                   0.30              Not switched
                                                                                                           0.30               Not switched
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.30               Not switched

                                     Switched                                                                                 Switched                                                                                 Switched

                   0.25                                                                                    0.25                                                                                     0.25


                   0.20                                                                                    0.20                                                                                     0.20


                   0.15                                                                                    0.15                                                                                     0.15


                   0.10                                                                                    0.10                                                                                     0.10


                   0.05                                                                                    0.05                                                                                     0.05


                   0.00                                                                                    0.00                                                                                     0.00


                  -0.05                                                                                    -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                          -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3    -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                             Years after training                                                                     Years after training                                                                     Years after training



                                                Panel A: Sales                                                                           Panel B: TFP                                                                             Panel C: ROA
     Notes . These graphs show the interactions between the training variables and the period dummies distinguishing between firms that did or did not switch
     production during World War II. Specifically, Switched 2-digit SIC equals one if a firm's war products were in different 2-digit 1939 SIC codes. The
     standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
                                                                                                 Figure A10: Loss of Human Capital

            0.30              Tertile 1
                                                                                                  0.30               Tertile 1
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.30               Tertile 1

                              Tertile 2                                                                              Tertile 2                                                                              Tertile 2
            0.25              Tertile 3
                                                                                                  0.25               Tertile 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25               Tertile 3


            0.20                                                                                  0.20                                                                                   0.20

            0.15                                                                                  0.15                                                                                   0.15

            0.10                                                                                  0.10                                                                                   0.10

            0.05                                                                                  0.05                                                                                   0.05

            0.00                                                                                  0.00                                                                                   0.00

           -0.05                                                                                  -0.05                                                                                  -0.05

           -0.10                                                                                  -0.10                                                                                  -0.10
                   -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10            -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10            -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                   Years after training                                                                   Years after training                                                                   Years after training



          Panel A: Sales, share of drafted workers                                               Panel B: TFP, share of drafted workers                                                 Panel C: ROA, share of drafted workers
            0.30              Tertile 1
                                                                                                  0.30               Tertile 1
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.30               Tertile 1

                              Tertile 2                                                                              Tertile 2                                                                              Tertile 2
            0.25              Tertile 3
                                                                                                  0.25               Tertile 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25               Tertile 3


            0.20                                                                                  0.20                                                                                   0.20
A9




            0.15                                                                                  0.15                                                                                   0.15

            0.10                                                                                  0.10                                                                                   0.10

            0.05                                                                                  0.05                                                                                   0.05

            0.00                                                                                  0.00                                                                                   0.00

           -0.05                                                                                  -0.05                                                                                  -0.05

           -0.10                                                                                  -0.10                                                                                  -0.10
                   -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10            -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10            -5   -4   -3     -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                   Years after training                                                                   Years after training                                                                   Years after training



         Panel D: Sales, share of managers leaving                                               Panel E: TFP, share of managers leaving                                                Panel F: ROA, share of managers leaving

     Notes . Panels A to C show the treatment effects estimated separately by tertiles of the share of employees drafted during World War II.
     Panels D to F show the treatment effects estimated separately by tertiles of the share of top managers leaving the firm by 1955. To compute
     this variable, we compare the list of top executives in 1955 (or last year in which a firm is observed) to the list of top executives in period
     0, the year of the TWI training. All regressions include the training variable in isolation, as well as fixed effects for county-sector-period
     combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. The standard
     errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
                                                                      Figure A11: Effects of TWI Training on War Contracts
                    0.15                                                          2.65                                                      0.27

                    0.12                                                          2.06                                                      0.21

                    0.08                                                          1.48                                                      0.15

                    0.05                                                          0.89                                                      0.09

                    0.02                                                          0.30                                                      0.03

                    -0.02                                                        -0.29                                                      -0.02

                    -0.05                                                        -0.87                                                      -0.08

                    -0.08                                                        -1.46                                                      -0.14

                    -0.12                                                        -2.05                                                      -0.20
                            -5   -4   -3     -2           -1      0      1   2           -5    -4   -3     -2           -1      0   1   2           -5     -4   -3     -2           -1      0   1   2
                                           Years after training                                          Years after training                                        Years after training



                                 Panel A: Has contracts                                       Panel B: Value contracts                                   Panel C: Number contracts
      Notes . These graphs show the effects of TWI training on variables that describe the relationship between applicant firms and the federal government.
      Has contracts is a dummy equal to one for firms with at least one new contract in a given year. Number contracts and Value contracts are the inverse
      hyperbolic sine function (due to many zeros) of the number and value of war contracts granted to each firm per year. These variables come from war
      contracts data and are therefore available only between 1940 and 1945. The number of firms with nonmissing values are 3,974 in period -5, 7,332 in
      period -4, 10,607 in period -3, 11,545 in period -2, 11,567 in period -1, 11,575 in period 0, 7,601 in period 1, and 4,243 in period 2. All regressions also
A10




      include fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the
      firm application. Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
                                                                                                      Figure A12: Other Heterogeneous Effects

            0.31               Agriculture
                                                                                                          0.32              J-I, North East
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.38              1940-1942

                               Manufacturing                                                                                J-I, Midwest                                                                             1943
            0.26               Transportation
                                                                                                          0.27              J-I, South
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.33              1944

                               Services                                                                                     J-I, West                                                                                1945
            0.22                                                                                          0.22                                                                                     0.28

            0.18                                                                                          0.17                                                                                     0.23

            0.13                                                                                          0.12                                                                                     0.17

            0.09                                                                                          0.08                                                                                     0.12

            0.04                                                                                          0.03                                                                                     0.07

            -0.00                                                                                        -0.02                                                                                     0.02

            -0.05                                                                                        -0.07                                                                                    -0.03
                    -5   -4   -3     -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10              -5   -4   -3     -2       -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3      -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                        Years after training                                                                        Years after training                                                                  Years after training



                                       Panel A: Sectors                                                                            Panel B: Regions                                                             Panel C: Treatment years
            0.29               Quartile 1
                                                                                                          0.31              Quartile 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.35              Tertile 1

                               Quartile 2                                                                                   Quartile 2                                                                               Tertile 2
            0.25               Quartile 3
                                                                                                          0.26              Quartile 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.30              Tertile 3

                               Quartile 4                                                                                   Quartile 4
            0.20                                                                                          0.22                                                                                     0.25
A11




            0.16                                                                                          0.17                                                                                     0.20

            0.12                                                                                          0.13                                                                                     0.15

            0.08                                                                                          0.08                                                                                     0.10

            0.03                                                                                          0.04                                                                                     0.05

            -0.01                                                                                        -0.00                                                                                     0.00

            -0.05                                                                                        -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                    -5   -4   -3     -2        -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10              -5   -4   -3     -2       -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10           -5   -4   -3      -2   -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                        Years after training                                                                        Years after training                                                                  Years after training



                                   Panel D: Firm size                                                                 Panel E: Initial TFP level                                                  Panel F: Instructors from private sector

      Notes . In all panels, the dependent variable is the log of TFP, estimated using the Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) method. Panel
      A shows the treatment effects estimated separately by sector. Panel B shows the treatment effects estimated separately by U.S. Census
      Bureau regions. Panel C shows the treatment effects estimated separately by training year. Panel D shows the treatment effects estimated
      separately by quartiles of workforce size in period -1. Panel E shows the treatment effects by quartiles of TFP in period -1. Panel F shows
      the treatment effects by tertiles of the distribution of TWI instructors from the private sector. All regressions also include fixed effects
      for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm
      application. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
                                 Table A1: List of 22 TWI Districts

 District Name                         States                                        Main Office Location
 1) Upper New England                  Maine; Massachusetts; Vermont; New            Boston
                                       Hampshire
 2) Lower New England                  Connecticut; Rhode Island                     New Haven
 3) Upstate New York                   New York state (excluding Metropolitan        New York
                                       New York)
 4)   Metropolitan New York            Metropolitan New York                         New York
 5)   New Jersey                       New Jersey                                    Newark
 6)   Eastern Pennsylvania; Delaware   Eastern Pennsylvania; Delaware                Philadelphia
 7)   Maryland                         Maryland                                      Baltimore
 8)   Atlantic Central                 Virginia; North Carolina; South Carolina      Raleigh
 9)   South-Eastern States             Georgia; Florida; Alabama; Mississippi;       Atlanta
                                       Central and Eastern Tennessee
 10) Ohio Valley                       Southern Ohio; Southern West Virginia,        Cincinnati
                                       Kentucky
 11) Western Pennsylvania              Western Pennsylvania (except Erie             Pittsburgh
                                       County); Northern West Virginia
 12) Northern Ohio                     Northern Ohio (expect Lucas County);          Cleveland
                                       Erie County (PA)
 13) Michigan                          Michigan; Lucas County (OH)                   Detroit
 14) Indiana                           Indiana (except Lake and Porter Counties)     Indianapolis
 15) Illinois                          Illinois (except three counties adjacent to   Chicago
                                       St. Louis, MO); South Wisconsin; Lake
                                       and Porter Counties (IN)
 16) North-Central States              North Wisconsin; Minnesota; North             Minneapolis
                                       Dakota; South Dakota; Iowa; Nebraska
 17) South-Central States              Missouri; Kansas; Oklahoma; Arkansas;         St. Louis
                                       Western Tennessee; Madison, St. Clair,
                                       Monroe Counties (IL)
 18)   Gulf District                   Texas; Louisiana                              Houston
 19)   Mountain District               Colorado; Wyoming                             Denver
 20)   Pacific Southwest               Southern California; Arizona; New Mexico      Los Angeles
 21)   Pacific Central                 Northern California; Nevada; Utah             San Francisco
 22)   Pacific Northwest               Washington; Oregon; Idaho; Montana            Seattle


Notes. List of the 22 TWI districts with their headquarters location.




                                                   A12
                       Table A2: Balancing Tests for Applicant Firms By Treatment Year
                               TWI                 J-I              J-R               J-M            J-I and J-R      J-R and J-M        J-I and J-M        All
                                (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)                (7)           (8)

                             Panel A: p-value of joint significance from regressions of training variables on firm characteristics in period -1

Training   in   1940-1942       0.46              0.93              0.45              0.49               0.40              0.77              0.38          0.70
Training   in   1943            0.59              0.64              0.53              0.65               0.66              0.40              0.78          0.73
Training   in   1944            0.15              0.57              0.32              0.17               0.97              0.21              0.97          0.47
Training   in   1945            0.40              0.91              0.82              0.90               0.80              0.49              0.79          0.46

Panel B: p-value of joint significance from regressions of training variables on firm characteristics, including number and value of government contracts, in period -1

Training   in   1940-1942       0.60              0.98              0.59              0.54               0.30              0.84              0.47          0.67
Training   in   1943            0.70              0.46              0.59              0.70               0.47              0.49              0.66          0.81
Training   in   1944            0.19              0.66              0.41              0.23               0.98              0.22              0.96          0.52
Training   in   1945            0.41              0.75              0.88              0.87               0.82              0.59              0.85          0.11

                            Panel C: p-value of joint significance from regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1940

Training   in   1940-1942       0.99              0.62              0.05              0.61               0.79              0.09              0.13          0.82
Training   in   1943            0.06              0.51              0.38              0.07               0.55              0.67              0.17          0.12
Training   in   1944            0.64              0.34              0.55              0.13               0.80              0.44              0.63          0.84
Training   in   1945            0.04              0.95              0.84              0.52               0.84              0.22              0.14          0.18

                            Panel D: p-value of joint significance from regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1930

Training   in   1940-1942       0.72              0.70              0.04              0.79               0.87              0.27              0.05          0.67
Training   in   1943            0.01              0.64              0.18              0.09               0.39              0.38              0.55          0.06
Training   in   1944            0.28              0.32              0.42              0.06               0.45              0.73              0.86          0.84
Training   in   1945            0.07              0.64              0.64              0.91               0.41              0.07              0.06          0.79

                            Panel E: p-value of joint significance from regressions of training variables on county characteristics in year 1920

Training   in   1940-1942       0.91              0.67              0.04              0.74               0.39              0.21              0.46          0.71
Training   in   1943            0.31              0.50              0.21              0.02               0.49              0.39              0.39          0.14
Training   in   1944            0.55              0.03              0.77              0.35               0.80              0.95              0.39          0.82
Training   in   1945            0.02              0.70              0.60              0.70               0.36              0.34              0.14          0.27


Notes . Panel A shows the p -value of the test of joint significance of the coefficients of fifteen firm
characteristics observed in period -1, distinguishing by training year. The variables are: the logs of
sales, value added, number of employees, number of plants, foundation year, the value of inventory,
capital, current assets, investments, number of workers' strikes, monetary compensation for workers'
injuries, performance-based bonus payments, number of subsidiaries, as well as distance to the nearest
railroad station and distance to the nearest port. Panel B adds the inverse hyperbolic sine function of
the number and value of government contracts. The regressions also include fixed effects for county-
sector pairs, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window
and the firm application. Panels C, D, and E show the p -value of the test of joint significance of
the coefficients of several county characteristics measured in 1940, 1930, and 1920, distinguishing
by training year. The county-level variables are imputed to firms based on their location. These
regressions include: log population, log of the manufacturing value added, log number of manufacturing
establishments, log number of manufacturing employees, log average manufacturing wage, log total
expenses in manufacturing, log value of manufacturing production, farms per capita, unemployment
share (available only in 1930 and 1940), population per square mile, share of male residents, share of
black population, share of urban population, share of illiterate population (available only in 1920 and
1930). County data are from IPUMS NHGIS, www.nhgis.org. The regressions also include fixed effects
for subdistrict-sector pairs, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the
window and the firm application. Standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict-application window
level.




                                                                                  A13
                            Table A3: Autocorrelation of the TWI Trainings

                  TWIt        J-It       J-Rt            J-Mt          J-I and J-Rt      J-I and J-Mt      J-R and J-Mt       Allt
                    (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)                 (5)                (6)               (7)         (8)

 TWIt-1            0.028
                  (0.022)
 J-It-1                       0.039
                             (0.028)
 J-Rt-1                                 -0.020**
                                         (0.010)
 J-Mt-1                                                  0.007
                                                        (0.028)
 J-I and J-Rt-1                                                              0.002
                                                                            (0.023)
 J-I and J-Mt-1                                                                                 0.001
                                                                                               (0.022)
 J-R and J-Mt-1                                                                                                0.007
                                                                                                              (0.019)
 Allt-1                                                                                                                       0.017
                                                                                                                             (0.024)

 Observations     1,873      1,873       1,873          1,873               1,873               1,873             1,873       1,873
 R2               0.001      0.002       0.001          0.001               0.001               0.001             0.001       0.001


Notes. This table shows the autocorrelation between the current and past share of firms that received
different types of TWI trainings. The unit of observation is one of 364 subdistricts and one of 10
application windows. The standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.


                                         Table A4: Exit Regressions

                              Exit              Exit                Exit                Exit               Exit             Exit

                               (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)              (6)

 TWI                        -0.257***      -0.249***              -0.254***
                             (0.013)        (0.012)                (0.013)
 J-I                                                                                  -0.221***          -0.223***        -0.225***
                                                                                       (0.019)            (0.017)          (0.018)
 J-R                                                                                  -0.258***          -0.242***        -0.245***
                                                                                       (0.019)            (0.017)          (0.019)
 J-M                                                                                  -0.288***          -0.280***        -0.288***
                                                                                       (0.017)            (0.015)          (0.017)

 Observations                 6,244             6,244               6,115               6,244              6,244            6,115
 R2                           0.172             0.090               0.152               0.173              0.090            0.153
 County-sector FEs             Yes               No                  No                  Yes                No               No
 District-sector FEs           No                Yes                 No                  No                 Yes              No
 Subdistrict-sector FEs        No                No                  Yes                 No                 No               Yes
 App. window FEs               Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes


Notes . Exit is equal to one for firms that exited the sample between period -5 and period 10. The
standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                A14
                        Table A5: Components of Production Function

                          TFP             Log sales         Log intermediate    Log capital       Log employees
                                                                 inputs

                           (1)               (2)                  (3)               (4)                (5)

 TWI x Post             0.159***          0.128***             -0.079***         -0.013***          0.060***
                         (0.004)           (0.006)              (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)

 Observations            67,472            67,472                67,472            67,472            67,472
 R2                      0.326             0.184                 0.391              0.426            0.148


Notes . This table shows the treatment effects for the different components of the production function.
The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is imputed using the distance from
the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same subdistrict and application window.
The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one TWI training or no training at all.
The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                 Table A6: Changes in Firm Structure

                            Log plants     Log employees       Log managers    Log subsidiaries   Log investment

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)

 TWI x Period 1              0.001***         0.012***             0.012            -0.009           0.062**
                              (0.000)          (0.001)            (0.008)          (0.009)            (0.026)
 TWI x Period 5              0.026***         0.072***           0.050***          0.016*            0.155***
                              (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.008)          (0.009)            (0.025)
 TWI x Period 10             0.062***         0.127***           0.108***         0.050***           0.168***
                              (0.003)          (0.003)            (0.008)          (0.010)            (0.028)

 Observations                    67,472        67,472             67,472           67,472             67,472
 R2                              0.144         0.150              0.142             0.136             0.149


Notes . This table shows the coefficients of the interactions between the training variable and three
selected period dummies (out of 15 period dummies included). The omitted period is the year before
the TWI training (period -1). The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is
imputed using the distance from the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same
subdistrict and application window. The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one
TWI training or no training at all. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and
application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      A15
                           Table A7: Matching Trained and Nontrained firms
                  Log sales         TFP              Log ROA          Log plants     Log employees      Log managers   Log subsidiaries   Log investment

                     (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)

                                                          Panel A: Unmatched baseline
TWI x Post        0.128***        0.159***           0.065***          0.028***         0.060***          0.057***        0.017***           0.134***
                   (0.006)         (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.003)            (0.011)
Observations       67,472          67,472             67,472            67,472           67,472            67,472          67,472             67,472

                                              Panel B: Matching using nine variables observed at -1
TWI x Post        0.127***        0.159***           0.065***          0.028***         0.060***          0.057***        0.017***           0.133***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       66,048          66,048             66,048            66,048           66,048            66,048          66,048             66,048

                              Panel C: Matching using nine variables observed between -5 and -1 + period FEs
TWI x Post        0.143***        0.169***           0.065***          0.028***         0.060***          0.058***        0.017***           0.145***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       64,080          64,080             64,080            64,080           64,080            64,080          64,080             64,080

                                            Panel D: Matching using eighteen variables observed at -1
TWI x Post        0.130***        0.160***           0.065***          0.028***         0.060***          0.057***        0.017***           0.136***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       65,824          65,824             65,824            65,824           65,824            65,824          65,824             65,824

                                  Panel E: Matching using eighteen variables observed at -1 + district FEs
TWI x Post        0.130***        0.160***           0.064***          0.029***         0.060***          0.055***        0.016***           0.135***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       65,808          65,808             65,808            65,808           65,808            65,808          65,808             65,808

                                Panel F: Matching using eighteen variables observed at -1 + subdistrict FEs
TWI x Post        0.128***        0.160***           0.066***          0.028***         0.060***          0.058***        0.019***           0.135***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       65,776          65,776             65,776            65,776           65,776            65,776          65,776             65,776

                       Panel G: Matching using eighteen variables observed at -1 + subdistrict FEs & app. window FEs
TWI x Post        0.133***        0.161***           0.062***          0.027***         0.060***          0.057***        0.017***           0.133***
                   (0.006)         (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.012)
Observations       65,696          65,696             65,696            65,696           65,696            65,696          65,696             65,696


Notes . This table shows the results of different propensity score matching (PSM) between trained and
nontrained firms. All PSM algorithms impose a common support and match without replacement:
we use the Stata command psmatch2 with options common, ties, noreplacement, descending. In
panel B, we match using nine variables observed in period -1: number of plants, number of employees,
sales, TFP, distance from the nearest port and railroad station, and three sector dummies. In panel
C, we match using the same nine variables observed between period -5 and period -1, also including
period fixed effects. In panel D, we match using eighteen variables observed in period -1: number of
plants, number of employees, sales, TFP, distance from the nearest port and railroad station, three
sector dummies, foundation year, value of inventory, capital, value of current assets, investments,
number of strikes, money spent for worker injuries, money spent for bonuses, number of subsidiaries.
In panel E, we match using the same eighteen variables observed in period -1, as well as district
fixed effects. In panel F, we match using the same eighteen variables observed in period -1, as well as
subdistrict fixed effects. In panel G, we match using the same eighteen variables observed in period
-1, as well as subdistrict and application window fixed effects. The coefficients of the PSM regressions
are included in Table B3. The distance from the TWI intervention for the nontreated firms is imputed
using the distance from the TWI intervention of the first participating firm in the same subdistrict and
application window. The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one TWI training
or no training at all. The standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application
windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                                    A16
                  Table A8: Effects of TWI Training on Responses to TWI Surveys

                                                      J-I                         J-R                       J-M
                                           Period 0         Period 3   Period 0         Period 3   Period 0    Period 3
                                             (1)              (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)

 (1) Log machine repairs                  -0.089***     -0.357***      0.053***     0.216***       0.053***    0.219***
                                            (0.001)       (0.006)        (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.001)      (0.004)
 (2) Log workers' injuries                 0.029***      0.118***      0.125***     0.029***       0.030***     0.121***
                                            (0.001)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.005)
 (3) Register causes of breakdown          0.877***      0.877***      -0.019***    -0.018***      -0.020***   -0.016***
                                            (0.009)       (0.020)        (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.006)
 (4) Job description for managers            0.001          0.001      0.876***     0.875***         -0.002       -0.002
                                            (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.006)      (0.019)       (0.002)      (0.003)
 (5) Job description for workers          -0.019***      -0.020**      0.838***     0.826***       -0.015***    -0.014**
                                            (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.008)      (0.021)       (0.005)      (0.006)
 (6) Training for workers                 -0.025***     -0.030***      0.875***     0.875***       -0.015***    -0.013**
                                            (0.007)       (0.009)        (0.008)      (0.017)       (0.005)      (0.006)
 (7) Bonus payment scheme                   -0.008*        -0.009      0.897***     0.902***        -0.007*       -0.006
                                            (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.015)       (0.004)      (0.004)
 (8) Suggestions from workers                0.001         -0.002       0.563***     0.552***        -0.002       -0.003
                                            (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.010)      (0.026)       (0.002)      (0.004)
 (9) Log unused input                      0.039***      0.157***      0.039***     0.158***       -0.089***   -0.348***
                                            (0.001)       (0.004)        (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.000)      (0.004)
 (10) Production planning                 -0.027***     -0.032***       -0.018**     -0.019**      0.823***    0.827***
                                            (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.023)
 (11) Marketing                             -0.008*        -0.007         -0.002       -0.001      0.840***    0.828***
                                            (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.008)      (0.020)


Notes . The data used in this table come from the surveys administered by the TWI administration only to
firms that received at least one training. The responses were collected before the training, three months after
the training, and then each year until 1945. Each row represents a separate regression whose dependent variable
is one of the 11 management practices listed in the first column. The estimates are coefficients that measure
the difference between each period and the period just before the implementation of the TWI program (period
-1), separately for each TWI training. The regressions also include the coefficients for period 1 and 2, the
treatment variables in isolation, as well as fixed effects for county-sector pairs, the application window, and the
number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. Three dependent variables are
continuous and transformed in logs: the number of machine repairs (1); the number of workers' injuries (2); and
the value of unused input in the inventory (9). The other eight variables are dummies equal to 1 if the firm
was implementing a given management practice: keeping records of machine breakdowns (3); providing clear
list of tasks and expectations to managers (4) and workers (5); offering on-the-job training (6); implementing
bonus payment schemes (7); allowing workers to provide suggestions (8); using formal production planning (10);
having a formal marketing unit (11). Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application
windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            A17
                         Table A9: Clustering Standard Errors at Subdistrict Level
                          Log          Log         Log           Log           Log            Prob           Log          Log           Prob
                        repairs    maintenance   injuries       bonus         strikes       training      inventory   product lines   marketing
                          (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                    Panel A: Main results on managerial practices (Section 5.1)
J-I x Period 1         -0.010***    0.005***      -0.020**       -0.000         0.000         -0.001         -0.010       0.002          -0.001
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.002)        (0.012)      (0.003)        (0.001)
J-I x Period 5         -0.033***    0.014***     -0.043***       -0.000      0.006***      -0.051***         0.007        -0.002      -0.028***
                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.011)      (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.011)      (0.004)        (0.006)
J-I x Period 10        -0.057***    0.025***     -0.064***        0.000       0.030***     -0.062***          0.008       -0.004      -0.064***
                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.011)      (0.000)        (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.014)      (0.005)        (0.006)
J-R x Period 1           -0.000       0.000         0.004      0.414***         -0.000      0.043***         -0.005        0.002          0.001
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.011)        (0.011)      (0.002)        (0.001)
J-R x Period 5           -0.000       0.000         0.011      0.431***      -0.268***      0.628***          0.008       -0.001      -0.023***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)      (0.000)        (0.006)       (0.024)        (0.011)      (0.004)        (0.004)
J-R x Period 10          -0.000       -0.000        -0.000     0.459***      -0.268***     0.927***        0.033***       -0.000      -0.061***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.010)      (0.001)        (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.011)      (0.005)        (0.006)
J-M x Period 1            0.000        0.000        -0.001        0.000          0.000         0.001      -0.015***     0.015***       0.043***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.011)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.010)
J-M x Period 5           -0.000        0.000         0.001       -0.000       0.007***     -0.038***      -0.071***     0.538***       0.661***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.009)      (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.005)        (0.005)      (0.009)        (0.024)
J-M x Period 10          -0.000       0.000          0.006       -0.000      0.013***      -0.062***      -0.100***     0.606***      0.930***
                        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.009)      (0.000)        (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.009)        (0.008)
                                                             Panel B: Complementarities (Section 5.2)
J-I x Post             -0.038***    0.014***     -0.037***      -0.002       0.009***      -0.035***       0.009**        0.001       -0.026***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.003)
J-R x Post               -0.001       -0.001       -0.004     0.390***       -0.194***     0.543***        0.011**        0.004       -0.027***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.009)        (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.003)
J-M x Post               -0.004       -0.002        0.000        0.001        0.009***     -0.034***      -0.055***     0.334***       0.549***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.009)
J-I not alone x Post      0.006     -0.013***       0.007        0.002        0.107***      0.015***       -0.011**       0.005        0.014***
                        (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.004)         (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.004)
J-R not alone x Post      0.000     -0.007***       0.004     -0.012***      -0.101***      0.026***         -0.006       -0.006       0.011***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.004)         (0.005)       (0.009)        (0.006)      (0.005)        (0.004)
J-M not alone x Post      0.004     0.006***       -0.004      -0.005*        0.107***      0.029***         -0.007     0.066***       0.027***
                        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.006)      (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.009)
                                                             Panel C: Vertical spillovers (Section 6.1)
J-I x Post               0.018        -0.023        0.012       0.035          0.006       -0.071***        -0.037        -0.026         0.002
                        (0.046)      (0.052)      (0.048)      (0.032)        (0.033)       (0.022)        (0.024)       (0.025)       (0.016)
J-R x Post               0.020       -0.073*       -0.006      0.057**       -0.139***     0.466***         -0.002        -0.000        -0.009
                        (0.045)      (0.041)      (0.042)      (0.028)        (0.038)       (0.048)        (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.011)
J-M x Post               0.015         0.012        0.007      0.077**         -0.005        -0.025       -0.408***        0.025      0.368***
                        (0.037)      (0.043)      (0.039)      (0.037)        (0.024)       (0.030)        (0.074)       (0.018)       (0.045)


Notes: This table shows that the main findings on managerial practices are robust to clustering
the standard errors at the subdistrict level. Panel A tests the robustness of the main results on
managerial practices described in Section 5.1 and Table 3. Panel B tests the robustness of the results
on complementarities described in Section 5.2 and Table 4. Panel C tests the robustness of the results
on vertical spillovers described in Section 6.1 and Table 5 (Panel A).




                                                                  A18
                                   Table A10: Multiple Hypotheses Testing
                         Log         Log         Log          Log           Log            Prob           Log          Log           Prob
                       repairs   maintenance   injuries      bonus         strikes       training      inventory   product lines   marketing
                         (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                 Panel A: Main results on managerial practices (Section 5.1)
J-I x Period 1          0.18        0.18        0.52          0.82          0.84           0.90          0.84          0.84          0.90
J-I x Period 5         <0.01       <0.01       <0.01         0.94          <0.01          <0.01         0.94           0.94         <0.01
J-I x Period 10        <0.01       <0.01       <0.01         0.86          <0.01          <0.01         0.86           0.80         <0.01
J-R x Period 1          0.88        0.88        0.94          0.18          0.90           0.18          0.94          0.94          0.58
J-R x Period 5          0.88        0.88        0.72         <0.01         <0.01          <0.01         0.84           0.88         <0.01
J-R x Period 10         0.88        0.44        0.98         <0.01         <0.01          <0.01         <0.01         0.98          <0.01
J-M x Period 1            1         0.98          1             1           0.90           0.98          0.26          0.24          0.24
J-M x Period 5          0.90        0.76        0.98          0.90         <0.01          <0.01         <0.01         <0.01         <0.01
J-M x Period 10         0.82        0.64        0.82          0.64         <0.01          <0.01         <0.01         <0.01         <0.01
                                                          Panel B: Complementarities (Section 5.2)
J-I x Post             <0.01       <0.01       <0.01         0.64          <0.01          <0.01         0.08           0.80         <0.01
J-R x Post              0.86        0.80        0.74         <0.01         <0.01          <0.01         0.08           0.74         <0.01
J-M x Post              0.40        0.72        0.96          0.84         <0.01          <0.01         <0.01         <0.01         <0.01
J-I not alone x Post    0.24       <0.01       0.36           0.52         <0.01          <0.01         0.06           0.52         <0.01
J-R not alone x Post    0.86       <0.01       0.68          <0.01         <0.01          <0.01         0.58           0.58         <0.01
J-M not alone x Post    0.52       <0.01       0.52           0.36         <0.01          <0.01         0.52          <0.01         <0.01
                                                          Panel C: Vertical spillovers (Section 6.1)
J-I x Post               1           1           1            0.86           1             0.02          0.80          0.86           1
J-R x Post               1          0.42        0.92          0.30         <0.01          <0.01           1              1          0.90
J-M x Post               1           1           1            0.20           1             0.90         <0.01          0.54         <0.01


Notes: This table shows p-values adjusted for multiple concurrent hypotheses tests using the
Westfall-Young methodology ("Resampling-based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for p-
value Adjustment." by Westfall and Young, 1993). The table uses the Stata command wyoung. Panel
A tests the robustness of the main results on managerial practices described in Section 5.1 and Table
3. Panel B tests the robustness of the results on complementarities described in Section 5.2 and Table
4. Panel C tests the robustness of the results on vertical spillovers described in Section 6.1 and Table
5 (Panel A).




                                                               A19
                     Table A11: Complementarity Effects, Alternative Specification 1
                          Log          Log         Log         Log        Log         Prob         Log          Log           Prob
                        repairs    maintenance   injuries     bonus      strikes    training    inventory   product lines   marketing
                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
J-I x Post             -0.037***    0.014***     -0.037***     -0.001    0.008***   -0.038***    0.009**        -0.000      -0.025***
                        (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)
J-R x Post               -0.000        -0.001      -0.003    0.390***   -0.195***   0.540***    0.011***        0.002       -0.026***
                        (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.008)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)
J-M x Post               -0.004        -0.001       0.001       0.002    0.008***   -0.038***   -0.055***     0.332***       0.550***
                        (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.003)    (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.008)
J-I and J-R x Post     -0.031***    -0.005***    -0.028***   0.380***   -0.183***    0.538***     0.004         -0.002      -0.025***
                        (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.006)    (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.002)
J-R and J-M x Post       -0.000        -0.002      -0.002    0.376***   -0.183***    0.552***   -0.056***     0.392***       0.563***
                        (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)
J-M and J-I x Post     -0.032***     0.007***    -0.032***     -0.001    0.228***   -0.037***   -0.064***     0.400***       0.567***
                        (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)
All three x Post       -0.033***    -0.006***    -0.036***   0.369***   -0.055***    0.568***   -0.059***     0.414***       0.544***
                        (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.008)    (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.007)
Observations            134,288      134,288     134,288     134,288    134,288     134,288     134,288       134,288        134,288
R2                       0.102        0.098       0.101       0.210      0.177       0.616       0.395         0.552          0.627


Notes: This table shows the coefficients of several dummies for each possible combination of the TWI
training. For example, J-I is equal to one for firms that received only the J-I module, while J-I and J-R
is equal to one for firms that received only the J-I and J-R modules. All the dependent variables are
logged with the exception of two dummy variables that measure whether firms reported expenditures
for on-the-job training (column 6; mean=0.18) or for marketing activities (column 9; mean=0.17).
The regressions also include the training variables in isolation, as well as fixed effects for county-
sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of
the window and the firm application. Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and
application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                               A20
                   Table A12: Complementarity Effects, Alternative Specification 2
                        Log          Log         Log         Log         Log         Prob         Log          Log           Prob
                      repairs    maintenance   injuries     bonus       strikes    training    inventory   product lines   marketing
                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
J-I x Post           -0.034***     0.012***    -0.034***     -0.002     0.031***   -0.033***     0.003       0.010***       -0.010**
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
J-R x Post              0.003        -0.002      0.000     0.389***    -0.172***    0.545***      0.006      0.012***      -0.011***
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
J-M x Post             -0.002        -0.003      0.004        0.001     0.029***   -0.033***   -0.060***     0.342***      0.564***
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.007)
J-I x J-R x Post       -0.000     -0.015***      0.005      -0.006*    -0.047***   0.025***      -0.004     -0.026***         -0.007
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.007)
J-R x J-M x Post       -0.002       0.003*       -0.006    -0.014***   -0.046***    0.039***     -0.001      0.036***          0.007
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.006)
J-M x J-I x Post        0.003        -0.002      -0.003      0.001      0.162***    0.028***     -0.006      0.046***          0.010
                      (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.007)
Observations          134,288      134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288     134,288       134,288        134,288
R2                     0.101        0.098       0.101       0.210       0.177       0.615       0.395         0.552          0.627


Notes: This table shows the coefficients of several dummies for each type of TWI training, as well
as their interaction. J-x is one for all firms that received the J-x training. For example, J-I is equal
to one for firms that received only the J-I module, as well as for firms that received the J-I and J-
R modules. All the dependent variables are logged with the exception of two dummy variables that
measure whether firms reported expenditures for on-the-job training (column 6; mean=0.18) or for
marketing activities (column 9; mean=0.17). The regressions also include the training variables in
isolation, as well as fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and
the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. The sample includes
all applicant firms. Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                             A21
             Table A13: Effects on Upstream and Downstream Firms, Heterogeneity Analysis
                                         Log             Log             Log           Log             Log        Prob        Log          Log           Prob
                                       repairs       maintenance       injuries       bonus           strikes   training   inventory   product lines   marketing
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                  Panel A: Heterogeneity by sector of trained firms
J-I x Post                               0.082          -0.094           0.099        -0.048        -0.060        -0.071   -0.064***        0.031        -0.015
                                       (0.076)         (0.076)         (0.070)       (0.062)       (0.091)       (0.056)    (0.016)       (0.031)       (0.009)
J-R x Post                              -0.023          -0.080           0.047        0.062       -0.117***     0.527***   -0.091***      -0.080*        -0.030
                                       (0.058)         (0.106)         (0.080)       (0.055)       (0.028)       (0.162)    (0.021)       (0.042)       (0.030)
J-M x Post                              -0.036          -0.106        -0.070**        -0.055        0.019         -0.103   -0.295***     -0.076**      0.135***
                                       (0.025)         (0.066)         (0.031)       (0.138)       (0.121)       (0.098)    (0.069)       (0.036)       (0.045)
J-I x Post x Manufacturing              -0.056          0.074           -0.066        0.080         0.096         0.052      0.030         -0.038        0.039
                                       (0.079)         (0.083)         (0.074)       (0.069)       (0.094)       (0.062)    (0.023)       (0.036)       (0.025)
J-R x Post x Manufacturing               0.046          0.034           -0.056        -0.050        0.004         -0.106   0.102***        0.082*        0.003
                                       (0.064)         (0.112)         (0.084)       (0.062)       (0.038)       (0.164)    (0.024)       (0.045)       (0.039)
J-M x Post x Manufacturing             0.059*          0.154**        0.082**          0.042        0.002         0.054      0.026       0.101***      0.195***
                                       (0.033)         (0.073)         (0.039)       (0.141)       (0.122)       (0.102)    (0.086)       (0.037)       (0.062)

                                                    Panel B: Heterogeneity by size of trained firms
J-I x Post                              0.047            -0.062         0.044          0.009        0.062*        -0.035   -0.053***       -0.023         0.010
                                       (0.034)          (0.053)        (0.037)       (0.037)       (0.036)       (0.037)    (0.009)       (0.022)       (0.021)
J-R x Post                              0.058            -0.059         0.029         -0.004      -0.152***     0.493***     -0.000        -0.013        -0.017
                                       (0.039)          (0.061)        (0.039)       (0.034)       (0.038)       (0.044)    (0.011)       (0.022)       (0.025)
J-M x Post                               0.030            0.050          0.020        -0.005         0.039        -0.039   -0.220***        0.021      0.326***
                                       (0.033)          (0.067)        (0.041)       (0.047)       (0.030)       (0.025)    (0.057)       (0.019)       (0.054)
J-I x Post x Above-median workforce     -0.031            0.067         -0.012         0.029        -0.064         0.020      0.031         0.036         0.014
                                       (0.047)          (0.072)        (0.049)       (0.052)       (0.048)       (0.047)    (0.027)       (0.029)       (0.038)
J-R x Post x Above-median workforce     -0.064            0.017         -0.061         0.033         0.067       -0.113*      0.011         0.021        -0.016
                                       (0.050)          (0.076)        (0.048)       (0.047)       (0.046)       (0.067)    (0.019)       (0.028)       (0.039)
J-M x Post x Above-median workforce     -0.017           -0.018         -0.020        -0.015        -0.026        -0.013     -0.077         0.005        -0.006
                                       (0.044)          (0.080)        (0.052)       (0.054)       (0.040)       (0.043)    (0.092)       (0.023)       (0.065)

                                                  Panel C: Heterogeneity by location of trained firms
J-I x Post                              0.028            0.001            0.030        0.038        0.040         -0.031    -0.037**       -0.004         0.011
                                       (0.035)          (0.036)         (0.034)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.030)     (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.018)
J-R x Post                              0.033            -0.047          -0.004       0.032       -0.114***     0.427***       0.006       -0.009        -0.011
                                       (0.028)          (0.049)         (0.029)      (0.036)       (0.032)       (0.056)     (0.015)      (0.020)       (0.018)
J-M x Post                               0.027            0.057           0.018       -0.041         0.009        -0.004   -0.272***      0.025*       0.385***
                                       (0.033)          (0.058)         (0.035)      (0.034)       (0.023)       (0.024)     (0.071)      (0.014)       (0.045)
J-I x Post x Midwest                    0.051            -0.136         0.144**     -0.102**        -0.071         0.014      -0.007        0.002        -0.030
                                       (0.056)          (0.112)         (0.059)      (0.048)       (0.073)       (0.072)     (0.023)      (0.032)       (0.053)
J-I x Post x South                     -0.121*            0.044        -0.190**        0.027        -0.011         0.057       0.021        0.002       0.094**
                                       (0.062)          (0.065)         (0.081)      (0.060)       (0.083)       (0.040)     (0.025)      (0.042)       (0.047)
J-I x Post x West                        0.072           -0.155           0.046       -0.060        -0.008        -0.023       0.003        0.013         0.165
                                       (0.054)          (0.152)         (0.075)      (0.166)       (0.045)       (0.048)     (0.034)      (0.039)       (0.172)
J-R x Post x Midwest                    0.065            -0.043           0.082       -0.027         0.024        -0.064       0.035        0.004         0.034
                                       (0.074)          (0.117)         (0.073)      (0.069)       (0.057)       (0.090)     (0.024)      (0.027)       (0.037)
J-R x Post x South                      -0.044            0.120           0.009       -0.083         0.011      0.213***      -0.061       -0.074        -0.040
                                       (0.114)          (0.140)         (0.090)      (0.118)       (0.075)       (0.062)     (0.066)      (0.067)       (0.068)
J-R x Post x West                     -0.139***           0.023       -0.116***       -0.041        -0.020         0.022      -0.013      0.052*        -0.166*
                                       (0.038)          (0.077)         (0.044)      (0.072)       (0.050)       (0.074)     (0.018)      (0.027)       (0.100)
J-M x Post x Midwest                    -0.056           -0.014          -0.056        0.064        -0.003      -0.089**      -0.059       -0.022        -0.063
                                       (0.048)          (0.099)         (0.049)      (0.064)       (0.042)       (0.044)     (0.137)      (0.023)       (0.067)
J-M x Post x South                       0.005           -0.066          -0.001        0.017         0.053         0.009       0.031       -0.055      -0.237***
                                       (0.051)          (0.108)         (0.060)      (0.100)       (0.069)       (0.028)     (0.127)      (0.057)       (0.077)
J-M x Post x West                        0.037           -0.048           0.020        0.104         0.077      -0.223**       0.113        0.036        -0.246
                                       (0.057)          (0.082)         (0.062)      (0.070)       (0.061)       (0.106)     (0.124)      (0.032)       (0.223)


Notes: The sample used for this table includes 1,816 upstream and downstream firms linked to 1,572
firms that applied to the TWI program. Panel A tests whether there are heterogeneous effects based
on the sector of the trained firms. Panel B tests whether there are heterogeneous effects based on
the workforce size of the trained firms in period -1. Panel C tests whether there are heterogeneous
effects based on the location (U.S. Census Bureau region) of the trained firms. These regressions
also include the interaction between the training variable and the "heterogeneity dummies," the
interaction between the period fixed effects and the "heterogeneity dummies," the training variables
by themselves, the "heterogeneity dummies" by themselves, as well as fixed effects for county-sector-
period combinations, the application window of the applicant firm, and the number of days between
the opening of the window and the firm application. Standard errors are clustered at the level of
subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                       A22
                Table A14: Selection of Firms Entering the Applicants' Supply Chain

                         Log        TFP        Log          Log         Log          Log         Log
                         sales                 ROA         plants     employees    managers   subsidiaries
                          (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
 TWI                    0.017***   0.193***     -0.018    0.099***     0.099***    0.111***    0.107***
                         (0.001)    (0.006)    (0.033)     (0.012)      (0.009)     (0.027)     (0.011)
 Observations             686        686        686          686         686         686          686
 R2                      0.533      0.738      0.120        0.266       0.337       0.148        0.287


Notes . This table shows cross-sectional correlations between the characteristics of upstream and
downstream firms joining the supply chain of TWI applicants after the TWI program and the training
variable. The only period considered is -1, the year before the entry in the supply chain of applicant
firms. The sample includes 715 upstream and downstream firms that entered the supply chain of 660
TWI applicants only after the TWI program. The regressions also include fixed effects for district-sector
combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window
and the firm application. Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application
windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   A23
          Table A15: Summary Statistics for 11,536 Nonapplicant War Contractors

                                                Nonapplicant firms            Difference with    Difference with
                                       Mean      St. Dev.   Min      Max        applicants      matched applicants
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)                (6)

                             Panel A: Data from annual financial statements in 1939
 Plants                                 2.61       0.73       1        4           -3.47               -0.60
 Employees                             618.26     98.90      265      970        -420.06              -63.98
 Foundation year                        1923       2.03     1916     1930          -8.01               -8.09
 Agriculture                            0.03      0.17         0        1           0.01               -0.01
 Manufacturing                          0.86      0.35        0        1           -0.01               -0.01
 Transportation                         0.09      0.29        0        1            0.01                0.01
 Services                               0.02      0.15        0        1            0.01                0.01
 Sales                                 90.00      0.01      89.95    90.05       -101.78              -52.94
 Current assets                         1.18      0.29      0.66     1.74         -17.22              -12.39
 Total assets                           3.64      0.35       2.95     4.39        -60.81              -43.85
 TFP                                    4.09      0.37       3.30     4.74          0.22                0.05
 ROA                                    0.07      0.01       0.05     0.09          0.04                0.04
 Inventory                              0.54      0.07       0.28     0.84        -14.83              -10.75
 Injuries                               0.88      0.24       0.44     1.62         -9.52               -6.88
 Repairs                                1.35      0.26      0.90     1.80         -14.02              -10.09
 Bonus payments                         2.25      0.78      0.90     3.60          -6.02               -3.95

                              Panel B: Workforce data from replacement lists in 1941

 Share African-Americans                0.05       0.01     0.04      0.07         -0.01              -0.01
 Share women                           0.04        0.01     0.03      0.05         -0.01              -0.01
 Years of education                       7        1.05       3        11          -1.51              -1.53
 Age of workforce                      23.02       5.02       4        42          -5.96              -5.90

                       Panel C: WWII-related data from replacement lists and war contracts

 Share drafted employees (1942-1945)    0.20       0.09         0     0.35         -0.03              0.01
 Switched 3-digit SIC (1940-1945)         1          0          1       1             0                  0
 Switched 2-digit SIC (1940-1945)       0.54       0.50         0       1          -0.02              -0.05
 Switched 1-digit SIC (1940-1945)       0.35       0.48         0       1          -0.02              -0.04
 Number of contracts (1940-1945)       1.90        7.30         0     123           1.22               1.21
 Value of contracts (1940-1945)        18.26      250.76        0    38,771        -6.85              -9.59


Notes . Summary statistics for 11,536 firms that applied to the TWI program and for which we found financial
data (out of 13,818 total nonapplicants). Column 5 shows the average difference with respect to all applicants.
Column 6 shows the average difference with respect to 2,223 applicants that were matched to nonapplicants.
The matching was based on propensity scores, using a nearest-neighbor algorithm without replacement. The
variables used for the matching were the number of plants and employees in 1939, TFP in 1939, distance from
the nearest port and railroad station, sector, and fixed effects for the 22 TWI districts. A description of the
variables is available under Table 1 and in Appendix B.




                                                          A24
                                  Table A16: Spillover of Practices to Nonapplicant Firms
                                                Log            Log               Log            Log           Log            Prob          Log           Log           Prob
                                              repairs      maintenance         injuries        bonus         strikes       training     inventory    product lines   marketing
                                                (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                                        Panel A: Number of nearby applicants
Trained, same sector x Post                 0.0000            -0.0001          -0.0000         -0.0001        -0.0001       -0.0000      -0.0000        -0.0001        -0.0000
                                           (0.0001)          (0.0001)         (0.0001)        (0.0002)       (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0000)       (0.0001)       (0.0001)
Trained, diff. sector x Post                0.0001           0.0002*            0.0000         -0.0000         0.0003       -0.0002      -0.0000         0.0001        -0.0002
                                           (0.0002)          (0.0001)         (0.0003)        (0.0004)       (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0000)       (0.0001)       (0.0002)
Nontrained, same sector x Post              -0.0001            0.0001          -0.0001          0.0000         0.0001        0.0001       0.0000         0.0001         0.0001
                                           (0.0001)          (0.0001)         (0.0001)        (0.0002)       (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0000)       (0.0001)       (0.0001)
Nontrained, diff. sector x Post             -0.0002          -0.0002*          -0.0001         -0.0000        -0.0004        0.0003       0.0000        -0.0001         0.0002
                                           (0.0002)          (0.0001)         (0.0003)        (0.0004)       (0.0003)      (0.0003)     (0.0000)       (0.0001)       (0.0002)
Observations                               126,875            126,875         126,875         126,875        126,875       126,875      126,875         126,875       126,875
                                                                        Panel B: Distance to nearby applicants
Trained, same sector x Post                 0.0000            -0.0000          0.0000          -0.0001        0.0001        0.0000       0.0000         0.0000         -0.0000
                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)         (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)
Trained, diff. sector x Post                0.0000             0.0000          0.0000          -0.0000        0.0000        -0.0001      0.0000         -0.0000        -0.0000
                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)         (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0001)
Nontrained, same sector x Post              -0.0000            0.0000          -0.0000          0.0000      -0.0001**       -0.0001      0.0000         -0.0000         0.0001
                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)         (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0000)      (0.0001)     (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0001)
Nontrained, diff. sector x Post             -0.0000            0.0000          -0.0000          0.0001        0.0000       0.0001**      -0.0000        -0.0000        -0.0000
                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)         (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0001)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)
Observations                               125,885            125,885         125,885         125,885        125,885       125,885      125,885         125,885       125,885


Notes: The sample used for these graphs includes 11,536 war contractors that did not apply to the TWI program and for which we
found financial statements (out of 13,818 total nonapplicants). In panel A, the coefficients shown are the interactions between the
log number of applicants in the area and a post-TWI dummy. The number of applicants is divided between trained and nontrained
firms and between firms in the same or different sector (agriculture, manufacturing, transportation, or services). Panel B uses the
log of the average distance from applicant firms, instead of the log number of firms. In order to compute the number of nearby
applicant firms and their average distance to nonapplicant firms, we divided the 364 subdistricts into 52 groups of 7 adjacent
subdistricts. Period 0 coincides with the modal treatment year within each of the 52 groups of subdistricts. All regressions also
include firm fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                  Table A17: Adoption of Practices and Managers Leaving
                                       Log              Log                Log              Log            Log            Prob           Log            Log            Prob
                                     repairs        maintenance          injuries          bonus          strikes       training      inventory     product lines    marketing
                                       (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)
 J-I x Post                         -0.040***           0.013***        -0.040***           0.001        0.010***       -0.037***      0.012**          0.004        -0.027***
                                     (0.004)             (0.003)         (0.007)           (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.005)      (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.004)
 J-R x Post                           0.002               -0.000          0.002           0.385***       -0.197***       0.547***      0.015**          0.006        -0.021***
                                     (0.005)             (0.003)         (0.006)           (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.013)      (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.003)
 J-M x Post                           -0.002              0.001            0.003            0.000         0.007***      -0.036***     -0.056***       0.341***        0.559***
                                     (0.004)             (0.002)         (0.006)           (0.004)         (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.011)
 J-I x Post x Median leaving           0.008               0.001           0.007            -0.006          -0.001          0.000       -0.005          -0.007          -0.002
                                     (0.007)             (0.004)         (0.010)           (0.007)         (0.003)        (0.007)      (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.006)
 J-R x Post x Median leaving          -0.006              -0.002          -0.010             0.009          0.005          -0.016       -0.005          -0.010          -0.006
                                     (0.007)             (0.004)         (0.009)           (0.007)         (0.009)        (0.018)      (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.005)
 J-M x Post x Median leaving          -0.005              -0.005          -0.005            0.003           -0.001          0.003       -0.000          -0.018          -0.019
                                     (0.006)             (0.004)         (0.010)           (0.006)         (0.003)        (0.006)      (0.011)         (0.011)         (0.018)
 Observations                        67,472              67,472           67,472           67,472         67,472         67,472        67,472          67,472         67,472
 R2                                  0.142               0.132            0.141             0.168         0.160          0.436         0.406            0.342         0.496


Notes: Median leaving is equal to 1 for firms with an above-median (52 percent) share of top executives leaving the company
between the end of training and 1955. To compute this variable, we compare the list of top executives in 1955 (or last year in
which a firm is observed) to the list of top executives in period 0, the year of the TWI training. These regressions also include the
interaction between the training variable and Median leaving , the interaction between the period fixed effects and Median leaving ,
the training variables by themselves, Median leaving by itself, as well as fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the
application window of the applicant firm, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application.
Standard errors are clustered at the level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                          A25
                                Table A18: Relationship with the Government

                                          Has                 Value             Number           Above-median          Top-tertile
                                        contracts           contracts          contracts            value                value
                                            (1)              (2)                (3)                     (4)                 (5)

                                                         Panel A: War contract data between -3 and +2
 TWI x Post                               0.015            0.346               0.027                  0.022               0.007
                                         (0.018)          (0.292)             (0.021)                (0.017)             (0.016)
 Observations                             24,805           20,741             20,741                 20,741               20,741
 R2                                       0.176            0.170              0.167                   0.166               0.151

                                                         Panel B: War contract data between -4 and +2
 TWI x Post                               0.013            0.283               0.023                  0.017               0.005
                                         (0.017)          (0.288)             (0.021)                (0.017)             (0.016)
 Observations                             27,186           23,122             23,122                 23,122               23,122
 R2                                       0.185            0.191              0.186                   0.186               0.158

                                                         Panel C: War contract data between -5 and +2
 TWI x Post                               0.012            0.271               0.022                  0.016               0.005
                                         (0.017)          (0.285)             (0.020)                (0.017)             (0.016)
 Observations                             28,353           24,289             24,289                 24,289               24,289
 R2                                       0.193            0.203              0.197                   0.197               0.164

                                                          Panel D: Postwar and cross-sectional variables
                                         Postwar          Supply              Supply                 Projects            Projects
                                         refunds          combat               other                industrial           military
                                            (1)              (2)                (3)                     (4)                 (5)

 TWI                                      -0.000           0.117               0.057                  0.055               -0.246
                                         (0.000)          (0.171)             (0.073)                (0.198)             (0.231)
 Observations                             20,388           4,601               4,601                  4,601                4,601
 R2                                       0.131            0.607               0.687                  0.583                0.637

Notes . Has contracts is a dummy equal to one for firms with at least one new contract in a given year. Number contracts and Value
contracts are the inverse hyperbolic sine function (preferable over logs due to zeros) of the number and value of war contracts granted
to each firm per year. Above-median value is a dummy equal to one for firms above the median of values of war contracts in each
year. Top-tertile value is a dummy equal to one for firms in the top tertile of values of war contracts in each year. These variables
come from war contracts data and are therefore available only between 1940 and 1945. The number of firms with nonmissing
values is 3,974 in period -5, 7,332 in period -4, 10,607 in period -3, 11,545 in period -2, 11,567 in period -1, 11,575 in period 0,
7,601 in period 1, and 4,243 in period 2. Postwar Refunds is the log of subsidies given by the government to war contractors to
switch from military to civilian production after World War II. They are available only from 1946 to 1951. Therefore, we need
to estimate a single-difference specification, instead of the usual difference-in-differences event study. All regressions also include
fixed effects for county-sector-period combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the
window and the firm application. In Panel D, columns 2 to 5 have dependent variables that measure the total value of war-related
government spending between 1940 and 1945 in the county of each applicant firm. Supply combat is the inverse hyperbolic sine
function of the total value of supply contracts for combat equipment, while Supply combat is the inverse hyperbolic sine function of
the total value of supply contracts for noncombat equipment. Projects industrial is the inverse hyperbolic sine function of the total
value of projects for the construction of industrial facilities, while Projects military is the inverse hyperbolic sine function of the
total value of projects for the construction of military facilities. These regressions also include fixed effects for subdistrict-sector
combinations, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. The
data come from https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/ICPSR/studies/02896/variables?q=war. Standard errors are clustered at the
level of subdistricts and application windows. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                   A26
B     Data Collection and Variable Construction
Data Collection
The data collection targeted firms eligible to apply to the TWI program. In order to apply, firms had to be
located in the United States and needed to win at least one war contract between June 1940 and August
1945. To identify the eligible companies, we used the tabulation of war supply contracts published by the
Civilian Production Administration in 1946, which Dmitri Koustas digitized and kindly shared with us. This
dataset includes information on all contracts for war supplies worth at least $50,000 and awarded between
June, 1940 and September, 1945. The minimum threshold at $50,000 in 1945 USD or $710,000 in 2020 USD
(https://www.measuringworth.com/calculators/uscompare/) is unlikely to be binding for the type of war
contracts received by applicant firms. If we consider the distribution of the average value of war contracts
received by the firms in our sample, the median is equal to $4.2 million (2020 USD), while the mean is equal to
$56.5 million (2020 USD). Out of 25,627 companies with at least one contract in these five years, we excluded
234 firms located outside the United States, obtaining a list of 25,393 companies eligible to participate in the
TWI program.32 We then constructed a panel dataset gathering four different types of data.
TWI Monthly Program Development Reports (1940-1945). We retrieved and digitized the list of
applicant firms from the monthly program development reports compiled by the TWI administration between
August 22, 1940 and September 19, 1945. These reports are stored at the National Archives and Record
Administration (Record Group 211, "Records of the War Manpower Commission [WMC]," 1936-1947, College
Park, MD). Out of 25,393 eligible firms, we were able to find applications from 11,575 companies.33 For each
application, the monthly records indicate the application date, the district and subdistrict in which the applicant
firm was located, whether it eventually received the TWI training, in which of the J-modules it was trained, and
the year in which each module was delivered. Moreover, we also retrieved and digitized the list of the instructors
trained by the TWI service who delivered the J-modules to participant firms. For each instructor, we know
their full name, whether they were employed by the government before the TWI program, whether they were
hired full time or part-time, in which specific J-module they were trained, and to which subdistrict they were
assigned. In total, the TWI instructors were 48,424.
Plant-level Surveys (1940-1945). In order to test the effectiveness of the program, the TWI administration
conducted plant-level surveys in the firms that received the TWI training. Specifically, the surveys--stored at the
National Archives and Record Administration (Record Group 211, "Records of the War Manpower Commission
[WMC]," 1936-1947, College Park, MD)--indicate whether a plant was performing each of eleven managerial
practices linked to the teachings of the TWI program. The plan managers were interviewed before the start of
each J-module training, three months after the TWI training, and then each year thereafter until 1945. Overall,
this dataset contain information about 38,241 surveyed establishments. We digitized these data and then we
matched them to the list of applicant firms using name, municipality and state in which the firm's headquarters
were located.
Replacement Schedules (1942-1945). After the Executive Order 9279 of December 5, 1942, firms in which
at least one worker was drafted had to submit a replacement schedule to their regional Bureau of Manpower
Utilization. In the schedules--stored at National Archives and Record Administration (Record Group 211,
"Records of the War Manpower Commission [WMC]," 1936-1947, College Park, MD)--, firms provided a
description of their products, as well as a list of firms they were selling to and buying from. Moreover, they
reported the composition of their labor force, specifically indicating the share of African-American workers

32
   These companies, which were granted 772 contracts in total, were located in: Arabia (1), Argentina (22),
   Australia (4), Belgium (1), Bermuda (5), Brazil (5), British West Indies (6), Canada (123), Chile (3), China
   (2), Congo (1), Cuba (6), Denmark (1), Dominican Republic (2), Ecuador (1), Finland (1), India (5), Iran
   (1), Malaysia (1), Mexico, (9) Nicaragua (3), Panama (6), Peru (2), Philippines (3), Switzerland (8), Thailand
   (1), UK (7), and Venezuela (4).
33
   As noted in Brunet (2019), firms may appear in contract listings with numerous locations, which in some
   cases makes unclear whether there are multiple firms with the same name or one firm with multiple facilities.
   We solve this ambiguity by checking how firms were listed in the TWI reports. Specifically, if we found two
   firms with the same name but in different locations listed as two separate entities receiving the TWI service,
   we consider them as two separate firms.

                                                       B1
and women, as well as the average years of education and age of all their employees. Finally, they had to
list the names of drafted employees, their job titles, their relative ranking within the firm hierarchy, their
age, their current Selective Service classification, their family status, their local board identity, and their draft
order number, as well as the time needed to replace them with new workers (hence, then name "replacement
schedules"). Through these replacement schedules, employers could also ask for exemptions from the draft for
some categories of their workers. According to the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, men between
the ages of 18 and 45 were classified into four categories: (1) men available for training and service; (2) men
deferred because of occupational status; (3) men deferred because of dependents; (4) men deferred by law or who
were unfit for service. The Selective Service System, operating at a decentralized level through its 6,443 local
boards, processed the exemption requests, mostly based on the information given by the draftees at the time of
registering. Managers were usually deferred "in support of national health, safety, or interest" (category II-A).
While the replacement schedules started being submitted in 1942, the first schedule contained data on both
1941 and 1942. Using firm name, municipality, and state, we searched for firms eligible for the TWI program
in the replacement lists. Given the large size of war contractors, all of them had at least one worker drafted
between 1940 and 1945. Therefore, we were able to match all applicant firms to the newly digitized dataset of
replacement schedules.
Firm Performance (1935-1955). We retrieved information on the economic outcomes of U.S. war contrac-
tors from their balance sheets and income statements. To do so, we relied on the "Historical Annual Reports"
collection of the Mergent Archives, which is composed of more than one million corporate financial statements
collected directly from company archives, universities, libraries, and private collections.34 In Summer 2016, we
accessed the data through the subscription of the University of California쵪rvine. Specifically, we searched the
UCI library's search engine for the name, municipality and state of each U.S. war contractor, collecting any
document published between 1935 and 1955. For each firm and year found, we were able to download the annual
financial reports a single pdf page at time after inserting a verification code for each downloaded page. If we
did not find a firm before its first U.S. war contract, we used the foundation date to determine if this was due
to a missing statement or if the firm had not been founded yet. If we stopped finding a firm after its last U.S.
war contract, we assumed that the firm had exited the market.. We were able to find at least one match for all
the 11,575 applicants firms and for 11,536 out of 13,857 (83 percent) nonapplicants. We believe that the lower
matching rate among nonapplicants is likely due to the smaller size. Even though there is not a formal threshold
on firm size to be included in the Mergent Archives, in practice, publicly traded firms, firms issuing bonds, and
larger firms are more likely to be included because it is relatively easier to find their balance sheets.
Variables Construction and Definition
In Table B1, we provide a list of all the variables used in the paper with their definitions and data sources.
When needed, we also provide additional details on the variable construction. All the monetary values have
been reevaluated to 2020 USD using https://www.measuringworth.com/calculators/uscompare/.

Definition of Sector and Identification of Firms in the Supply Chain
The annual financial reports do not include information on a firm's sector. To retrieve this piece of information,
we rely on the replacement schedules. In fact, firms had to report the products not covered by a war contract
for the year 1941, the year before the draft started. We therefore classify these products using the Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) created for the first time in U.S. history in 1939 for the manufacturing products
and in 1940 for the non-manufacturing products at 1-, 2-, and 3-digit levels.35 Specifically, we find the classi-
fication of manufacturing products in Volume I, part 3--"Alphabetic Index of Products, Establishments and
Processes, 1939," and the classification of the products in Volume II, Part 3--"Alphabetic Index of Products,
Establishments, and Services, 1940," published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget in 1941 under
the title of "Standard Industrial Classification Manual."
     We then use these classifications to obtain the 1-, 2-, and 3-digit SIC codes of each firm's war products. We
use this information to construct three variables: Switched 3-digit SIC , an indicator that equals to 1 for firms
in which at least one war product had a different 3-digit SIC code than the peacetime products listed in 1941;

34
     https://www.ftserussell.com/data/mergent-archives.
35
     While the SIC categorizes products up to 4 digits, the product description is not accurate enough for such a
     detailed classification.

                                                        B2
Switched 2-digit SIC , an indicator that equals to 1 for firms in which at least one war product had a different
2-digit SIC code than the peacetime products listed in 1941; Switched 1-digit SIC , an indicator that equals to 1
for firms in which at least one war product had a different 1-digit SIC code than the peacetime products listed
in 1941.
     In the replacement schedules, firms also had to indicate the name of the companies with which they had
an existing contract, as well as the list of products bought from and sold to them. We use this information to
construct a list of upstream and downstream firms for the U.S. war contractors. First, we use the SIC codes to
classify the 2-digit industry of the products sold to and bought from these companies. Then, we use the 1947
input-output tables to assess whether these products were upstream and downstream, relative to the products
of the U.S. war contractor.36 To avoid any possible ambiguity, we keep only firms for which all the products had
the same 2-digit industry. Out of 3,465 companies listed in the replacement schedules, we exclude 341 firms.
Out of the remaining 3,124 firms, we were able to find financial statements for 1,816 of them, which represent
the sample we use for the analysis in Section 6.1.
Estimation of TFP
We specify a Cobb-Douglas revenue production function for each 2-digit sector s, as follows:
                                                 s       s       s
                                     rit = ait + l lit + k kit + m mit +   it ,                                (2)
where all the lowercase variables are in logs, rit is operating revenues of firm i in year t, ait denotes TFP, lit
is the number of employees, kit is capital stock, mit are intermediate inputs expenditures (raw materials and
services), and it is the error. Table B1 contains the definition of these variables.
     We estimate equation (2) using the methodology proposed by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) (GNR),
which develops a nonparametric estimation of gross-output production functions that employs a "proxy variable"
in a similar vein as prior work by Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP). More
specifically, the GNR methodology consists in regressing revenue shares on inputs to identify the flexible input
elasticity, first solving the partial differential equation and then integrating it into the dynamic panel/proxy
variable structure to identify the remainder of the production function. Therefore, this procedure leads to a
two-step nonparametric estimator in which different components of the production function are estimated via
polynomial series in each stage.
     The estimated factor coefficients for each 2-digit sector are reported in Table B2. In this table, we com-
pare the coefficients estimated with the GNR methodology to the coefficients obtained from the LP and OP
methodologies. Both LP and OP tend to overestimate the labor coefficients and underestimate the coefficients
of capital and intermediate goods. This result is well-known in the literature (for example, Ackerberg, Caves,
and Frazer, 2015) and stems from the fact that the labor coefficient is not identified in the first stage of OP
and LP. Conversely, the OLS results substantially overestimate the output elasticity of intermediate inputs and
underestimate both the capital and labor coefficients in every sector, confirming the severity of the transmission
bias (as discussed by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers, 2020). Finally, it is worth noting that the GNR estimates
are roughly comparable to the expenditure shares of intermediate goods, labor, and capital.
     In summary, we use the sector-specific GNR coefficients to create the measure of TFP for each firm and
year that we employ in the main analysis. However, our results do not hinge on using the GNR methodology.
In fact, our findings are robust to estimating TFP with alternative algorithms, for example the popular OP
and LP methods. Figure B1 shows the main event studies using TFP estimated with the GNR, OP, and
LP methodologies. Regardless of the estimation technique, the result that trained firms started experiencing
an increase in productivity after the delivery of the training stands. Moreover, the treatment effects are
quantitatively similar across the three methods.

Propensity Score Matching
To show the robustness of the main findings, Section 5.1 discusses the results of several propensity score matching
(PSM) between trained and nontrained firms. Table B3 shows the coefficients of the PSM algorithms.


36
     The 1947 input-output tables have been digitized by Soltan (2019) and are available at the follow-
     ing link: https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi%3A10.7910%2FDVN%2FMMHRU7
     (downloaded in September 2018).

                                                       B3
                                                Figure B1: Alternative Estimations of TFP

         0.34               GNR 2020
                                                                                                   0.34               GNR 2020

                            LP 2003                                                                                   OP 1996
         0.29                                                                                      0.29

         0.25                                                                                      0.25

         0.20                                                                                      0.20

         0.15                                                                                      0.15

         0.11                                                                                      0.11

         0.06                                                                                      0.06

         0.01                                                                                      0.01

         -0.04                                                                                     -0.04
                 -5   -4   -3    -2    -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10                -5   -4   -3   -2     -1   0    1    2     3     4  5   6   7   8   9   10
                                                Years after training                                                                      Years after training



                       Panel A: TFP, LP (2003)                                                                   Panel B: TFP, OP (1996)
Notes . These graphs show the difference between estimating the TFP following the recent methodology
by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) and the older methodologies proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003) and Olley and Pakes (1996).




                                                                                              B4
                                      Table B1: List, Definition, and Sources of Variables
Variable                                Definition                                     Level, Source and Years of Coverage               Notes
Plants                                  Number of firm plants                          Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
Employees                               Number of employees                            Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
Foundation year                         Year of firm's foundation                      Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                                                                       Firm, Replacement Schedules, imputed in
Sector                                  Sector in which firm operated                                                                    See Section B.
                                                                                       1941
Revenues                                Annual operating revenues                      Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
Sales                                   Annual revenues from sales                     Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                        Assets that can be converted to cash within
Current assets                                                                         Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                        one year or less
Total assets                            Total amount of assets                         Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                                                                       Firm-year, Financial Statement, calculated in     Authors' calculation following Gandhi,
TFP                                     Total factor productivity
                                                                                       1935-1955                                         Navarro, and Rivers (2020)'s methodology
                                                                                       Firm-year, Financial Statement, calculated in
ROA                                     Ratio between profits and fixed gross assets                                                     Authors' calculation
                                                                                       1935-1955
                                        Fixed gross asset is the value of land,
Gross fixed assets                                                                     Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                        buildings, and machines owned by the firm.
                                        Difference between current and lagged value
Investment                                                                             Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                        of gross fixed assets
                                        Capital stock is calculated using the
                                                                                       Firm-year, Financial Statement, calculated in
Capital stock                           perpetual inventory method (PIM) from the                                                        See table notes
                                                                                       1935-1955
                                        gross fixed asset.
Inventory                               Value of inventory at cost                     Firm-year,   Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                                                                       Firm-year,   Financial Statement, calculated in
Intermediate inputs                     Sum of raw materials and services
                                                                                       1935-1955
Maintenance                             Cost of machine maintenance                    Firm-year,   Financial   Statement,   1935-1955
Injuries                                Cost of workers' injuries                      Firm-year,   Financial   Statement,   1935-1955
Repairs                                 Cost of machine repairs                        Firm-year,   Financial   Statement,   1935-1955
Bonus payments                          Cost of bonus paid to workers                  Firm-year,   Financial   Statement,   1935-1955
Product lines                           Number of product lines                        Firm-year,   Financial   Statement,   1935-1955
                                        =1 if firm reported spending for on-the-job
Prob training                                                                          Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                        training
Prob marketing                          =1 if firm reported spending for marketing     Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1935-1955
                                                                                       Firm-year, Work Stoppages Caused by Labor
Strikes                                 Number of strikes
                                                                                       Management Disputes, BLS, 1935-1955
Share African-Americans                 % of African-American workers                  Firm-year, Replacement Schedules, 1941-1945
Share women                             % of women in workforce                        Firm-year, Replacement Schedules, 1941-1945
Years of education                      Average years of education of workforce        Firm-year, Replacement Schedules, 1941-1945
Age of workforce                        Average age of workforce                       Firm-year, Replacement Schedules, 1941-1945
Share drafted employees (1942-1945)     % of drafted employees                         Firm, Replacement Schedules, 1942-1945
                                        Indicator if at least one war product was      Firm, Civilian Production Administration
Switched 3-digit SIC                    different from products in 1941 in 3-digit     and Replacement Schedules, imputed for the        See Section B.
                                        1939 SIC codes                                 period 1940-1945
                                        Indicator if at least one war product was      Firm, Civilian Production Administration
Switched 2-digit SIC                    different from products in 1941 in 2-digit     and Replacement Schedules, imputed for the        See Section B.
                                        1939 SIC codes                                 period 1940-1945
                                        Indicator if at least one war product was      Firm, Civilian Production Administration
Switched 1-digit SIC                    different from products in 1941 in 1-digit     and Replacement Schedules, imputed for the        See Section B.
                                        1939 SIC codes                                 period 1940-1945
                                                                                       Firm-year, Civilian Production                    Aggregated at the firm-year level from the
Number of contracts                     Number of war contracts
                                                                                       Administration, 1940-1945                         original contract-level data
                                                                                       Firm-year, Civilian Production                    Aggregated at the firm-year level from the
Value of contracts                      Value of contracts
                                                                                       Administration, 1940-1945                         original contract-level data
                                        Subsidies given to firms to go back to civil
Post-WWII refunds                                                                      Firm-year, Financial Statement, 1946-1951
                                        production


Notes . To compute capital stock, we use the following PIM formula: Pt+1 Kt+1 = Pt+1 (1 -  )Pt Kt +
Pt+1 It+1 , where K is gross fixed asset, I is investment, P is the capital price (set equal to the interest
rate on credit from 1935 to 1955), and  is the depreciation rate (set equal to 5.5 percent). To estimate
K0 P0 at replacement costs from its historical cost reported in the financial statement, we used the
                                                                                   +1 -1](1+ ) [(1+g )(1+ )-1]
RG factor suggested by Balakrishnan et al. (2000), computed as RG = [(1+g) g{[(1+        g )(1+ )] +1 -1}
where  is the average life of machines (assumed to be 15 years),  is the average capital price PP t
                                                                                                t-1
from 1935 to 1955 (equal to 1.00476667), and g is the (assumed constant) real GDP growth rate from
1935 to 1955 (equal to 1.0589524).




                                                                                       B5
                                   Table B2: Estimation of Production Function

                                I. Food                          II. Textile                       III.Wood                       IV. Paper
                       l           k           m         l           k           m         l           k        m         l           k         m
GNR                  0.26***    0.25***      0.49***   0.22***    0.25***      0.55***   0.21***   0.18***    0.63***   0.22***    0.28***    0.51***
                      (0.02)     (0.03)       (0.05)    (0.01)     (0.03)       (0.06)    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.04)    (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.06)
LP                   0.32***    0.20***      0.51***   0.31***    0.16***      0.54***   0.30***   0.15***    0.60***   0.31***    0.14***    0.51***
                      (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.03)    (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.05)    (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.04)
OP                   0.33***    0.18***      0.53***   0.30***    0.18***      0.53***   0.31***   0.16***    0.57***   0.32***    0.21***    0.49***
                      (0.03)     (0.01)       (0.05)    (0.03)     (0.04)       (0.05)    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)
OLS                  0.20***    0.15***      0.65***   0.18***    0.20***      0.62***   0.15***   0.16***    0.69***   0.17***    0.21***    0.62***
                      (0.01)     (0.02)       (0.05)    (0.03)     (0.02)       (0.06)    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.05)    (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.06)
Expenditure Shares     0.24       0.26         0.50      0.20       0.26         0.57      0.20      0.22       0.60      0.21       0.26       0.54

                           V. Machinery                          VI. Metals                    VII. Chemicals                 VIII. Construction
                       l       k        m                l           k           m         l         k        m           l           k         m
GNR                  0.31***    0.20***      0.52***   0.21***    0.19***      0.61***   0.21***   0.15***    0.63***   0.20***    0.31***    0.52***
                      (0.02)     (0.04)       (0.03)    (0.01)     (0.02)       (0.04)    (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.05)    (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.05)
LP                   0.38***    0.15***      0.50***   0.29***    0.14***      0.59***   0.30***   0.14***    0.59***   0.30***    0.20***    0.51***
                      (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.05)    (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.05)
OP                   0.35***    0.17***      0.51***   0.27***    0.16***      0.55***   0.28***   0.15***    0.60***   0.28***    0.17***    0.52***
                      (0.03)     (0.02)       (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.01)       (0.06)    (0.03)    (0.02)     (0.06)    (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.04)
OLS                  0.25***    0.15***      0.60***   0.18***    0.15***      0.67***   0.18***   0.11***    0.72***   0.17***    0.20***    0.65***
                      (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.06)    (0.03)     (0.02)       (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.06)
Expenditure Shares     0.29       0.22         0.55      0.19       0.22         0.58      0.17      0.15       0.68      0.20       0.22       0.61

                               IX. Service                   X. Transportation             XI. Communication
                       l           k           m         l          k         m            l      k        m
GNR                  0.44***    0.15***      0.51***   0.23***    0.11***      0.68***   0.25***   0.27***    0.50***
                      (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.05)    (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.05)    (0.03)    (0.04)     (0.05)
LP                   0.48***    0.13***      0.44***   0.27***    0.10***      0.65***   0.35***   0.17***    0.50***
                      (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.06)    (0.03)    (0.02)     (0.06)
OP                   0.44***    0.15***      0.46***   0.24***    0.15***      0.60***   0.31***   0.19***    0.52***
                      (0.03)     (0.01)       (0.04)    (0.03)     (0.01)       (0.07)    (0.04)    (0.02)     (0.05)
OLS                  0.33***    0.13***      0.59***   0.20***    0.10***      0.72***   0.22***   0.23***    0.57***
                      (0.03)     (0.01)       (0.06)    (0.04)     (0.02)       (0.07)    (0.03)    (0.01)     (0.06)
Expenditure Shares     0.39       0.17         0.55      0.25       0.15         0.63      0.22      0.25       0.54


Notes . Coefficients on labor (l ), capital (k ) and intermediate goods (m ) estimated with the
methodology proposed by Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers (2020) (GNR), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)
(LP), or Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP). Moreover, we show the coefficients from simple OLS regressions,
as well as expenditure shares for each two-digit sector. *** denotes 1%, ** denotes 5%, and * denotes
10% significance.




                                                                        B6
                 Table B3: Coefficients of PSM between Trained and Nontrained Firms

                                         TWI          TWI          TWI          TWI          TWI          TWI
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

Plants                                     0.0034     0.0034       -0.0308       -0.0310      -0.0330     -0.0360
                                         (0.0061)    (0.0027)     (0.0322)      (0.0323)     (0.0330)    (0.0334)
Employees                              -0.0002***     -0.0000    -0.0004***   -0.0004***   -0.0004***     -0.0001
                                         (0.0001)    (0.0000)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)    (0.0001)
TFP                                     -0.0739**   -0.0551***     -0.0532      -0.0549*      -0.0538    -0.0634*
                                         (0.0323)    (0.0144)     (0.0330)      (0.0332)     (0.0342)    (0.0346)
Distance to nearest port                   0.0001     0.0001*       0.0001        0.0002       0.0003      0.0003
                                         (0.0001)    (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)    (0.0002)
Distance to nearest railroad station     -0.0007*   -0.0007***    -0.0007*       -0.0007      -0.0009    -0.0010*
                                         (0.0004)    (0.0002)     (0.0004)      (0.0004)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)
Sales                                   0.0000**       0.0000    0.0000***     0.0000***    0.0000***   0.0000***
                                         (0.0000)    (0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Manufacturing                             -0.0190     -0.0222      -0.0206       -0.0267      -0.0581     -0.0631
                                         (0.0734)    (0.0328)     (0.0735)      (0.0739)     (0.0757)    (0.0764)
Transportation                            -0.0506     -0.0540      -0.0516       -0.0454      -0.0820     -0.0676
                                         (0.0820)    (0.0367)     (0.0821)      (0.0824)     (0.0843)    (0.0851)
Services                                   0.0148     0.0135        0.0197        0.0147      -0.0160     0.0057
                                         (0.1088)    (0.0486)     (0.1088)      (0.1094)     (0.1121)    (0.1130)
Foundation year                                                    -0.0041       -0.0042      -0.0048     -0.0051
                                                                  (0.0031)      (0.0031)     (0.0032)    (0.0032)
Inventory                                                           0.0000        0.0000       0.0000      0.0000
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Capital                                                             0.0000        0.0000      0.0000    -0.0000**
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Current assets                                                      0.0000        0.0000      0.0000      0.0000
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Investment                                                         -0.0000       -0.0000      -0.0000     -0.0000
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Strikes                                                             0.0503        0.0520      0.0481       0.0551
                                                                  (0.0441)      (0.0442)     (0.0451)    (0.0456)
Injuries                                                           -0.0000       -0.0000      -0.0000     -0.0000
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Bonus                                                              -0.0000      -0.0000*      -0.0000    -0.0000*
                                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)    (0.0000)
Subsidiaries                                                        0.0025        0.0014       0.0125      0.0070
                                                                  (0.0293)      (0.0294)     (0.0301)    (0.0303)
Observations                            11,575       57,867       11,575       11,575       11,575       11,567
Periods                                   -1        [-5 , -1]       -1           -1           -1           -1
Year FEs                                  No          Yes           No           No           No           No
District FEs                              No           No           No          Yes           No           No
Subdistrict FEs                           No           No           No           No          Yes          Yes
App. window FEs                           No           No           No           No           No          Yes

Notes . This table shows the coefficients from different propensity score matching between trained and
nontrained firms. Table A7 shows the main results using the different matched samples. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        B7
C         Results on TWI Instructors' Assignments

             Table C1: Correlation Between TWI Training and Instructors' Composition
                 J-I first   J-R first   J-M first   J-I + J-R        J-R + J-I   J-R + J-M   J-M + J-R   J-I + J-M   J-M + J-I
                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)              (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)

Max J-I          0.215***
                  (0.009)
Max J-R                      0.197***
                              (0.010)
Max J-M                                  0.192***
                                          (0.008)
Max J-I + J-R                                        0.136***
                                                      (0.013)
Max J-R + J-I                                                         0.128***
                                                                       (0.011)
Max J-R + J-M                                                                     0.166***
                                                                                   (0.016)
Max J-M + J-R                                                                                 0.080***
                                                                                               (0.013)
Max J-I + J-M                                                                                             0.152***
                                                                                                           (0.014)
Max J-M + J-I                                                                                                         0.179***
                                                                                                                       (0.009)

Observations      10,735      10,735      10,735      10,735           10,735      10,735      10,735      10,735      10,735
R2                0.189       0.192       0.188       0.146            0.147       0.146       0.121       0.135       0.150
Mean dep. var.     0.18        0.18        0.17        0.09             0.10        0.12        0.10        0.13        0.11


Notes . This table shows the correlations between the firm-level TWI training and the share of TWI instructors
assigned to a firm's subdistrict and application window. The dependent variables are the following dummies:
J-I first = 1 for firms that first received the Job-Instructions training; J-R first = 1 for firms that first received
the Job-Relations training; J-M first = 1 for firms that first received the Job-Methods training; J-I + J-R = 1
for firms that received first the J-I training and then the J-R training; J-R + J-I = 1 for firms that received
first the J-R training and then the J-I training; J-R + J-M = 1 for firms that received first the J-R training and
then the J-M training; J-M + J-R = 1 for firms that received first the J-M training and then the J-R training;
J-I + J-M = 1 for firms that received first the J-I training and then the J-M training; J-M + J-I = 1 for firms
that received first the J-M training and then the J-I training. The independent variables measure the following:
Max J-x = 1 for firms that applied in subdistricts and application windows in which the share of instructors
for training J-x (I, R, or M) was the highest; Max J-x + J-y = 1 for firms that applied in subdistricts and
application windows in which the share of instructors for training J-x (I, R, or M) was the highest and the
share of instructors for training J-y (y = x) was the second highest. The regressions also include fixed effects for
county-sector pairs, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and
the firm application. The standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict-application window level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                 C1
           Table C2: Correlation Between Firm and County Variables and TWI Instructors
                                                Max               Max            Max                Max                Max               Max              Max              Max         Max
                                                J-I               J-R            J-M             J-I + J-R           J-R + J-I        J-R + J-M        J-M + J-R        J-I + J-M    J-M + J-I
                                                (1)               (2)            (3)                 (4)                (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)         (9)
                                                         Panel A: Regressions of TWI instructors on firm characteristics in period -1
 p -value of joint significance                 0.99              0.95           0.70              0.35                 0.94               0.90              0.57          0.99         0.92
 Observations                                  10,735            10,735         10,735            10,735               10,735             10,735            10,735        10,735       10,735
                            Panel B: Regressions of TWI instructors on firm characteristics, including number and value of government contracts, in period -1
 p -value of joint significance                 0.99              0.96           0.82              0.38                 0.94               0.86              0.70          0.98         0.96
 Observations                                  10,727            10,727         10,727            10,727               10,727             10,727            10,727        10,727       10,727
                                                      Panel C: Regressions of TWI instructors on county characteristics in year 1940
 p -value of joint significance                 0.01              0.14           0.01              0.01                 0.71               0.07              0.86          0.23         0.12
 Observations                                  10,745            10,745         10,745            10,745               10,745             10,745            10,745        10,745       10,745
                                                      Panel D: Regressions of TWI instructors on county characteristics in year 1930
 p -value of joint significance                 0.05              0.19           0.14              0.05                 0.83               0.36              0.66          0.07         0.71
 Observations                                  10,859            10,859         10,859            10,859               10,859             10,859            10,859        10,859       10,859
                                                        Panel E: Regressions of TWI instructors on county characteristics in year 1920
 p -value of joint significance                 0.04              0.18           0.12              0.01                 0.57               0.09              0.72          0.40         0.85
 Observations                                  10,873            10,873         10,873            10,873               10,873             10,873            10,873        10,873       10,873


Notes . Panel A shows the p -value of the test of joint significance of the coefficients of fifteen firm characteristics observed in period
-1. The variables are: the logs of sales, value added, number of employees, number of plants, foundation year, the value of inventory,
capital, current assets, investments, number of workers' strikes, monetary compensation for workers' injuries, performance-based
bonus payments, number of subsidiaries, as well as distance to the nearest railroad station and distance to the nearest port. Panel
B adds the inverse hyperbolic sine function of the number and value of government contracts. The regressions also include fixed
effects for county-sector pairs, the application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm
application. Panels C, D, and E show the p -value of the test of joint significance of the coefficients of several county characteristics
measured in 1940, 1930, and 1920, respectively. The county-level variables are imputed to firms based on their location. These
regressions include: log population, log of the manufacturing value added, log number of manufacturing establishments, log number
of manufacturing employees, log average manufacturing wage, log total expenses in manufacturing, log value of manufacturing
production, farms per capita, unemployment share (available only in 1930 and 1940), population per square mile, share of male
residents, share of black population, share of urban population, share of illiterate population (available only in 1920 and 1930).
County data are from IPUMS NHGIS, www.nhgis.org. The regressions also include fixed effects for subdistrict-sector pairs, the
application window, and the number of days between the opening of the window and the firm application. The description of the
dependent variables is in the notes of Table C1. Standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict-application window level.




                      Table C3: Autocorrelation between Current and Past TWI Instructors
                                   Max           Max                 Max               Max                   Max                   Max                Max               Max           Max
                                   J-It          J-Rt                J-Mt           J-I + J-Rt             J-R + J-It           J-R + J-Mt         J-M + J-Rt        J-I + J-Mt     J-M + J-It
                                    (1)           (2)                   (3)              (4)                   (5)                  (6)               (7)               (8)            (9)
Max J-It-1                         0.002
                                  (0.022)
Max J-Rt-1                                       0.019
                                                (0.025)
Max J-Mt-1                                                           -0.002
                                                                    (0.022)
Max J-I + J-Rt-1                                                                        -0.020
                                                                                       (0.023)
Max J-R + J-It-1                                                                                              0.016
                                                                                                             (0.026)
Max J-R + J-Mt-1                                                                                                                  0.046*
                                                                                                                                  (0.026)
Max J-M + J-Rt-1                                                                                                                                    -0.037*
                                                                                                                                                    (0.020)
Max J-I + J-Mt-1                                                                                                                                                       0.012
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.023)
Max J-M + J-It-1                                                                                                                                                                      -0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.023)

Observations                       1,873         1,873               1,873              1,873                1,873                1,873              1,873             1,873          1,873
R2                                < 0.001       < 0.001             < 0.001            < 0.001              < 0.001               0.002              0.001            < 0.001        < 0.001


Notes . The table shows the autocorrelation between the current and past share of instructors for different types of TWI trainings.
The unit of observation is one of 364 subdistricts and one of 10 application windows. The description of the dependent variables is
in the notes of Table C1. The standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                               C2
                                    Table C4: IV and OLS Event Studies

                                     Sales                            TFP                          ROA
                             (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)              (6)

 J-I x Post TWI           0.120***            0.185**    0.053***             0.055       -0.005          -0.025
                           (0.007)            (0.086)     (0.005)            (0.054)     (0.004)         (0.056)
 J-R x Post TWI           0.155***           0.263***    0.277***           0.313***    0.147***         0.135**
                           (0.008)            (0.083)     (0.004)            (0.052)     (0.005)         (0.054)
 J-M x Post TWI           0.113***           0.178***    0.144***           0.154***    0.052***           0.024
                           (0.007)            (0.054)     (0.004)            (0.034)     (0.006)         (0.036)

 Specification              OLS                 IV            OLS              IV         OLS              IV
 Observations              67,472             67,472         67,472          67,472      67,472          67,472


Notes . This table shows the coefficients of the interactions between the training variables and a post-TWI dummy
variable. In the IV specifications, we instrument for the TWI training variables using three dummy variables
that measure the allocation of TWI instructors to each subdistrict and application window: Max J-x = 1 for
firms that applied in subdistricts and application windows in which the share of instructors for training J-x (I,
R, or M) was the highest. The sample includes applicant firms that either received only one TWI training or
no training at all. The standard errors are clustered at the subdistrict-application window level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        C3
