                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MORE THAN AN IVORY TOWER:
                    THE IMPACT OF RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS ON
                THE QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                        Valentina Tartari
                                          Scott Stern

                                      Working Paper 28846
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28846


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021



We would like to thank Pierre Azoulay, Maryann Feldman, Jeff Furman, Jorge Guzman, Fiona
Murray, and seminar participants at Copenhagen Business School, DRUID, the AIEA-NBER
Conference, the 2021 ASSA meetings, the NBER Productivity Seminar, and participants in the
MIT Regional Ecosystem Acceleration Program for useful comments and feedback, and Luca
Gius for excellent research assistance. This work was supported by the Jean Hammond (1986)
and Michael Krasner (1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward B. Roberts (1957)
Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT, and the Kauffman Foundation. Valentina Tartari gratefully
acknowledges the support from the Independent Research Fund Denmark through a Sapere Aude
Research Talent Grant (DFF ­4003-00137B), and Stern gratefully acknowledges the hospitality
and hosting of Copenhagen Business School. All errors and omissions are of course our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28846.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Valentina Tartari and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
More than an Ivory Tower: The Impact of Research Institutions on the Quantity and Quality
of Entrepreneurship
Valentina Tartari and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 28846
May 2021
JEL No. L26,O3,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides systematic empirical evidence for the distinctive role of universities on local
entrepreneurial ecosystems. Assessing the impact of research institutions on entrepreneurship is
challenging, given that these institutions are often located in economic and innovation
environments conducive to growth-oriented entrepreneurial activity, are themselves a source of
local demand, and produce knowledge, which might serve as the foundation for new ventures.
To overcome this inference challenge, we first combine comprehensive business registration
records with a predictive analytics approach to measure both the quantity and quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship at the zip-code level on an annual basis. We then link each location
to the presence or absence of research-oriented universities or national laboratories. Finally, we
exploit significant changes over time in Federal commitments to both universities and national
laboratories. Our key finding is that changes in Federal research commitments to universities are
uniquely linked to positively correlated changes in the quality-adjusted quantity of
entrepreneurship. In contrast, increases in non-research funding to universities and funding to
national laboratories is associated with either a neutral or negative impact on the quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship. Research funding to universities seems to play a unique role in
promoting the acceleration of local entrepreneurial ecosystems.


Valentina Tartari
Copenhagen Business School
Kilevej 14A
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
vt.si@cbs.dk

Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sstern@mit.edu
   I.      Introduction

   A distinguishing feature of publicly funded research organizations such as universities or
national laboratories is that they are situated in a single (or small number) of locations. As
geographically bounded institutions, universities and national laboratories are often invoked, by
both economists and policymakers, as drivers of local knowledge spillovers (Jaffe, 1989; Acs,
Audretsch and Feldman, 1992; Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson, 1993; Moretti, 2012) and local
economic development (Adams, Chiang and Jensen, 2003; Kantor and Whalley, 2014; Hausman,
2020).

   A particularly important route through which research institutions might influence local
outcomes is through entrepreneurship. The role of universities and related institutions as drivers of
local entrepreneurship (and subsequent economic development) is largely grounded in academic
and policy discussions of leading entrepreneurial "ecosystems" such as Silicon Valley (anchored by
institutions such as Stanford, Berkeley, and UC-SF), Boston (with at least 10 research institutions),
and the Research Triangle Park in North Carolina (Feldman, 1994, 2014; Saxenian, 1996). For
example, in the late 1980s, a group of five North Carolina State engineers conducting pioneering
research on the advantages silicon carbide for light-emitting diode (LED) founded a start-up
company, Cree. Given their ties to the local community, Cree was founded on the outskirts of the
North Carolina State campus, and, over the next 25 years, established itself as a leader in the
emerging LED industry, employing more than 6000 workers (mostly in the local region).

   The purpose of this paper is to assess the impact of research institutions on the overall quantity
and quality of local entrepreneurship. Focusing on the overall impact of research institutions on
entrepreneurship in regions proximate to those research institutions allows us offer an integrated
analysis of questions of theoretical and policy interest. On the one hand, both universities and
national laboratories serve as a source of local demand and produce frontier knowledge that might
form the basis of new companies. But, while the impact of research institutions as a source of local
demand is likely to enhance the quantity of entrepreneurs, the ability to leverage frontier research
can play a critical role in the formation of companies with a high potential for significant growth at
founding. In other words, public research institutions may not simply increase the quantity of
entrepreneurs but also their average quality. As well, though both universities and national
laboratories conduct research at significant scale, universities are distinctive in also producing
students (who might launch careers as entrepreneurs or start-up employees in the local area) and
being governed by policies and rules that encourage openness and diffusion to the local
environment (Valero and Van Reenen, 2019).
                                                                                                         3
   While a significant body of work emphasizes the importance of geographically mediated
academic entrepreneurship as an outcome of university and national laboratory research (Kenney,
1986; Feldman, 1994; Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Zucker, Darby and Armstrong, 1998), this
prior by and large focuses on establishing the linkage between the presence of a specific type of
research (e.g., life sciences) conducted at a university or national laboratory and subsequent
entrepreneurship either initiated by individuals directly connected to the research activities or in
industries that draw directly on knowledge related to that research (Stern, 1995; Zucker, Darby and
Armstrong, 1998; Audretsch, Lehmann and Warning, 2005; Baptista and Mendonça, 2010; Babina
et al., 2020; Hausman, 2020). Though informative about the potential role that specific areas of
research play in shaping subsequent local entrepreneurship, these focused sectoral studies do not
provide evidence about the overall impact of research institutions on the overall level and nature of
entrepreneurship. Specifically, research institutions such as universities engage in many different
activities, including hosting a diverse research portfolio over many fields, educating students, and
hosting sporting events and conferences. Focusing exclusively on the impact of a particularly
fertile research area (such as biotechnology) may be evidence for the impact of a particular area of
research at a particular time without providing evidence for the overall impact of research
institutions on the local economic environment. In other words, the average impact of research
activities by public research institutions on entrepreneurship may be very different than the impact
linked to specific discoveries or inventions.

   Rather than track the impact of specific research trajectories (or individuals), we focus on the
impact of the resources of research institutions on the level and nature of entrepreneurship
proximate to that research institution. Specifically, we assess how the activities of a research
institution in a particular location influence both the rate and nature of entrepreneurship adjacent to
that location. To do so we must address two broad challenges. First, while both theoretical and
policy discussions of the economic developments of entrepreneurship focus on the impact arising
from a small number of highly skewed growth outcomes (e.g., firms such as Cree that grow to
become large employers within the local economy), most entrepreneurs found their firm with
neither the intention nor the resources for significant growth (Schoar, 2010; Hurst and Pugsley,
2011). As a source of local economic demand, research institutions may encourage local
entrepreneurship without advancing the potential for economic development. However, some of
the activities of research institutions ­ such as the production of scientific discoveries, technological
innovations, and students with frontier knowledge ­ may induce not only a higher quantity of
entrepreneurship but also entrepreneurship with a higher quality. Capturing these broader impacts
requires capturing not only the quantity of entrepreneurship ­ the number of new businesses within
                                                                                                          4
a given location ­ but also the quality of entrepreneurship ­ the potential for growth of these new
businesses at their founding.

    Second, even if one is able to measure both the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship, the co-
location of research institutions and the strength of local entrepreneurial ecosystems is not random.
Most notably, there may be common infrastructure, amenities, or knowledge that influence both the
activities of the research institution as well as local entrepreneurship. Simply comparing the
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship in locations proximate to research institution with locations
that are not proximate to a research institution cannot provide direct evidence for the impact of
research institutions on local entrepreneurship. Moreover, even if one tracks the activities of
research institutions over time, it is possible that the activities of the entrepreneurial ecosystem are
itself influencing the activities of the research institution. As such, an estimate of the causal impact
of research institutions on local entrepreneurship requires both variation impacting the level of
activities of the research institution independently of local entrepreneurship, as well as an approach
that accounts for the dynamic impact of local entrepreneurship itself. At a broad level, the
experiment we would like to assess is whether activity at the research institution (e.g., the
development of a new research trajectory whose quality merits Federal funding) itself influences the
quantity and quality of subsequent entrepreneurship in the ecosystem surrounding that research
institution.

    We tackle these challenges in three interrelated steps, First, leveraging data from the Startup
Cartography Project (Andrews et al., 2020), we develop a consistent set of zip-code-level measures
of both the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship across 34 U.S. states from
1988-2012. Second, for each of these zip codes, we identify both the presence and absence of
universities and national laboratories co-located nearby to that zip code, as well as a rich set of
covariates that allow us to observe zip codes that are otherwise "similar" to those that are located
next to a research institution. Finally, we take advantage of the fact that, for a given research
institutions (university or national lab), there are quantitatively significant changes over time in the
allocation of Federal funds (both research-oriented and more general) to that institution, and the
allocation of the bulk of these funds is through competitive grant processes that is independent of
future changes to the local entrepreneurial ecosystem (Federal research funding is driven by grants
based on scientific merit). For example, after subtracting out research institution fixed effects and
year fixed effects, more than one-third of the variance in research funds allocated to universities is
idiosyncratic variation to that research institution over time (above and beyond any overall time
trends).

                                                                                                           5
   We leverage these data to undertake two broad types of analyses. First, we undertake a cross-
sectional evaluation of the link between research institutions and both the quantity and quality-
adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship across locations. The cross-sectional analysis points to the
broad colocation of university and a high quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship, particularly
in areas that are urban, in historically high-income zip codes, and for zip codes collocated with a
top-tier university. Moreover, there has been a sizeable shift in the link between research
institutions and entrepreneurship over time. First, regardless of whether there is a university or
national lab in a location, the types of locations that host research institutions seem to have become
more associated with the quantity of entrepreneurship over time. However, even after accounting
for these underlying place-based characteristics, there is a sharp (and cyclical) uptick in the
association between universities and the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.

   Building on these descriptive findings, we then turn to the heart of our analysis, where we focus
on the causal impact of changes over time in the allocation of Federal resources (in terms of
research and non-research funding) on the subsequent level of entrepreneurship. To address the
main potential sources of bias, we implement both a fixed effects panel data estimator, as well as
first-differences instrumental variables estimators that account for the potential for dynamics within
a given entrepreneurial ecosystem. The results are striking. On the one hand, we find that a
positive shock in the allocation of Federal resources (both research and non-research, to universities
or national laboratories) is associated with a meaningful increase in the quantity of
entrepreneurship. This is in line with the idea that, as large local economic institutions, universities
induce local demand for entrepreneurship of all types.

   However, when we turn to an analysis of the impact of Federal resources on the quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship (i.e., accounting for the potential for growth and spillovers from these
start-ups), we find a very sizeable positive impact of Federal research expenditures towards
universities but a negative impact on non-research resources and a small (and negative) impact on
research resources to national laboratories. Taken at face value, the estimates suggest that the
ideation of an idea within a university that is able to attract $1.56 million of Federal support induces
an incremental level of quality-adjusted entrepreneurship to result in a one successful growth
outcome from the cohort of start-ups founded in that given university ecosystem (i.e., within the zip
codes immediately adjacent to that university) over the next six years. This quantitative impact is
particularly striking given that, though highly skewed, the private returns to successful growth-
oriented entrepreneurship (conditional on a successful exit (i.e., an IPO or acquisition worth more
than $10 million) are extremely high: a successful growth outcome has an average (though

                                                                                                        6
skewed) private value of more than $50 million) (Hall and Woodward, 2007). Moreover, given that
the idiosyncratic component of Federal research support for a zip code within our dataset is more
than $10 million, our findings suggest that the development of new research within universities that
attract Federal research support have a meaningful near-term impact on the subsequent quality of
entrepreneurship within local entrepreneurial ecosystems.

   Overall, these findings document the distinct impact of universities and national laboratories on
local entrepreneurial ecosystem. There are two key distinctions that are worthwhile to note. First,
there seems to be a meaningful distinction between research activity and non-research activity at
universities; whereas non-research activity raises the quantity of entrepreneurship (but lowers its
average quality), research activity increases both the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of
entrepreneurship. Second, there is an important distinction between universities and national
laboratories. While these are the two primary institutions conductions publicly funded research in
the United States, university research activities seem to be more closely linked to spillovers to local
entrepreneurial ecosystems, whereas the more cloistered nature of national laboratories is associated
with a much more muted (or even perhaps negative) impact. These results highlight the important
and unique role universities play in building and sustaining entrepreneurial ecosystems. Because of
their norms and missions, universities seem to be able to spur economic development more widely
than other research institutions, and also beyond the simple fact of being located in high-growth
locations. For example, our findings offer broad support for recent policy proposals such as the
2021 Endless Frontiers Act that prioritize the role of university research in place-based policy
(Gruber and Johnson, 2019; Senate of the United States, 2021).

   II.     The Impact of Public Research Institutions on Entrepreneurship

   The central objective of this paper is to consider the empirical impact of research universities
and national laboratories on entrepreneurship. We begin our analysis by briefly synthesizing g the
distinctive economic properties of these public research institutions, and then draw out the
implications of these properties for entrepreneurship in the context of a simple model.

   It is useful to start by highlighting a central feature of the US national innovation system: the
highly decentralized performance of publicly funded scientific and engineering research across a
wide variety of institutions and domains (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1993; Rosenberg and Nelson,
1994). In particular, though the classical rationale for public investment in research arising from
lack of appropriability is consistent with simply funding the research activities of private firms
(Nelson, 1959; Arrow, 1972), the majority of public funding of research (as opposed to

                                                                                                       7
development) is concentrated in public and non-profit institutions, most notably universities and
national laboratories. There are more than 260 research universities scattered across the United
States receiving more than 30 billion USD annually from public research funds, and 46 national
laboratories engaging in research with more than 19 billion USD research funds per year. When
research is performed in an institution such as a national laboratory or university that only conducts
research but face significant restrictions in direct commercialization, the social return from that
public research investment depends crucially on whether research is transferred to the private
sector. Though direct transfer to established firms is an important channel for such knowledge
transfer (Furman and MacGarvie, 2007), the establishment of new firms leveraging new knowledge
may be a particularly important channel for realizing the benefit of publicly funded research
(Baptista, Lima and Mendonça, 2011; Kim, Kim and Yang, 2012).

   As research-enhancing economic institutions (Furman and Stern, 2011; Valero and Van Reenen,
2019), universities and national labs share a number of distinctive properties and also display some
key differences that shape their potential impact on entrepreneurship. On the one hand, both
universities and national laboratories engage in a wide variety of different types of research,
including both basic and applied research, and there are examples of important fundamental
breakthroughs (as well as more modest discoveries) from both types of institutions. As well, both
employ a workforce highly skewed towards those with a high level of formal training in scientific
and engineering fields, the bulk of public research funding is assigned to individualized researchers
pursuing well-defined research projects at a moment in time, and, to first approximation,
researchers are allowed to disclose their research findings to the broader scientific and engineering
community through publication and other types of disclosure (Dasgupta and David, 1994; Stephan,
2012).

   Importantly, both universities and national laboratories are geographically bounded, with
physical campuses in specific locations (and usually only a small number of satellite locations).
Interestingly, the place-based nature of these research-enhancing institutions suggests that they will
serve potentially as a source of knowledge for potential local spillovers. As well, universities and
national laboratories are important economic agents within a given geography (e.g., as a source of
local demand). As a source of economic density, universities concentrate demand in a particular
place, thus encouraging the formation of new businesses near that place. This channel is of course
particularly salient at the earliest stages of a university (Andrews, 2020) or in response to a change
in the scale of university activities (i.e., in equilibrium, there would be a sustained flow of new
businesses, but not necessarily different from other places).


                                                                                                         8
       Despite these significant similarities between universities and national laboratories, a number
of key distinctions point towards the potential for differences in their likely impact on
entrepreneurship in the local environment. Most notably, whereas universities combine the education
and training of students alongside the pursuit of research, national labs by and large are focused more
narrowly on research (Jaffe and Lerner, 2001; Adams, Chiang and Jensen, 2003). Not simply a
difference in the scope of their activities, students may play an important (and often underappreciated)
role in transferring knowledge produced by universities into private sector activity, including the
founding of new firms by students directly as well as the hiring of students into start-ups for the
purpose of leveraging their frontier knowledge.

       Though the presence or absence of students and an educational function is likely the primary
contrast between universities and national laboratories, universities also likely maintain practices and
offer incentives that enhance the fluidity between research and industry, and may focus on a broader
range of research problems that may be more applicable for local economic development. The most
obvious channel through which knowledge flows from universities and other research organizations
involves scientific research published in academic journals. This research is produced locally but it
is distributed globally, and it is in principle available for anyone to use, independent of their
geographical location. Yet, empirical evidence points to a different pattern. Jaffe and colleagues
(1993) show that patents tend to cite other patents produced by organizations (both universities and
corporations) that are located nearby. Even more strikingly, Adams (2002) finds that knowledge
flows from universities tend to be much more local in nature than spillovers from firms, highlighting
the apparent paradox that institutions whose mandate is to produce public knowledge, such as
universities, tend to benefit disproportionately local businesses. Adams goes on arguing that it is
precisely because of the open nature of the knowledge that is produced by universities, that we
observe firms gravitating around academic institutions: as knowledge and information, especially if
they are highly tacit in nature, do not transmit without costs, firms locate close to universities to
absorb knowledge which is "reasonably current and not propriety" (Adams, 2002, p. 274). The
importance of oral transmission of knowledge is indeed one of the main reasons why people tend to
cluster in cities notwithstanding the increased costs (Lucas, 1988). This channel, which is present for
all firms, may be even more relevant for start-ups (Audretsch and Thurik, 2001) as they rely more
heavily on externally produced knowledge (Hall, Link and Scott, 2003) due to the lower amount of
resources they can devote to internal R&D. In other words, while both universities and national labs
conduct research, the dual mission of universities and related practices may have the consequence
that universities are more likely to serve as a source of knowledge for start-up activity in the local
environment, at least in the short to medium term.
                                                                                                      9
            These distinctive properties of universities and national laboratories as local economic
institutions have distinctive implications for both the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of local
entrepreneurship. Consider a simple stylized model in which within a location r there is a potential
set of risk-neutral entrepreneurs, normalized to be equal to a unit mass. Each entrepreneur i considers
two alternative opportunities, L and H. L is a local opportunity whose net operating profits are
determined by the size of the local market, dr, while H is a knowledge-based opportunity whose value
is determined by  rH (the quality of the accessible local knowledge stock) and pH (the probability of
success in the knowledge-based opportunity conditional on pursuing that opportunity).                                                            For
simplicity, the quality of the local opportunity does not depend on the quality of the local knowledge
stock, and the quality or probability of success of the knowledge-based opportunity does not depend
on the size of the local market. Finally, entrepreneurs differ in the skills and resources they bring to
entrepreneurship, and so each entrepreneur faces an idiosyncratic fixed cost of pursuing
entrepreneurship,  i , identical for both L and H, with  i  f ( ;  ) . 1

            Each potential entrepreneur chooses whether to pursue the local opportunity, the knowledge-
based opportunity, or neither opportunity (e.g., paid employment). Normalizing the returns to paid
employment equal to 0, the relative returns to L are simply d r -  i while the returns to H are

 rH p H -  i . Before turning to the choice of whether to choose entrepreneurship, this very simple

model yields a sharp result in terms of whether to pursue L or H: if d r >  rH p H , then entrepreneurs
will pursue the local opportunity and, in the converse, the knowledge-based opportunity. The
quantity of entrepreneurship will then be determined by the value of the preferred opportunity versus
the fixed cost of entry with a cut-off equal to to  i <  r* =
                                                            max{d r ,  rH p H } . This cut-off determines
                                                                     r
                                                                     *


the overall quantity of entrepreneurship, r =                         f ( )d .
                                                                     0
                                                                                        However, the quality-adjusted quantity of

                                                                                               rH p H
entrepreneurship,  r , will be 0 if d r >  p and =  =                                                   f ( )d  if d r   rH p H . Though
                                                                 H   H
                                                  r r           r
                                                                                                 0


simplified in the extreme, this structure highlights that while the quantity of entrepreneurship is
shaped by the overall attractiveness of both local and knowledge-based opportunity, the quality-
adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship (i.e., the incidence of entrepreneurship including the probability



   1
       It is likely that the initial sunk costs of pursuing a local opportunity are different than that of pursuing a knowledge-based opportunity;
however, as long as    iH =  iL       (i.e., the idiosyncratic sunk costs are proportional), the analysis is identical (e.g., this would be the same as

a "scaling" of        = 1/  ).
                  H


                                                                                                                                                   10
of significant "growth") will be shaped by both the overall quality of growth opportunities (i.e.,
 rH p H ) but also the relative returns to local versus knowledge-based entrepreneurship.

           We can then use this model to identify the impact of shifts in the level of resources available
to a local entrepreneurial ecosystem, either in terms of the overall level of local demand or the level
of knowledge itself. First, a shift in dr or  rH (weakly) increases the quantity of entrepreneurship by
increasing the size of the local market or the quality of knowledge-based opportunities, respectively.
Essentially, regardless of whether the ecosystem is in the L or H regime, expanding the level of
resources or knowledge makes entry more attractive for marginal entrant, and so increases the overall
quantity of entrepreneurship. And, since an increase in the  rH only induces entry into the H

                                                                                                      r
opportunity, also increases the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship (                           0) . However,
                                                                                                      rH

because  r is shaped not only by the absolute level of resources and knowledge but also the relative
returns to each, an increase in the size of the local market, dr, has the potential to shift the ecosystem
                                      r
from the H to the L regime (              0) . In other words, a simple increase in local resources without
                                     d r
an increase in knowledge production itself may actually result in substitution away from knowledge-
based start-ups and towards local opportunities.

           Finally, increasing  rH requires not only increasing the level of knowledge produced in
ecosystem r but also ensuring that this knowledge is accessible to potential entrepreneurs in r. As
discussed earlier, two distinctions between universities and national laboratories make it more likely
that universities may exert a higher level of knowledge transfer on their local entrepreneurial
ecosystem. First, universities not only produce research but also train and produce students, who
may be important conduits for knowledge transfer into the local entrepreneurial ecosystem. As well,
while many national laboratories maintain a certain level of insularity, universities are by and large
more "open" in the sense of engaging with their local ecosystems and promoting local economic
development and entrepreneurship. As such, we hypothesize that the impact of a shift in research
resources for a public institutions on local quality-adjusted entrepreneurship will be larger for
universities than for national laboratories.

    III.      The Measurement of Entrepreneurship 2


   2
     This section builds on Andrews, et al (2020), which itself builds on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017, 2020), which introduces
the details regarding state-level business registration records and the predictive analytics approach used to measure the quantity
                                                                                                                              11
      The first task that we face is how to develop consistent measures of entrepreneurial quantity and
  quality on a consistent and granular basis so that we can examine how the presence or absence of a
  research institution, or changes in the economic and research activities of research institutions over
  time, influence subsequence entrepreneurship within a given local area. To do so, we leverage data
  from the Startup Cartography Project (Andrews et al., 2020). Building on Guzman and Stern (2015,
  2017), the Startup Cartography Project data leverage a systematic approach for measuring the
  founding quality of startups using predictive analytics and business registration records. The
  approach combines three interrelated insights. First, as the challenges to reach a growth outcome as
  a sole proprietorship are formidable, a practical requirement for any entrepreneur to achieve growth
  is business registration (as a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company). This practical
  requirement allows to form a population sample of entrepreneurs "at risk" of growth at a similar
  (and foundational) stage of the entrepreneurial process. Second, it is possible to distinguish among
  business registrants through the measurement of founding choices observable at or close to the time
  of registration. For example, Guzman and Stern measure start-up characteristics such as whether the
  founders name the firm after themselves (eponymy), whether the firm is organized in order to
  facilitate equity financing (e.g., registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm
  seeks intellectual property protection (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, though rare, some firms
  experience observable meaningful growth outcomes (such as achieving an IPO or high-value
  acquisition). Combining these insights, it is possible to estimate entrepreneurial quality by
  estimating the relationship between observed growth outcomes and start-up characteristics.

      That is, for a firm i born in region r at time t, with at-birth start-up characteristics K irt , we

  observe growth outcome gir (t +l ) l years after founding and estimate:

irt P( =
=                   =
       gir (t +l ) 1| K irt ) f ( K irt )


                                     irt P( =
                                     =                   =
                                            gir (t +l ) 1| K irt ) f ( K irt )                              (1)


  and use the predicted value of this regression the measure of entrepreneurial quality. As long as the
  process by which start-up characteristics map to growth remain stable over time (an assumption
  which is itself testable), this mapping allows to form an estimate of founding characteristics to
  entrepreneurial quality for any business registrant within any given sample.




  and quality of entrepreneurship.
                                                                                                                  12
                                           ^irt = f (^ K irt )                                     (2)


These estimates can be used to generate three core entrepreneurship statistics capturing the level of
entrepreneurial quantity, and the potential for growth entrepreneurship within a given geographical
area and start-up cohort.

    Entrepreneurial Quantity and Quality Indices (N and EQI). With a set of business registrants
over a given time period within a given geographic region, it is straightforward to measure
entrepreneurial quantity, N rt , which is simply equal to the count of all new business registrations in
ZTCA r and year t.

    The predictive analytics approach described above is then combined with this population of
business registrants to create an index of entrepreneurial quality for any group of firms (e.g., all the
firms within a particular cohort or a group of firms satisfying a particular condition). Specifically,
the Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI) is defined as an aggregate of quality at the ZTCA-year

level by simply estimating the average of ^ over that ZTCA:
                                           irt



                                                      N rt

                                                      ^      irt
                                           EQI rt =   i =1
                                                                                                   (3)
                                                        N rt


To ensure that the estimate of entrepreneurial quality for a region r reflects the quality of start-ups
in that location rather than simply assuming that start-ups from a given location are associated with
a given level of quality, location-specific measures are excluded Hr,t from the vector of observable
start-up characteristics.

    The Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI). From the perspective of a
given geographical area, the overall inherent potential for a cohort of start-ups combines both the
quality of entrepreneurship in a region and the number of firms in such region (a measure of
quantity). RECPI is therefore defined as simply  multiplied by the number of firms in that
region-year:

                                         RECPI rt = EQI rt N rt                                    (4)


Since this index multiplies the average probability of a firm in a region-year to achieve growth
(quality) by the number of firms, it is, by definition, the expected number of growth events from a
                                                                                                          13
region-year given the start-up characteristics of a cohort at birth. This measure of course abstracts
away from the ability of a region to realize the performance of start-ups founded within a given
cohort (i.e., its ecosystem performance), and instead can be interpreted as a measure of the
"potential" of a region given the "intrinsic" quality of firms at birth, which can then be affected by
the impact of the entrepreneurial ecosystem, or shocks to the economy and the cohort between the
time of founding and a growth outcome. Together, this use of business registration data allows the
construction of measures of both entrepreneurial quality and quantity-adjusted quality, giving us the
ability to undertake a time-sensitive and granular evaluation of the interplay between research
institutions and entrepreneurial activity.

   IV.       Empirical Approach

   The primary objective of our analysis is to leverage the SCP measures to examine the impact of
public research resources on the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. Our
data are composed of zip-code level measures of the quantity and quality-adjusted entrepreneurship
over time at a granular geographic level, these geographic units are co-located (or not) with a public
research institution (university or national laboratory or both), and measures of the resources
utilized by those public research institutions (including their overall budget, but also specific time-
varying measures of resources such as the annual level of Federal research funding allocated to a
given university). In an ideal case, we would be simply able to allocate public research resources
randomly (e.g., to some locations but not others) and then measure the quantity and quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship over time for those locations that had received public research
resources versus those that had not. Indeed, the first stage of our empirical analysis is purely
descriptive, and simply documents the differences in the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship
for locations that are proximate or not to universities, with a focus on how this cross-sectional
empirical relationship has changed over time.

   However, to assess the causal impact of universities and national laboratories on their local
entrepreneurial ecosystem (i.e., on entrepreneurship proximate to that research institution), we must
overcome three distinct but related empirical obstacles. First, the co-location of public research
institutions and vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystems is not random. While it is instructive in a
descriptive sense to simply examine the cross-sectional correlation between the presence of public
research institutions and entrepreneurship, it is possible that the presence of a positive correlation
may be driven by potentially unobserved (to the econometrician) location-specific infrastructure or
amenities.    For example, the area surrounding Boulder, Colorado contains both the University of
Colorado (which might influence that ecosystem) but also has specific private sector initiatives
                                                                                                         14
(such as the entrepreneurial accelerator TechStars) as well as other nearby institutions (e.g., the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory is only 25 miles away). Both public research institutions
and strong entrepreneurial ecosystems are likely elements of the "Creative Economy" (Florida,
2002), and the correlation between public research activity and entrepreneurship may be driven by
selection rather than a causal link between the two.

    Second, even if one controls for selection of public research institutions into favorable locations
(e.g., through location-specific fixed effects), the activities of these public research institutions
themselves may be endogenous to the activities of the local entrepreneurial ecosystem. Knowledge
produced by firms within a local entrepreneurial ecosystem might simultaneously promote
entrepreneurial activity within that ecosystem, and also exert spillovers onto university or national
laboratory research itself. For example, the strategic shift by Monsanto (headquartered in St. Louis)
into agricultural biotechnology research not only impacted that firm but also resulted in a shift
towards agricultural biotechnology research at co-located research institutions such as Washington
University of St. Louis (Sohn, 2020). More generally, a discovery or invention made by the
entrepreneurs in a given location might facilitate both a higher level of research output at the
university and at the same time serve as a spur for subsequent local entrepreneurship. The
potentially bidirectional nature of impact between public research institutions and local
entrepreneurial activity means that a simple examination of positive correlation over time of public
research institutions research and local entrepreneurial activity cannot identify the causal linkage of
public research institutions on entrepreneurship.

    And, finally, entrepreneurial ecosystems are themselves dynamic. A positive shock to the
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship in a given location (e.g., as the result of favorable
economic conditions) may not only influence the current rate of entrepreneurial activity but may
also exert a positive influence on the follow-on period. This would occur, for instance, if there was
a potential for a two-period lag between the an initial unobserved shock and its influence on the rate
of entrepreneurship (e.g., increasing the rate most saliently in the period immediately following the
period but also having a smaller influence on entrepreneurship in the second period after the shock).
Accounting for this dynamic would result in a lagged dependent variable structure. Specifically, if
the lagged dependent variable is itself correlated with the changing level of local university
research, abstracting away from the dynamic impact of entrepreneurial ecosystems themselves
might result in overestimating the impact of university research itself.

    To address these interrelated empirical challenges, we leverage the fact that the level of Federal
research resources allocated to any given public research institution varies considerably over time.

                                                                                                        15
As we discuss in more detail in Sections V and VI, while the mean level of Federal research
expenditures to a university within our sample is $77 million, the standard deviation of those
expenditures is $112 million. More subtly, the standard deviation of the "residual" based on a
regression of Federal research expenditures that includes a complete set of university-level and year
fixed effects is $38 million. In other words, even after accounting for differences across
universities and secular trends across time, there is significant variation within a given university in
the overall level of research funding received in a given period.

   While the receipt of Federal research funding is of course not randomly allocated (indeed, it is
dependent on the quality of the ideas and the grantsmanship of public researchers), our key
assumption is that the changes over time in the level of overall Federal funding (research and
otherwise) to a given university or national laboratory is exogenous to the existing quantity and
quality of the local entrepreneurship. Essentially, our key assumption is that, conditional on the
time-invariant quality level of a given ecosystem, there is random variation over time in the ability
of individuals within that research institution (e.g., university faculty) to develop and attract Federal
funding for their activities. Put another way, our analysis is premised on the idea that the ability to
attract a Federal grant to a particular institution indicates an increase in both the resources and the
knowledge produced by that institution. As such, a consistent estimate of the impact of those
additional resources on subsequent local entrepreneurship can be interpreted as the impact of the
time-varying strength of that institution on the local environment.

   To take advantage of this variation over time in the level of Federal resources allocated to
universities and national laboratories, we first link our zip-code-level measures of the quantity and
quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship to the presence or absence of universities themselves.
To do so, we define a zip-code r in state m to be proximate to a university or national laboratory if
the center of that zip code is within five miles of the university or national laboratory (the next
section details this procedure in greater detail). For each university or national laboratory, we
observe a vector of inflation-adjusted annual Federal resource commitments, Xrt, which includes the
level of research funding to a university, the level of non-research funding to the university, and the
overall Federal budget allocation to a given national laboratory. In order to allow a meaningful gap
of time to elapse between the allocation of Federal funding and its impact on the local
entrepreneurial ecosystem, we group the annual zip-code-level data from the SCP, as well as
measures of Federal resource allocation, into a smaller number of multi-year periods (either 2 years
or 3 years). Denoting each of these multi-year periods by s, we can thus observe a multi-year
measure of local entrepreneurial activity, Yrs (measured as either Nrs or RECPIrs), for each zip code,


                                                                                                          16
as well as measures of the level of resources provided by the Federal government to universities or
national laboratories in that zip code, Xrs, and other time-varying location-specific characteristics,
Zrs.

       We implement two empirical approaches to estimate the impact of changes over time in the
Federal resources allocated to research institutions, Xrs-1, on the quantity and quality-adjusted rate of
entrepreneurship in s. We first examine a simple fixed effects panel estimator:

                                   Yrs =  r +  s +  X rs -1 +  Z rs -1 +  rs                       (5)

This simple specification allows us to estimate the relationship between entrepreneurship and the
lagged level of resources, while controlling for fixed differences between locations and year in
terms of the rate of entrepreneurship, and controlling for other observable location-specific
measures. This specification goes beyond a simple cross-sectional correlation between the
colocation of research institutions and entrepreneurship by focusing exclusively on variation in
resources that are structurally independent from local entrepreneurship: changes in the level of
Federal resources are the result of grant writing rather than the result of a flow from
entrepreneurship towards the university. However, this specification does not address the potential
for dynamics within an entrepreneurial ecosystem insofar as it is possible that the rate of
entrepreneurship is not only impacted by the level of resources from the university but also the
existing level of entrepreneurship itself. In principle, we can account for this possibility by
including the lagged level of dependent variable:

                                   Yrs =  r +  s +  X rs -1 +  Z rs -1 +  rs                       (6)

       Though an appealing method for accounting for dynamics, the assumptions required for
consistent estimation of (6) using a simple fixed effects panel estimator are demanding (Angrist and
Pischke, 2008, p. 243): (a) the elements of X and Z must themselves by serially independent (i.e.,
conditional on r, there can be no correlation over time in the X and Z themselves), and (b) the
elements of r must be independent of each other (i.e., the shocks are not only independent of X and
Z, but there are also no dynamics to the shocks over time), and. Specifically, in the case where
there is positive correlation across sequential time periods (e.g., an AR(1) process)), then (6) is
likely to result in an overestimate of (the absolute value of)  (our parameter of interest).

       We can significantly relax the assumptions required for identification of  by transforming (6)
through first-differences:

                              Yrs = s + Yrs -1 + X rs -1 + Z rs -1 + rs                            (7)

                                                                                                         17
    Specifically, this specification allows us to assess how changes over time in the resources
allocated to a research institution influences subsequent changes over time in the quantity or
quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. And, since we are focusing only on changes in the
level of X and Z, this specification allows for correlation over time in the level of X and Z.
However, both Yrs -1 and  rs contain  rs -1 and so there is a mechanical (negative) correlation

between Yrs -1 and rs ; as such, the estimates from an OLS implementation are biased (Nickell,

1981; Arellano and Bond, 1991). To address this, we can use the level of Yrs - 2 as an instrument for

Yrs -1 to implement a consistent estimator for (3) (Anderson and Hsiao, 1981). 3 As highlighted by
Angrist and Pischke (2008), this approach may lead to an underestimate of the (absolute value of) 
due to attenuation bias.

    Putting these ideas together, the key empirical challenges of estimating the impact of
universities on local entrepreneurial ecosystems arises from the fact that the colocation of
universities and start-ups is neither random nor unidirectional, and local entrepreneurial ecosystems
are themselves dynamic. To address these concerns, we take advantage of the fact that Federal
resources towards local research institutions are essentially independent of start-ups in that region
(conditional on the pre-existing level of entrepreneurship), and we will take advantage of this
insight by considering the impact of changes over time in Federal resources to local research
institutions. To account for different potential biases, our analysis compares both fixed effects and
panel data estimators to assess the robustness of our core results to different sets of assumptions
required for consistent estimation of this fixed effects dynamic panel data model.

    V.        Data

    Implementing our approach requires the combination of systematic measures of quantity and
quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship at a granular geographic level with measures of
universities and national laboratories activities over time, as well as locational characteristics (e.g.,
urban versus rural, income, etc). We therefore combine data at the zip code level from the Startup
Cartography Project, the National Center for Education Statistics, the NSF Survey of R&D




    3
      Accounting for the interplay between dynamics over time within a panel and the presence of fixed differences is complex
and involves tradeoffs (Angrist and Pischke, 2009, Section 5.3). To simplify exposition and focus on estimates that most
directly connect to our research question, we focus on the fixed effects panel estimator and OLS and instrumental variables
first-differences specifications. We have also explored using an Arellano-Bond GMM estimator (which allow for more
efficiency by using all the lags of the levels of dependent and independent variables as instruments for the changes in those
variables over time); however, we found that the estimates varied considerably depending on the precise specifications (and in
ways that were not easily interpretable except perhaps reflecting the imprecision arising from a "weak instruments" problem).
                                                                                                                           18
Expenditures, Census socioeconomic data, as well as auxiliary sources concerning research
university quality and type.

A. The Startup Cartography Project 4

    The first building block of our dataset consists of systematic and granular measures of the
quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship drawn from the Startup Cartography
Project (Andrews et al., 2020). Building on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017, 2020), these measures
are calculated by aggregating, to the zip code level, state-level business registration data with the
predictive analytics approach discussed in Section 2 allowing for an estimate of entrepreneurial
quality for all new registrants at founding. The data are drawn from 32 states (corresponding to
more than 81% of the national GDP) from 1988 to 2012, and include, for any year, all new business
registrants that are either a for-profit firm in the local jurisdiction, or a for-profit firm registered in
Delaware but whose principal office address is in the focal state. 5

    For each business registrant, the SCP constructs variables related to: (i) growth outcomes (IPO
or significant acquisition); (ii) firm characteristics based on business registration observables; (iii)
firm characteristics based on secondary data that can be directly linked to the firms itself, such as
patents and trademarks.

i. Growth Outcomes. The growth outcome, Growth, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
    firm has an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful positive valuation
    within 6 years of registration as reported in the Thomson Reuters SDC database. 6
ii. Firm Characteristics Based on Business Registration Data. Two binary measures relate
    to how the firm is registered: Corporation, which captures whether the firm is a
    corporation rather than an LLC or partnership, and Delaware, equal to one if the firm is
    registered in Delaware. Five additional measures are furthermore based directly on the
    name of the firm. Eponymous is equal to 1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top
    managers is part of the name of the firm itself, which may be associated with lifestyle
    businesses rather than growth-oriented entrepreneurs (Belenzon, Chatterji and Daley,
    2017, 2020), and Short Name is equal to one if the entire firm name has three or less
    words, and zero otherwise (most growth-oriented ventures have names of three words or


   4
     This section builds on Andrews, et al (2020), which itself builds on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017, 2020), which introduces
the details regarding state-level business registration records and the predictive analytics approach used to measure the quantity
and quality of entrepreneurship.
   5
     While the updated version of SCP (Andrews, et al, 2020) contains data for 48 states, we focus on the 32 states for which
data were available in 2019 (in line with Guzman and Stern (2020)).
   6
     Although the coverage of IPOs is essentially comprehensive, the SDC data set excludes some acquisitions. Guzman, et al
(2020) and Andrews, et al (2020) discuss robustness to alternative datasets and measures of growth outcomes.
                                                                                                                              19
    fewer). Seven measures are based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
    within which the firm is operating, taking advantage of the industry categorization of the
    US Cluster Mapping Project ("US CMP") (Delgado, Porter and Stern, 2016) and a text
    analysis approach. The first three are associated with broad industry sectors and include
    whether a firm can be identified as local (Local), traded (Traded) or resource intensive
    (Resource Intensive). The other five industry groups are narrowly defined high
    technology sectors that are typically associated with high growth firms, including
    whether the firm is within the biotech (Biotech Sector), e-commerce (E-Commerce),
    other information technology (IT), medical devices (Medical Devices) or
    semiconductors (Semiconductor) space.
iii. Firm Characteristic Based on External Observables. Two measures are related to
    intellectual property measures based on data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
    Patent is equal to 1 if a firm is associated with a patent application within the first year
    and 0 otherwise, including patents filed by the firm within the first year of registration
    and patents that are assigned to the firm within the first year from another entity (e.g., an
    inventor or another firm). The second measure, Trademark, is equal to 1 if a firm applies
    for trademark protection within a year from registration.

Table A.1 in Appendix A reproduces the core logistic regression model from Andrews et al. (2020)
which estimates how the presence or absence of a startup characteristic correlates with the
probability of growth (conditioning on the presence or absence of other startup characteristics).
There is an extremely strong (and robust) correlation between startup characteristics and the
probability of growth. Substantial changes in the predicted likelihood of a growth outcome are
associated with characteristics observable in real time from business registration records as well as
characteristics observable with a lag (e.g., patent and trademark applications). On the one hand,
startups founded as corporations are almost 220% more likely to grow. Similarly, firms with short
names are 79% more likely to grow, while eponymous firms are 69% less likely to grow. Finally,
the interplay between corporate form and formal intellectual property protection is particularly
predictive: a startup that registers in Delaware and applies for a patent in its first year is 83 times
more likely to grow than a firm that only registers in its home state and does not apply for
intellectual property protection. 7 For each firm, these estimates can be used to calculate the
probability of growth at founding. While this measure is low on average (on the order of one in


   7
     It is important to emphasize that these startup characteristics are not the causal drivers of growth, but instead are "digital
signatures" that allow to distinguish firms in terms of their entrepreneurial quality. Registering in Delaware or filing for a patent
will not guarantee a growth outcome for a new business, but the firms that historically have engaged in those activities have
been associated with skewed growth outcomes
                                                                                                                                 20
1400), firms with particular combinations of startup characteristics are far more likely to grow (e.g.,
firms in thet top 1 percent of the out-of-sample estimated quality distribution have a better than 1 in
100 chance of achieving a growth outcome).
    These firm-level estimates can then be aggregated at an arbitrary level of geographic and
temporal granularity to form annual measures of entrepreneurial quantity and quality-adjusted
quality. To capture the local relationship of university and national laboratory activity on local
entrepreneurship, we focus our geographic analysis at the ZCTA level. 8 As reported in Table 1, for
each year and ZCTA, we construct two core measures: # of Venturesrt is simply equal to the
number of newly formed ventures in ZCTA r in year t (mean = 41.8), while RECPIrt is # of
Venturesrt multiplied by the average estimated probability of growth within that cohort (EQIrt)
multiplied by 10,000 (for interpretability). The average probability of a growth event of the
startups within a ZTCA-year cohort is 0.029. 9
                                         -----------------------------------------
                                              Insert Table 1 about here
                                         -----------------------------------------

B. University and National Laboratory Measures

    The second component of the data include measures related to universities and national
laboratories. We first develop a list and location for all higher education institutions from the
National Center for Education Statistics. From this list, we define a Research University (RU)
those universities rated as either "high research activity" or "very high research activity" (the two
top categories of research orientation) according to the Carnegie Classification system (Shulman,
2001). For each research university j and year t, we gather measures of both Federal and non-
Federal sources of funding on an annual basis (calculated in 2012 dollars), including RU Federal
R&D Fundsjt and RU Federal Non-R&D Fundsjt (from NSF Survey of Federal Funds for Research
and Development 10), and RU Institutional Fundsjt, RU State Fundsjt, RU Business Fundsjt and RU
Other Fundsjt (from NSF Higher Education Research and Development Survey 11). As well, for
each research university, we include several dummies for university characteristics. We define a


    8
      Zip Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTA) are generalized area representations of USPS Zip Code service areas (United States
Census, https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/zctas.html). While standard zip codes
represent geographic areas with well-defined geographical boundaries, zip code boundaries are potentially changed over time,
and also there are zip codes for PO Boxes, military, and large customers. To fix zip code boundaries over time, we rely on the
2015 Zip Code to ZCTA crosswalk by the HRSA UDS mapper (https://www.udsmapper.org), which contains 41251 unique
ZIP Codes, the correspondent ZCTAs, the type of ZIP Code, city and State. All but two ZIP codes in the SCP were matched
using the cross walk (which were then assigned manually).
    9
      We then group these annual measures into two-year or three-year aggregates when we conduct fixed effects panel and first-
differences estimation of the causal impact of changes in Federal resources towards research institutions on the subsequent
changes in N and RECPI.
    10
       https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyfedfunds/#sd
    11
       https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyherd/
                                                                                                                            21
research university as being in the Top 10 or Top 50 based on the 2017 Times Higher Education
rankings (these broad rankings are quite stable over time). We then collected measures of the
activities of each university from Wikipedia, including a separate dummy variable for Business
School, Medical School, and/or Law School. Finally, we use the NSF NCSES Survey of R&D
Expenditures at Federally Funded R&D Centers 12 to both construct a list and location data for all
national laboratories and, for each national laboratory k in year t, measure Lab Federal R&D
Fundskt.

   We then aggregate these university and national laboratory measures into measures of the
presence and level of activities of research institutions proximate to a given ZCTA. Specifically,
for each ZCTA, we create a circle with a 5 mile radius centered at the ZCTA centroid; we then
aggregate the number, nature and funding of research universities that fall within the circle for each
ZCTA. The median university is proximate to eight zip codes (i.e., half of all universities are
proximate to eight or more zip codes), and the median national laboratory is proximate to 8.5 zip
codes. As such, any estimate of the impact of the impact of a research institutions on a proximate
zip code will then be scaled by the median number of zip codes impacted by institutions of that
type. Overall, 6.4% of ZTCA are proximate to a research university, while only 0.6% of ZTCA are
proximate to a national laboratory.

   Finally, the incidence rate of professional schools is between 0.05 and 0.076, in part because
there exist many professional schools that are independent of research universities (and are not
themselves research-oriented) and also because professional schools often have separate campuses,
often in urban locations. The average ZCTA-level aggregate of RU Federal R&D Fundsrt is $10.5
million (with a very large variance across locations), while the average of RU Federal R&D Fundsrt
is only about 11% of this level. Lab Federal R&D Fundskt registers and average of $3.3 million.

C. ZCTA Characteristics

   While also report cross-sectional estimates of the university and national laboratory "premium"
in terms of the level of entrepreneurial quantity and RECPI (and examine how this premium has
changed over time). We include a set of ZCTA characteristics, drawn from the 1990 Census, to
control for the presence of locational characteristics that might also explain the premium. These
include measures of population, density, male percentage, urban, fraction aged between 18 and 65,
white, born outside the U.S., percentage of population holding a college degree, private versus
public sector employment, income per sector, and housing value (See Appendix Table B.1 for


  12
       https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyffrdc/
                                                                                                     22
precise variable definitions and names, means and standard deviations). When undertaking the
matching between ZCTA and the 1990 Census, we fail to match 14% of ZCTAs, and so exclude
these zip codes throughout the analysis (all of the panel and long-differences results are robust to
their inclusion or exclusion). Overall, the final sample consist of 15950 ZCTAs in the time period
1988-2012.

   VI.     Results

   We now proceed to assess the relationship between research institutions and regional
entrepreneurship. Our analysis proceeds in two steps. We first consider how the quantity and
quality-adjusted level of entrepreneurship varies in the cross-section with the presence or absence of
a research institution, and how this relationship varies by institution type, geographic
characteristics, and over time. A key insight from this analysis is that while the positive correlation
between the presence of a university and entrepreneurial quality was negligible as of the late 1980s,
there was a striking increase between 1988 and 2012 in the degree of colocation of research
universities and high-quality ventures. We then turn to our core empirical analysis which focuses
on how changes in resources to research institutions over time influence subsequent
entrepreneurship. Across a broad range of approaches, we document that whereas an increase in
any type of funding to research institutions increases the quantity of entrepreneurship, only research
funding increases the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. The effect sizes implied by
these estimates are sizeable: a doubling of expenditures on university research would enhance the
overall quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship by 23% in proximate zip codes.

   A. The Cross-Sectional Relationship Between Research Institutions and Entrepreneurship

   We begin in Table 2 where we decompose Number of Ventures and RECPI by the presence or
absence of at least one research university or national laboratory. Overall, there is a striking
correlation between the presence of a research institution and entrepreneurial activity. The number
of ventures more than doubles in the presence of a national laboratory and more than triples for
those zip codes within a five-mile radius of a research university. Even more strikingly, RECPI
shows a 350% increase in locations near national labs and more than a 700% boost in locations near
research universities. Each of these conditional means is statistically significantly different than for
locations that are not proximate to at least one research institution.



                                  -----------------------------------------
                                       Insert Table 2 about here

                                                                                                       23
                                  -----------------------------------------

   Of course, the geography of universities or national laboratories is not random. Even when
performing a cross-sectional analysis, it is important to account for locational differences that may
also be correlated with the level and quality of entrepreneurship. More subtly, many national
laboratories are themselves co-located with research universities, and so the presence of a national
laboratory may in fact reflect the simultaneous presence of a research university rather than an
independent correlation between national laboratories and entrepreneurship.

   Table 3 explores this possibility by examining the relationship between entrepreneurship and
the presence of research universities and national laboratories at the same time, both excluding and
including a rich set of locational characteristics (population, density, income, etc), and also a set of
year dummies. Three relationships stand out. First, regardless of the inclusion or exclusion of
other measures, there is a quantitatively large and statistically significant relationship between both
Number of Ventures and RECPI and the presence of a nearby research university. For example, in
(3-4), where we control for the presence of national laboratories, as well as locational
characteristics, the presence of a research university is associated with an increase of 351 in RECPI,
corresponding to 40% of the standard deviation of that measure. Second, and in sharp contrast, the
positive pairwise correlation between national laboratories and entrepreneurship is nullified out
after controlling for the simultaneous presence of a research university, and there is actually a
negative relationship between the presence of a national laboratory and the quantity of
entrepreneurship after the inclusion of locational characteristics. Finally, it is useful to note that
the inclusion of locational controls have a significant impact on the relationship between research
institutions and entrepreneurship; for example, the relationship between the existence of a research
university and RECPI is nearly halved after the inclusion of these controls. This is consistent with
the idea that the areas where universities are located are indeed different from the areas without a
research institution nearby, and they present features that are correlated with increased
entrepreneurial activity (Florida, 2005).

                                  ----------------------------------------
                                       Insert Table 3 about here
                                  -----------------------------------------

We emphasize that these relationships are not causal, but are simply intended to highlight the cross-
sectional relationship between research institutions and both the quantity and quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship. Figure 1 extends this logic by examining how the correlation between
research institutions and RECPI has changed over time. To do so, we plot the regression

                                                                                                         24
coefficients of the interaction effects between Research University and National Laboratory,
respectively, with a full set of year dummies (controlling for locational characteristics). There are
two sharp insights from this figure. First, while the relationship between the presence of a research
university and RECPI in the late 1980s was limited, there was a steady increase in the premium
associated with university colocation through the 1990s, which has persisted through at least 2012.
Put another way, the incidence for the colocation of universities and locational clusters of
innovation and entrepreneurship, highlighted first in areas such as biotechnology (Zucker, Darby
and Armstrong, 1998; Feldman, 2000), seems to have increased over time. The linkage between
research universities and growth-oriented entrepreneurship is not an historical constant but has
grown over the past thirty years. Second, and in sharp contrast, the overall relationship between
RECPI and national laboratories is very noisy; there is no discernible robust relationship between
these dedicated research facilities and entrepreneurial quality. 13

                                           -----------------------------------------
                                                Insert Figure 1 about here
                                           -----------------------------------------

    B. The Impact of Changes in Federal Resources Towards Research Institutions on Local
         Entrepreneurial Ecosystems

    We now turn to the centerpiece of our analysis where we move beyond cross-sectional
correlations and turn to how changes in public funding to research institutions impact the
subsequent quantity and quality of entrepreneurship. As highlighted in our descriptive findings, the
key challenge of identifying the impact of research institutions on local entrepreneurship is that the
location of universities and national laboratories is not random; research universities and national
laboratories are associated with other locational characteristics (including the presence of vibrant
entrepreneurial clusters) that themselves encourage entrepreneurship. Following the logic laid out in
Section IV, we focus on leveraging variation in the level and nature of activities in research
institutions over time that is independent of those locational characteristics. To do so, we first group
each of the annual measures into two-year or three-year aggregates (depending on the
specification), and then focus on the impact of changes in Federal resources to research institutions
on first the quantity and then quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.



   13
       We explore the interplay between university, locational characteristics and entrepreneurship in Appendix Table B.3,
including the relationship to "elite" universities (Top 10 or Top 50) and professional schools. Interestingly, there is a significant
relationship between RECPI and Top 10 universities (reflecting the importance of entrepreneurial clusters surrounding
institutions such as Stanford and MIT), and the presence of a law school. As well, among other results, high-income zip codes
near universities are associated with an increase in the Number of Ventures.

                                                                                                                                 25
   A key element of our empirical approach is leveraging variation over time in Federal funding to
a given research institution to identify the impact of resource allocation on subsequent
entrepreneurship. We therefore begin our analysis in Table 4 by considering the degree to which
there is idiosyncratic variation within research institutions over time. For each of our three main
measures of Federal resources (RU Federal R&D Funds, RU Federal Non-R&D Funds, and Lab
Federal R&D Funds), we decompose the variance of each measure by considering the overall
standard deviation, and the standard deviation of the residual after subtracting out institution-level
fixed effects, year-level fixed effects, and institution-level and year-level fixed effects. Overall,
while there are large and persistent differences across institutions (e.g., more than 40% of the
overall standard deviation in RU Federal R&D Funds is accounted for by university-level fixed
effects), and there is a temporal trend over time (e.g., RU Federal R&D Funds exhibits about a 5%
per year average increase over the sample), there is a large level of idiosyncratic variation within
research institutions over time. For example, the annual average of RU Federal R&D Funds at the
university level is $76.7 million with a standard deviation of that measure of $111.6 million.
However, when we subtract institution-level and year-level fixed effects, the average standard
deviation of this "residual" variation is still $38.5 million. Relative to their respective means, there
is a similar degree of idiosyncratic variation for both RU Federal Non-R&D Funds and Lab Federal
R&D Funds. For example, relative to a mean of $215.5 and an unconditional standard deviation of
$425.5, the "residual" standard deviation for Lab Federal R&D Funds is $192.5. Taken together,
Table 4 suggests that the level of Federal resources allocated to individual research institutions has
a meaningful idiosyncratic component ­ while a significant level of variation in resources is
accounted for by institution-level and overall temporal effects, there is also significant variation in
the ability of research institutions (through the grant writing of individual researchers, or the
initiatives of administrators) to obtain Federal support. It is this source of variation which we will
exploit to then examine the impact of shifts in the level of activity by research institutions on the
subsequent quantity and quality of entrepreneurship.

                                   ----------------------------------------
                                        Insert Table 4 about here
                                   ----------------------------------------

   Our analysis begins in Table 5 with a focus on the overall quantity of entrepreneurship. We
begin in (5-1) with a panel fixed effects specification, where we examine the impact of funding on
the Number of Ventures controlling for year and ZTCA fixed effects (with standard errors clustered
at the zip code level). There is a large and statistically significant impact of both RU Federal R&D
Funds and RU Federal Non-R&D Funds with a much lower impact for Lab Federal R&D Funds.

                                                                                                        26
Indeed, the quantitative estimate in (5-1) seems implausibly large: the estimates suggests that a
$1,000 increase in Federal funds to a university (either research-oriented or not) is associated with
~0.3 new ventures in the subsequent time period in each zip code co-located with that university.
Of course this specification abstracts away from the potential dynamics within locations, where
there might be contemporaneous increases in the level of the entrepreneurial ecosystem and the
ability of universities within that ecosystem to attract Federal resources. As such, we then include
the lagged level of entrepreneurship (Number of Venturess-1) in (5-2) (once again with ZTCA and
year fixed effects). The coefficients on resources towards universities remain positive and
statistically significant but are much smaller (though still sizeable) in magnitude. For R&D funds
to universities, an increase of $70,000 is associated with a subsequent increase of one business
registrant in each zip code co-located to that university (recall that the median number of zip codes
adjacent to a university is eight), and the estimated impact for non-R&D funds to universities is
estimated to be nearly three times as large. This evidence is consistent with the idea that
expenditures by institutions serve as a source of local demand (Andrews, 2020), and so an increase
in university expenditures might encourage a higher quantity of entrepreneurship (without having
an impact on quality).

                                   ----------------------------------------
                                        Insert Table 5 about here
                                 -----------------------------------------

   Given the inclusion of ZTCA fixed effects and the inclusion of Number of Venturess-1, a causal
interpretation of (5-2) depends on assuming that changes in the levels of Federal resources over
time within a location are independent of each other. If there are trends over time in the Federal
resources (and the impact of those resources extend over time, then the (absolute value) of the
coefficients on the Federal resource measures in (5-2) will be positively biased, leading to an
overestimate of the impact of Federal resources on the quantity of entrepreneurship.

   We therefore turn in the remaining columns of Table 4 to a first-differences specification,
including both an OLS and instrumental variables implementation (Anderson and Hsiao, 1981). We
exclude ZTCA fixed effects, but include county-level fixed effects to account for differences in the
trend in entrepreneurship across regions, and state-year fixed effects to account for changing
regional economic conditions (all of our broad findings are robust to inclusion or exclusion of state-
year fixed effects). The results in (5-3) through (5-6) provide support for the hypothesis that
resources directed at local research institutions encourage a higher level of local entrepreneurship.
While the coefficient on RU Federal Non-R&D Funds is somewhat reduced (but remain
quantitatively and statistically significant for two-year first-differences), the coefficients on Federal
                                                                                                       27
R&D Funds and Lab Federal R&D Funds actually increase relative to (5-2). Moreover, these
results are robust to the use of the Anderson-Hsiao first-differences instrumental variables approach
(as discussed in Section IV), suggesting that the results are not simply driven by autocorrelation
within zip codes over time. As well, the coefficient on Number of Venturess-1 is positive, and is of
similar magnitude in the case of both the OLS and Anderson-Hsiao IV estimator. According to
these estimates, a $100,000 "shock" to university resources in a two-year period is associated with
between 4 and 8 additional business registrants in adjacent zip codes in the subsequent two-year
period (accounting for the overall trend in entrepreneurship in that county and the overall shift in
entrepreneurship in that state-year). It is also useful to note that the impact of resources seems to be
relatively rapid: the magnitudes of the effect are somewhat smaller for the case where we group the
data into three-year time periods (and the coefficient on RU Federal Non-R&D Funds becomes
insignificant).

    While Table 5 focuses on the impact of resources on the quantity of entrepreneurship, Table 6
follows the same empirical logic as Table 5 but focuses attention on potentially a more critical
measure, RECPI, which directly accounts for the growth potential of start-ups at the time of their
founding. The first two specifications (6-1 and 6-2) present the fixed effects panel estimator
(excluding or including a lagged dependent variable), the second two specifications (6-3 and 6-4)
examine a first-differences specification (implemented with OLS and an Anderson-Hsiao
instrumental variables estimator), and (6-5) and (6-6) present the first-differences specification with
the data grouped into three-year rather than two-year intervals.

                                   ----------------------------------------
                                        Insert Table 6 about here
                                 ----------------------------------------

    The results are striking and robust. First, across both the fixed effects and first-differences
specifications (both OLS and IV), there is a positive and quantitatively significant impact of RU
Federal R&D Funds on the subsequent change in RECPI. Moreover, after controlling for RECPIs-1,
the coefficient on RU Federal R&D Funds varies from 0.81 to 1.26. From a quantitative
perspective (and taking 0.81 as the baseline estimate), this implies that an increase of $1 million of
Federal research support (approximately the size of 2 additional average-sized NIH grants) is
associated with a shift of 810 in RECPI for each zip code proximate to that university. Recalling
that RECPI is defined as the quantity of entrepreneurship, weighted by the growth probability for
each firm multiplied by 10,000, this can be interpreted as increasing the potential of the birth of a
single growth firm by 0.08 within that zip code over that two-year time period. However, each
university is proximate on average to eight zip codes. As such, the value of RECPI increases by
                                                                                                        28
10,000 (or the equivalent of one successful growth outcome from the cohort of start-ups founded in
a given university ecosystem) for each $1.56 million of incremental Federal research support.         To
put this in context, consider Weber State University in Ogden, Utah, where a 249% increase in
research funding between 1997 and 1998 was accompanied by a 40% subsequent increase in
RECPI (including a 17% increase in # of Ventures) in zip codes less than five miles from campus
(see Appendix D). Interestingly, this burst in entrepreneurial activity was not experienced in more
distant zip codes in the state (e.g., zip codes between 5 to 50 miles (e.g., Salt Lake City).

   Put another way, an increase by one average standard deviation of the idiosyncratic component
of RU Federal R&D Funds (~ $10 million) is associated with the founding of ~ 6 additional firms
that will experience significant growth over the subsequent six years. It is of course important to
interpret this finding carefully: our estimates identify the impact of the ideation and attraction of
Federal research support by a university researcher and not simply the random allocation of dollars
to a random institution. In other words, while we assume that variation over time among university
researchers in the arrival rate of new ideas that merit Federal funding is conditionally independent
of the quality of their local entrepreneurial ecosystem, we cannot interpret these findings as a
measure of the value of a randomly allocated dollar of public research funding. At the same time,
the magnitude of these estimates are large given their follow-on economic impact. Though highly
skewed, the private returns to successful growth-oriented entrepreneurship (i.e., the value of a
successful exit such as an IPO or acquisition worth more than $10 million) are, on average, high.
For example, the median returns to a single successful growth outcome (either an IPO or successful
acquisition > $10M within six years of founding) are estimated to be more than $50 million of
private value to the entrepreneur and investors (Andrews et al., 2020), exclusive of additional local
economic impact in terms of employment growth or subsequent regional knowledge and supply
chain spillovers. 14 While a complete analysis of the economic value to that ecosystem would
require not only observing the return to successes but also the investments in firms that do not
succeed (which will dramatically reduce the overall return of the marginal Federal research
funding), our estimates nonetheless highlight the potential value of local research institutions in
playing a meaningful role in establishing and accelerating local entrepreneurial ecosystems.

   In contrast to the positive impact of Federal funds for research, the estimated impact of RU
Federal Non-R&D Funds is negative across all specifications. Moreover, the absolute value of
these coefficients are from 2 ­ 6 times as large (ranging from -2.19 in (6-2) to -7.34 in (6-3)).
Though a large estimated impact, it is useful to note that both the mean and standard deviation of


  14
       See Figure D for calculations.
                                                                                                        29
this measure is about 20% as large as RU Federal R&D Funds. Given the results from Table 5
suggest that the impact of non-R&D funding increases the quantity of entrepreneurship, these
results are consistent with the idea that increasing local demand enhances entrepreneurship, but
only research-oriented expenditures also increase the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.
Compared to research funding, non-research funding may simply result in substitution for the
marginal entrepreneur towards more local business formation. Finally, there is a negative and much
smaller in magnitude estimated coefficient across all specifications for Lab Federal R&D Funds.
Despite being focused on research expenditures, this small and negative finding suggests that the
cloistered nature of national laboratories (less open to local knowledge spillovers, less involved in
teaching) results in a much more limited impact of these institutions on their local entrepreneurial
ecosystems. 15

                                       ----------------------------------------
                                            Insert Table 7 about here
                                       -----------------------------------------

    In Table 7 we examine the interplay between federal research funding to universities, and
characteristics of the university and location. The interactions terms are added to the baseline first-
differences models corresponding to (5-4) and (6-4), and include state-year and county fixed
effects. When we interact RU Federal R&D Funds with Top 50 University, there is a negative
coefficient on this interaction effect both for Number of Ventures and RECPI. We find a similar
negative effect for an interaction effect with # of Research Universities (and no consistent impact
for universities located in more dense urban areas). These results are consistent with the idea that
the marginal returns to Federal research funding is larger in environments with a less robust
research and innovation infrastructure: environments with more resources (either through the
underlying strength of a single university or the presence of multiple universities) may benefit less
from a marginal addition of research resources into that local entrepreneurial ecosystem.

                                       ----------------------------------------
                                            Insert Table 8 about here
                                       -----------------------------------------
    One of the most distinctive results is the relative impact of changes in R&D resources for
universities versus national laboratories on subsequent entrepreneurship. As discussed earlier, one
of the primary mechanisms that universities might have an advantage in encouraging start-up
formation within their local geography is through the concurrent production of students. We


   15
      We have performed several robustness tests examining different time windows and excluding Stanford and MIT from the
analysis. Results are presented in Appendix C1 and C2.
                                                                                                                      30
investigate this possibility in an exploratory way in Table 8, where we examine the impact not only
of changes in funding allocation, but also changes in graduation rates by different types of students.
Specifically, we consider, for both # of Ventures and RECPI , the impact of changing numbers of
graduates of proximate universities, separated out by the change in students in natural sciences
versus social sciences/humanities ((8-1) and (8-3)) and disaggregated further by graduation level
(bachelors versus masters versus PhD). Overall, there is a large and significant effect of graduates
in tghe natural sciences, particularly for the production of bachelor's degrees in terms of impact on
RECPI; in contrast, changes over time in the number of social sciences and humanities degrees are
associated with much smaller (and noisier) negative impacts on subsequent medium-term
entrepreneurship (over the next two-year window).

   Finally, it is useful to note that we additionally explored the impact of other types of funding to
universities, including state research and non-research funding, and also funds from private sector
businesses. Relative to the allocation of Federal R&D resources (which are predominantly the result
of competitive grant processes through NSF, NIH and other Federal funding agencies), these other
sources of funding are highly endogenous, as they are often explicitly premised on promoting local
economic development and local entrepreneurship. For example, companies such as Monsanto
invest heavily in research and innovation centers at universities close to their main corporate
research facilities with the explicit aim of encouraging knowledge transfer and potential
collaborative spin-out behavior from the university (Sohn, 2020). With that said, it is useful to note
that the estimated coefficient on Business Funds to Universities is large and positive, and also
results in an insignificant estimate for coefficients of interest such as RU Federal R&D Funds.

   Overall, these results provide evidence about the relative salience of alternative channels of
impact of research institutions on entrepreneurship. Specifically, the framework in Section II
highlights that one channel by which research institutions might impact entrepreneurship is through
their role as a source of local demand (Andrews, 2020). And, that would have the consequences
that increased economic activity by research institutions might encourage an increase in the quantity
of entrepreneurship. However, a second channel by which research institutions might impact
entrepreneurship is through the generation of knowledge, and that channel is likely to be salient for
research institutions where it is possible for potential entrepreneurs to carry that knowledge outside
the boundary of the institution (or, similarly, if the boundaries of the institution are porous and open
enough to support local knowledge spillovers). The broad pattern of findings in Tables 4-7 are
consistent with the idea that research funding to universities plays a special role in shaping local
entrepreneurship by inducing the creation of ventures with high potential for growth (and local


                                                                                                       31
economic impact), while non-research funding may actually increase the quantity of
entrepreneurship but divert potential entrepreneurs towards the founding of more locally focused
ventures.

   VII.     Conclusions

   This paper provides specific evidence about the role of university research in shaping place-
based entrepreneurial ecosystems. Our analysis considers the impact of both universities and
national laboratories, as well as both research and non-research funding. Our approach allows us to
identify the impact of the generation of an incremental research "idea" or "project" from a
university that is of sufficient quality to attract Federal research funding: in other words, the key
estimates provide evidence for the impact of the marginal funded idea or project on subsequent
local entrepreneurship. Our key finding is that while Federal research funding of all types is linked
to a higher quantity of entrepreneurship, only research funding to universities is associated with a
meaningful increase in the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.

   Taken at face value the estimated impact of university research is very large: developing 2-3
successful research grants that attract an incremental $1.6 million of Federal funding induces a
sufficient level of quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship to eventually result in one
successful local growth outcome. Our approach purposefully abstracts away from the precise
mechanism underlying the impact of the knowledge produced by university research on subsequent
entrepreneurship. On the one hand, universities can directly influence their entrepreneurial
ecosystem through the establishment of spin-offs and technology transfer activities to industrial
partners(Mowery et al., 2001; Bercovitz and Feldman, 2008; Hausman, 2020). Second, it is
possible that the impact on local entrepreneurial ecosystems arises from the impact of students and
other non-permanent research staff involved in the research itself (Saxenian, 1996). In other words,
it is possible that by graduating students who have been exposed to the most recent research
activities of the university, the near-term spillovers to the local entrepreneurial ecosystem arises
from the knowledge being "wrapped up in a person" (Moretti, 2004; Stephan, 2006; Abramovsky,
Harrison and Simpson, 2007). Recent work by Babina et al. (2020) provide evidence for the role of
individual in shaping the near-term commercialization impact of Federally funded research.
Finally, it is possible that technology and knowledge transfer can also happen through more general
spillovers to the local environment, perhaps mediated by the social networks of inventors and
entrepreneurs. While published research is in principle available globally, there is significant
evidence that location mediates the impact of spillovers from university research (Jaffe, Trajtenberg
and Henderson, 1993; Adams, 2002). An important agenda for future research is integrating the
                                                                                                        32
assessment of the overall impact of universities and related research institutions on their local
economic environment with the study of specific mechanisms that directly influence the process of
knowledge transfer and local commercialization.

   Beyond the precise mechanism underlying our findings, the overall estimates provide support
for the potential for enhancements to Federal funding of university research to accelerate local
entrepreneurial ecosystems. In an influential policy analysis, Gruber and Johnson (2019) argue for
the establishment of a critical set of regional innovation hubs with the objective of "jump-starting"
regional entrepreneurial ecosystems through public support of regional universities and research
institutions (outside of established "superstar" locations such as the Bay Area and Boston). Our
analysis provides insights into both the potential efficacy and necessary conditions that would be
required for such a proposal to be successful. First, this paper provides the first direct empirical
support for the hypothesis that Federal funding of university research (irrespective of the type of
research) directly induces a higher level of growth-oriented local entrepreneurship. However, we
also find that the impact of Federal research is limited to university research funding (and is not
present for research funding to national laboratories or to non-research-related funding). As such,
the evidence also suggests that the impact of Federal funding is realized in an environment
characterized by a high degree of openness to the local environment that also allows for mobility
(e.g., by students) from the university to the local ecosystem. Realizing the local economic benefits
of a policy that enhances Federal research spending in certain geographic regions is likely to depend
on proactive investment in shaping local entrepreneurial ecosystems themselves.




   References


                                                                                                       33
Abramovsky, L., Harrison, R. and Simpson, H. (2007) `University research and the location of
business R&D', Economic Journal, 117(519), pp. 114­141.

Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B. and Feldman, M. P. (1992) `Real Effects of Academic Research:
Comment', The American Economic Review, 82(1), pp. 363­367.

Adams, J. D. (2002) `Comparative localization of academic and industrial spillovers', Journal of
Economic Geography, 2(3), pp. 253­278.

Adams, J. D., Chiang, E. P. and Jensen, J. L. (2003) `The influence of federal laboratory R&D on
industrial research', Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), pp. 1003­1020.

Anderson, T. W. and Hsiao, C. (1981) `Estimation of dynamic models with error components',
Journal of the American statistical Association, 76(375), pp. 598­606.

Andrews, M. (2020) How do institutions of higher education affect local invention? Evidence from
the establishment of US colleges.

Andrews, R. J. et al. (2020) The Startup Cartography Project. Working Paper.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2008) Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion.
Princeton university press.

Arellano, M. and Bond, S. (1991) `Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence
and an application to employment equations', The review of economic studies, 58(2), pp. 277­297.

Arrow, K. J. (1972) `Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention', in Readings
in industrial economics. Springer, pp. 219­236.

Audretsch, D. B., Lehmann, E. E. and Warning, S. (2005) `University spillovers and new firm
location', Research Policy, 34(7), pp. 1113­1122.

Audretsch, D. B. and Stephan, P. E. (1996) `Company-scientist locational links: The case of
biotechnology', The American economic review, 86(3), pp. 641­652.

Audretsch, D. B. and Thurik, A. R. (2001) `What's New about the New Economy? Sources of
Growth in the Managed and Entrepreneurial Economies', Industrial and Corporate Change, 10(1),
pp. 267­315.

Babina, T. et al. (2020) The Color of Money: Federal vs. Industry Funding of University Research.
Cambridge, MA.

Baptista, R., Lima, F. and Mendonça, J. (2011) `Establishment of higher education institutions and
new firm entry', Research Policy, 40(5), pp. 751­760.

Baptista, R. and Mendonça, J. (2010) `Proximity to knowledge sources and the location of
knowledge-based start-ups', Annals of Regional Science, 45(1), pp. 5­29.

Belenzon, S., Chatterji, A. K. and Daley, B. (2017) `Eponymous entrepreneurs', American
Economic Review, 107(6), pp. 1638­1655.

Belenzon, S., Chatterji, A. K. and Daley, B. (2020) `Choosing between growth and glory',
Management Science, 66(5), pp. 2050­2074.

                                                                                                   34
Bercovitz, J. and Feldman, M. (2008) `Academic entrepreneurs: Organizational change at the
individual level', Organization Science, 19(1), pp. 69­89.

Dasgupta, P. and David, P. A. (1994) `Toward a new economics of science', Research policy,
23(5), pp. 487­521.

Delgado, M., Porter, M. E. and Stern, S. (2016) `Defining clusters of related industries', Journal of
Economic Geography, 16(1), pp. 1­38.

Feldman, M. P. (1994) The geography of innovation. Springer Science & Business Media.

Feldman, M. P. (2000) `Location and innovation: the new economic geography of innovation,
spillovers, and agglomeration', in The Oxford handbook of economic geography.

Feldman, M. P. (2014) `The character of innovative places: entrepreneurial strategy, economic
development, and prosperity', Small Business Economics, 43(1), pp. 9­20.

Florida, R. (2002) `Bohemia and economic geography', Journal of economic geography, 2(1), pp.
55­71.

Florida, R. L. (2005) Cities and the creative class. Psychology Press.

Furman, J. L. and MacGarvie, M. J. (2007) `Academic science and the birth of industrial research
laboratories in the US pharmaceutical industry', Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
63(4), pp. 756­776.

Furman, J. L. and Stern, S. (2011) `Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: The impact of institutions
on cumulative research', American Economic Review, 101(5), pp. 1933­1963.

Gruber, J. and Johnson, S. (2019) Jump-starting America: How breakthrough science can revive
economic growth and the American dream. Hachette UK.

Guzman, J. and Stern, S. (2015) `Innovation economics. Where is Silicon Valley?', Science,
347(6222), pp. 606­9.

Guzman, J. and Stern, S. (2017) `Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and
Performance', in Haltiwanger, J. et al. (eds) Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
Knowledge and Challenges.

Hall, B. H., Link, A. N. and Scott, J. T. (2003) `Universities as Research Partners', Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85(2), pp. 485­491.

Hall, R. E. and Woodward, S. E. (2007) The incentives to start new companies: Evidence from
venture capital. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hausman, N. (2020) `University Innovation, Local Economic Growth, and Entrepreneurship',
Review of Economics and Statistics.

Hurst, E. and Pugsley, B. W. (2011) What do small businesses do? National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Jaffe, A. B. (1989) `Real effects of academic research', The American Economic Review, 79(5), pp.
957­970.

                                                                                                   35
Jaffe, A. B. and Lerner, J. (2001) `Reinventing public R&D: Patent policy and the
commercialization of national laboratory technologies', RAND Journal of Economics. JSTOR, pp.
167­198.

Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R. (1993) `Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations', The Quarterly Journal of Economics. Oxford
University Press, 108(3), pp. 577­598.

Kantor, S. and Whalley, A. (2014) `Knowledge Spillovers from Research Universities: Evidence
from Endowment Value Shocks', Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), pp. 171­188.

Kenney, M. (1986) Biotechnology: The university-industrial complex. Yale University Press.

Kim, Y., Kim, W. and Yang, T. (2012) `The effect of the triple helix system and habitat on regional
entrepreneurship: Empirical evidence from the U.S.', Research Policy, 41(1), pp. 154­166.

Lucas, R. E. (1988) `On the mechanics of economic development', Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22(1), pp. 3­42.

Moretti, E. (2004) `Estimating the social return to higher education: evidence from longitudinal and
repeated cross-sectional data', Journal of Econometrics, 121(1­2), pp. 175­212.

Moretti, E. (2012) The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Mowery, D. C. et al. (2001) `The growth of patenting and licensing by US universities: an
assessment of the effects of the Bayh­Dole act of 1980', Research policy, 30(1), pp. 99­119.

Mowery, D. C. and Rosenberg, N. (1993) `The US national innovation system', National
innovation systems: A comparative analysis. Oxford University Press New York, pp. 29­75.

Nelson, R. R. (1959) `The simple economics of basic scientific research', Journal of political
econom, 67(3), pp. 297­306.

Nickell, S. (1981) `Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects', Econometrica: Journal of the
econometric society, pp. 1417­1426.

Rosenberg, N. and Nelson, R. R. (1994) `American universities and technical advance in industry',
Research Policy, 23(3), pp. 323­348.

Saxenian, A. (1996) Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128
. American Council of Learned Societies.

Schoar, A. (2010) `The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship',
Innovation policy and the economy, 10(1), pp. 57­81.

Senate of the United States (2021) S.1260 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Endless Frontier Act.

Shulman, L. S. (2001) `The Carnegie classification of institutions of higher education', Menlo
Park: Carnegie Publication.

Sohn, E. (2020) `How Local Industry R&D Shapes Academic Research: Evidence from the
Agricultural Biotechnology Revolution', Organization Science


                                                                                                  36
Stephan, P. (2006) `Wrapping it up in a person: The mobility patterns of new PhDs', Innovation
policy and the economy. MIT Press, 7, pp. 71­98.

Stephan, P. E. (2012) How economics shapes science. Harvard University Press Cambridge, MA.

Stern, S. (1995) `Incentives and focus in university and industrial research: the case of synthetic
insulin', in Rosenberg, N., Gelijns, A., and Dawkins, H. (eds) Sources of Medical Technology:
Universities and Industry. National Academy of Sciences.

Valero, A. and Van Reenen, J. (2019) `The economic impact of universities: Evidence from across
the globe', Economics of Education Review, 68, pp. 53­67.

Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R. and Armstrong, J. (1998) `Geographically localized knowledge:
spillovers or markets?', Economic Inquiry, 36(1), pp. 65­86.




                                                                                                      37
                                                             TABLE 1

                                     Variable Definition and Summary Statistics

                                                Definition                                  Source            Mean    Std. Dev.
Outcome Variables
# of Ventures              Number of newly-formed ventures in each ZCTA,            Guzman and Stern          41.78     101.20
                           by year (1989-2012)                                      (2016)

RECPI                      [10,000 * average quality * # of Ventures], within       Guzman and Stern         262.50   1,074.00
                           a ZCTA and by year (1989-2012)                           (2016)

Public Research Measures
National Lab               1 if at least one National Research Laboratory is in     National Science          0.006      0.079
                           a 5-miles radius of the ZCTA                             Foundation

Research University        1 if at least one university classified as               National Center for       0.062      0.241
                           "Doctoral/Research Universities" or "Research            Education Statistics,
                           Universities ­ (very) high research activity" is in a    Carnegie
                           5-miles radius of the ZCTA                               Classification
# of Research              Number of Research Universities in a 5-miles             Own elaboration           0.098      0.471
Universities               radius of the ZCTA

Top50                      1 if at least one of the universities in a 5 miles       Times Higher              0.018      0.133
                           radius of the ZCTA is in the top 50 of the Times         Education
                           Higher Education 2017 ranking of US universities
Top10                      1 if at least one of the universities in a 5 miles       Times Higher              0.006      0.080
                           radius of the ZCTA is in the top 10 of the Times         Education
                           Higher Education 2017 ranking of US universities

Business School            1 if there is at least one business school in a          Wikipedia                 0.048      0.214
                           research university in a 5 miles radius of the
                           ZCTA
Medical School             1 if there is at least one medical school in a           Wikipedia                 0.036      0.187
                           research university in a 5 miles radius of the
                           ZCTA
Law school                 1 if there is at least one law school in a research      Wikipedia                 0.040      0.197
                           university in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA

R&D funds to               Total amount of federal funds ($k) earmarked for         National Science         10,490     68,942
universities               R&D activities received by the research                  Foundation
                           universities in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per
                           year
Non-R&D funds to           Total amount of federal funds ($k) earmarked for         National Science          1,247      7,912
universities               non R&D activities received by the research              Foundation
                           universities in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per
                           year

R&D funds to national      Total amount of federal funds ($k) received by the       National Science          3,319     68,956
laboratories               national laboratories in a 5 miles radius of the         Foundation
                           ZCTA, per year

                           Total number of ZCTA                                                              16,320
                           Total number of observations (panel)                                             408,000
Note: All dollar amounts are inflation-adjusted and standardized to 2012 dollars.


                                                                                                                        38
                                              TABLE 2

                 Quantity and Quality-Adjusted Quantity of Entrepreneurship:
                           With and Without a Research Institution

 Research University = 0 (15,307 ZCTAs)          Research University = 1 (1,013 ZCTAs)


 Variable              Mean       Std. Dev.      Variable        Mean     Std. Dev.      T-test of means


 # of Ventures          35.6        92.0         # of Ventures   134.6      167.5             ***


 RECPI                 200.0        751.7        RECPI           1208      3015.1             ***


 National Laboratory = 0 (16,220 ZCTAs)          National Laboratory = 1 (100 ZCTAs)


 Variable              Mean       Std. Dev.      Variable        Mean     Std. Dev.      T-test of means


 # of Ventures          41.5        101.2        # of Ventures    89.6      89.7              ***


 RECPI                 258.4       1069.9        RECPI           929.6     1452.1             ***

* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                                      39
                                           TABLE 3

Number of Ventures and RECPI By Presence of Research Institutions:
                    Year and Zipcode Controls


                                       # of Ventures                       RECPI
                                 (1)                   (2)           (3)              (4)

Research University          99.67***             22.20***      1,003.23***        399.98***
                              (4.74)               (4.84)          (81.14)           (74.57)
National Laboratory           -10.87             -39.05***          77.70           -235.72*
                              (9.15)               (6.77)         (123.38)          (112.88)

Constant                     12.54***            -87.88***        79.28***       -585.07***
                              (0.38)               (10.47)         (4.41)          (142.31)

Observations                  408,000             408,000         408,000           408,000
Number of ZCTAs                16,320              16,320          16,320            16,320
Census 1990 Controls                                Yes                               Yes
R-squared                      0.0896              0.362           0.0577            0.236
Years FE                        Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
                                                                     w
All specifications include year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 also include controls for the
1990 census variables presented in Appendix B, Table B.1. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis, clustered at the ZCTA level. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                               40
                                                   TABLE 4

        Time Variation of Federal Funding to Universities and National Laboratories:
                   With and Without Institution and Time Fixed Effects

                                                       Definition                            Mean    Std. Dev.
University-level measures
# of ZCTA per university j    Number of zip codes within 5 miles of university j               8.3         8.2


R&D funds                     Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities            76.7      111.6
                              for university j

De-Meaned R&D Funds           Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                       48.1
                              for university j, subtracting university-level fixed effects

De-Trended R&D Funds          Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                      107.3
                              for university j, subtracting year-level fixed effects

"Residual" R&D Funds          Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                       38.5
                              for university j, subtracting year-level fixed effects and
                              institution-level fixed effects

Non-R&D funds                 Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for non-R&D                    8.7       12.8
                              activities for university j

De-Meaned Non-R&D Funds       Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for non-R&D                                6.6
                              activities for university j, subtracting university-level
                              fixed effects

De-Trended Non-R&D Funds      Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for non-R&D                              11.8
                              activities for university j, subtracting year-level fixed
                              effects

"Residual" Non- R&D Funds     Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for non-R&D                                6.1
                              activities for university j, subtracting year-level fixed
                              effects and institution-level fixed effects

National Laboratories-level Measures
R&D funds                     Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities           215.5      425.5
                              for National Lab k

De-Meaned R&D Funds           Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                      219.8
                              for National Lab k, subtracting national lab-level fixed
                              effects


De-Trended R&D Funds          Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                      408.5
                              for National Lab k, subtracting year-level fixed effects

"Residual" R&D Funds          Average annual Federal Funds ($K) for R&D activities                      192.5
                              for National Lab k, subtracting year-level fixed effects
                              and institution-level fixed effects




                                                                                                            41
                                                            TABLE 5

The Impact of Funding on the Quantity of Entrepreneurship: Fixed Effects, Long First Differences
                   and Anderson-Hsiao Instrumental Variable Specification


                                            Long Panel with FE             Long First Differences          Long First Differences
                                                 [2 years]                       [2 years]                       [3 years]

                                                                                        With Instrument                 With Instrument
                                        (# of Ventures) (# of Ventures) (# of Ventures) (# of Ventures) (# of Ventures) (# of Ventures)
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)


 Covariates in levels
 (# of Ventures)-1                                       0.981***
                                                          (0.003)
 Federal funds
 (R&D funds to universities)t-1          0.348***        0.018***
                                          (0.030)         (0.002)
 (Non R&D funds to universities)t-1      0.362***        0.056***
                                          (0.090)         (0.017)
 (R&D funds to national laboratories)     0.014*           0.001
                                          (0.006)         (0.001)

 Covariates in first differences
 (# of Ventures)-1                                                       0.646***        0.537***        0.714***         0.574***
 `                                                                        (0.009)         (0.021)         (0.012)          (0.020)
 Federal funds
 (R&D funds to universities)t-1                                          0.102***        0.120***        0.049***         0.081***
                                                                          (0.011)         (0.013)         (0.008)          (0.010)
 (Non R&D funds to universities)t-1                                       0.079*          0.087*           0.027            0.043
                                                                          (0.040)         (0.041)         (0.043)          (0.046)
 (R&D funds to national laboratories)                                    0.016***        0.017***        0.011***         0.013***
                                                                          (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)          (0.002)


 Constant                                15,100***      -253.88**        9,173***        9,520***          130.71        19,722***
                                          (521.51)       (97.83)        (1,049.34)      (1,122.13)       (2,136.67)      (2,008.57)

 Observations                             375,360        359,040         103,230          103,230          57,350          57,350
 R-squared                                 0.169          0.935           0.594            0.589           0.636           0.629
 Number of ZCTAs                          16,320         16,320          11,470           11,470           11,470          11,470
 Year FE                                   YES            YES
 ZCTA FE                                   YES            YES
 Counties FE                                                               YES             YES              YES             YES
 State*Year FE                                                             YES             YES              YES             YES

                                                                                                                            =
 Note: In column (1), both endogenous variable and covariates are expressed as 2-year averages of the original variables: X
  +-1
                                                                                                                     = X
        . In columns (2), (3), we reduce the 25-year panel into 12 periods and difference out the resulting panel: X     -
   2
  -4 . In column (4), we re-transform all our original variables as 3-year averages (X
 X                                                                                      = +-1+-2), reduce the 25-year panel
                                                                                                    3
 into 8 periods and difference out:  X =   X - X  -6 . Notation simplified and Number of Ventures scaled by 1000 for
 exposition. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
  .




                                                                                                                                     42
                                                           TABLE 6

    The Impact of Funding on RECPI: Fixed Effects, Long First Differences and Anderson-Hsiao
                              Instrumental Variable Specification


                                             Long Panel with FE            Long First Differences          Long First Differences
                                                  [2 years]                      [2 years]                       [3 years]
                                                                                        With Instrument                 With Instrument
                                            (RECPI)         (RECPI)        (RECPI)       (RECPI)           (RECPI)       (RECPI)
                                               (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)


Covariates in levels
(RECPI)-1                                                  0.862***
                                                            (0.017)
Federal funds
(&    )-1                                  6.134***        1.132***
                                            (0.734)         (0.137)
(Non R&D funds to universities)t-1         -5.470**        -2.185**
                                            (1.917)         (0.775)
(R&D funds to national laboratories)-1     -0.199**          -0.039
                                            (0.074)         (0.021)

Covariates in first differences
(RECPI)-1                                                                 0.346***            -0.044      0.436***         0.230*
                                                                           (0.024)           (0.118)       (0.038)         (0.09)
Federal funds
(R&D funds to universities)t-1                                              0.806*        1.257***         2.034***      2.509***
                                                                           (0.336)         (0.363)          (0.461)        (0.47)
(Non R&D funds to universities)t-1                                        -7.335***       -7.270***       -13.652***    -13.060***
                                                                           (1.921)         (1.806)          (3.199)        (3.11)
(R&D funds to national laboratories)-1                                     -0.233*         -0.312*         -0.297**      -0.322**
                                                                           (0.098)         (0.125)          (0.111)       (0.117)


Constant                                  96,977***       31,599***       28,433**                        21,010***      95,049***
                                           (8,208)         (5,802)        (10,458)                         (19,717)       (20,057)

Observations                                375,360        359,040         103,230           103,230        57,350         57,350
R-squared                                    0.057          0.719           0.165             0.041         0.239          0.216
Number of ZCTAs                             16,320         16,320          11,470            11,470         11,470         11,470
Year FE                                      YES            YES
ZCTA FE                                      YES            YES
Counties FE                                                                  YES              YES           YES             YES
State*Year FE                                                                YES              YES           YES             YES

Note: In column (1), both endogenous variable and covariates are expressed as 2-year averages of the original variables: X  =
 +-1
                                                                                                                    = X
       . In columns (2), (3), we reduce the 25-year panel into 12 periods and difference out the resulting panel: X       -    X-4 .
   2
                                                                                     +-1 +-2
                                                                                =
In column (4), we re-transform all our original variables as 3-year averages (X                 ), reduce the 25-year panel into 8
                                                                                         3
periods and difference out: X =      -6 . Notation simplified and RECPI scaled by 1000 for exposition. Robust standard
                                X - X
errors in parenthesis.
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001.




                                                                                                                                     43
                                                                  TABLE 7

                             The Impact of Funding on RECPI and Number of Ventures:
                            Interactions with Institutional and Geographic Characteristics

                                                              (# of Ventures)                                     (RECPI)
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
(# of Ventures)-1                                 0.535***       0.512***         0.530***
                                                   (0.022)        (0.023)          (0.022)
(RECPI)-1                                                                                           -0.082           -0.086          -0.075
                                                                                                    (0.122)         (0.124)         (0.121)

Federal Funds

(R&D funds to universities)t-1                    0.169***          0.075         0.180***         1.987**         1.882**          1.551*
                                                   (0.027)         (0.041)         (0.024)         (0.708)         (0.686)          (0.767)
(Non R&D funds to universities)t-1                  0.071          0.091*           0.079         -7.821***       -7.222***        -7.368***
                                                   (0.042)         (0.041)         (0.040)         (1.851)         (1.802)          (1.813)
(R&D funds to national laboratories)t-1           0.016***       0.016***         0.016***          -0.350*        -0.362**        -0.382**
                                                   (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.138)         (0.130)         (0.129)

Interactions

(R&D funds univ)t-1  top50 Univ                   -0.098**                                        -4.728***
                                                   (0.030)                                         (1.123)
(R&D funds univ)t-1  Urban ZCTA                                     0.028                                            -1.235
                                                                   (0.044)                                          (0.788)
(R&D funds univ)t-1  # of Research Uni                                            -0.030***                                        -0.879***
                                                                                   (0.005)                                          (0.177)



Observations                                      103,230         103,230          103,230         103,230         103,230          103,230
R-squared                                          0.589           0.587            0.588           0.030           0.025            0.031
Number of ZCTAs                                   11,470          11,470           11,470          11,470          11,470           11,470
State*Year FE                                      YES             YES              YES             YES             YES              YES
Counties FE                                        YES             YES              YES             YES             YES              YES

 Note: The baseline specification for columns (1)-(3) is in Table 5, col. (4). The baseline specification for columns (4) - (7) is in Table 6,
 col. (4). Main effects on Top 50 Univ, Urban ZCTA, # of Research Universities, and the Constant are omitted for exposition.
 All endogenous and federal funds variables are in a long difference format. Notation simplified and endogenous variables scaled by 1000
 for exposition. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
  .




                                                                                                                                      44
                                                             TABLE 8

                   The Impact of Awarded Degrees on RECPI and Number of Ventures:
                           Natural Sciences, Social Sciences and Humanities


                                             (# of Ventures)        (# of Ventures)             (RECPI)                 (RECPI)
                                                   (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)


(# of Ventures)-1                                0.537***                0.538***
                                                  (0.021)                 (0.021)
(RECPI)-1                                                                                         -0.051                  -0.061
                                                                                                  (0.119)                 (0.120)
Federal funds
(R&D funds to universities)t-1                   0.120***                0.133***                1.072**                 1.307**
                                                  (0.013)                 (0.015)                (0.394)                 (0.445)
(Non R&D funds to universities)t-1                0.097*                   0.046                -6.582***               -6.268***
                                                  (0.041)                 (0.041)                (1.754)                 (1.739)
(R&D funds to national laboratories)-1           0.017***                0.015***                -0.328*                 -0.276*
                                                  (0.003)                 (0.003)                (0.133)                 (0.117)
Degrees Awarded
(Bachelor students natural science)-1                                    6.262**                                        318.719***
                                                                         (1.970)                                          (72.103)
(Master students natural science)-1                                       5.452                                            -83.530
                                                                         (3.067)                                         (154.357)
(PhD students natural science)-1                                        -13.911**                                         -45.943
                                                                         (4.973)                                         (228.721)
(Total students natural science)-1                3.528**                                      231.991***
                                                  (1.257)                                       (57.938)
(Bachelor students social sciences
      and humanities)-1                                                   -0.653                                         -73.245*
                                                                          (0.981)                                        (31.414)
(Master students social sciences
     and humanities)-1                                                    -1.105                                          4.776
                                                                          (0.788)                                        (20.504)
(PhD students social sciences
    and humanities)-1                                                     -4.949                                       1,059.452**
                                                                          (7.211)                                       (393.664)
(Total students social sciences
     and humanities)-1                            -0.804*                                       -34.959**
                                                  (0.396)                                        (13.259)


Observations                                        103,230                103,230                103,230                  103,230
R-squared                                            0.589                   0.589                  0.038                   0.035
Number of ZCTAs                                      11,470                 11,470                 11,470                  11,470
Counties FE                                           YES                     YES                   YES                     YES
State*Year FE                                         YES                     YES                   YES                     YES
Note: The baseline specification is in Table 5 and 6, col. (3). Constant omitted for exposition.
All variables are in a long difference format. Notation simplified and endogenous variables scaled by 1000 for exposition. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis.
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                                                               45
                                      FIGURE 1a

Impact of the Presence of a RESEARCH INSTITUTION on Number of Ventures over time

          1200.00

          1000.00

           800.00

           600.00

           400.00

           200.00

             0.00
                 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011
          -200.00

          -400.00

                         Research University    National Laboratory




                                      FIGURE 1b

     Impact of the Presence of a RESEARCH INSTITUTION on RECPI over time


        1200.00

        1000.00

         800.00

         600.00

         400.00

         200.00

           0.00
               1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011
        -200.00

        -400.00

                         Research University    National Laboratory




                                                                               46
                                                        APPENDIX A
                                                            TABLE A.1

                                        Entrepreneurial Quality Logit Model
                                               Predictive Analytics Model of Equity Growth
                                                   Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                                               Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported



                                                                                      Full model
                                                                                           (1)
                                Corporate Governance Measures
                                    Corporation                                        3.202***
                                                                                        (0.0650)


                                Name-Based Measures
                                    Short Name                                         1.786***
                                                                                        (0.0208)


                                    Eponymous                                          0.312***
                                                                                        (0.0150)
                                Intellectual Property Measures


                                    Trademark                                          4.288***
                                                                                        (0.200)
                                Patent - Delaware Interaction
                                    Patent Only                                        20.24***
                                                                                        (0.847)


                                    Delaware Only                                      15.26***
                                                                                        (0.294)


                                    Patent and Delaware                                84.08***
                                                                                        (2.720)


                                US CMP Clusters                                           Yes
                                US CMP High-Tech Clusters                                 Yes
                                N                                                     26,051,461
                                R-squared                                                0.194

Reproduced from Andrews, et al (2020), Table 2, col (4). This regression is a logit model with Growth as the dependent variable. Growth is
a binary indicator equal to 1 if a firm achieves IPO or acquisition within 6 years and 0 otherwise. Growth is only defined for firms born in
the cohorts of 1988 to 2010. This model forms the basis of our entrepreneurial quality estimates, which are the predicted values of the
model. Incidence ratios reported; Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                                                                         47
                                                          TABLE A.2

                         Funding and Degrees Controls: Definition and Summary Statistics

                                                 Definition                                 Source        Mean    Std. Dev.
Funds to universities

State funds to universities Total amount of state funds ($k) received by the         National Science      981          7,389
                            research universities in a 5 miles radius of the         Foundation
                            ZCTA, per year
Institutional funds to      Total amount of funds ($k) received from                 National Science     3,136        18,785
universities                institutional donors by the research universities in     Foundation
                            a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per year
Business funds to           Total amount of funds ($k) received from business        National Science     1,148         8,175
universities                donors by the research universities in a 5 miles         Foundation
                            radius of the ZCTA, per year
Other funds to universities Total amount of funds ($k) received from other           National Science     1,719        11,998
                            sources by the research universities in a 5 miles        Foundation
                            radius of the ZCTA, per year
Degrees Awarded

Bachelor students natural   Total number of natural sciences bachelor degrees        National Science     108.1         446.4
science                     awarded in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per year        Foundation

Master students natural     Total number of natural sciences Master degrees          National Science     44.34         241.7
science                     awarded in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per year        Foundation

PhD students natural        Total number of natural sciences PhD degrees             National Science      13.6          97.1
science                     awarded in a 5 miles radius of the ZCTA, per year        Foundation

Total students natural      Total number of bachelor, Master and PhD degrees         National Science     166.0         753.7
science                     in natural sciences awarded in a 5 miles radius of       Foundation
                            the ZCTA, per year
Bachelor students social    Total number of humanities and social sciences           National Science     302.4         1,219
sciences and humanities     bachelor degrees awarded in a 5 miles radius of the      Foundation
                            ZCTA, per year
Master students social      Total number of humanities and social sciences           National Science     149.1         838.8
sciences and humanities     Master degrees awarded in a 5 miles radius of the        Foundation
                            ZCTA, per year
PhD students social         Total number of humanities and social sciences           National Science      14.0          90.9
sciences and humanities     PhD degrees awarded in a 5 miles radius of the           Foundation
                            ZCTA, per year
Total students social       Total number of bachelor, Master and PhD degrees         National Science     465.4        2,067.0
sciences and humanities     in humanities and social sciences awarded in a 5         Foundation
                            miles radius of the ZCTA, per year
                            Total number of ZCTA                                                         16,320

                            Total number of observations (panel)                                        408,000

 Note: All dollar amounts are inflation-adjusted and standardized to 2012 dollars.




                                                                                                                  48
                                                 APPENDIX B
                                                    TABLE B.1

                                    Census Controls: Summary Statistics

                                              Definition                           Source          Mean     Std Dev


Census Variables by ZCTA (1990)
Total population         Total population                                     Decennial Census     9,367        12,893

Density                  Total population divided by the geographical area    Decennial Census    0.0004         0.001

Male                     % of men in the total population                     Decennial Census     0.496         0.038

Urban                    % of the population residing in urban areas          Decennial Census     0.349         0.431

Age between 18 and 65    % of the population between 18 and 65 years old      Decennial Census     0.594         0.068

White                    % of the population of white ethnicity               Decennial Census     0.884         0.182

Born outside the US      % of the population born outside of the United       Decennial Census     0.042         0.077
                         States
College                  % of the population with a college degree or         Decennial Census     0.210         0.131
                         higher
Private sector           % of the population employed in the private sector   Decennial Census     0.720         0.118

Public sector            % of the population employed in the public sector    Decennial Census     0.153         0.083

Income per capita        Median per capita income                             Decennial Census    12,506         5,780

Housing values           Median house value                                   Decennial Census    72,684        67,492

                         Total number of ZCTA                                                     16,320

                         Total number of observations (panel)                                    408,000




                                                                                                           49
                           TABLE B.2
    # of Ventures and RECPI By Presence of Research Institutions:
                         Census Controls

                                # of Ventures                          RECPI
                                      (1)                               (2)

Research University                  22.20***                         399.98***
                                      (4.84)                           (74.57)
National Laboratory                 -39.05***                         -235.72*
                                      (6.77)                          (112.88)
Total population                     0.00***                           0.01***
                                      (0.00)                            (0.00)
Density                             -2,728.18*                       -25,777.99+
                                    (1,086.45)                       (13,878.21)
Male                                 -61.10**                           351.21
                                      (21.98)                          (250.15)
Urban                                20.52***                          42.62+
                                      (2.30)                           (24.01)
Age 18 - 65                           29.98*                          810.16***
                                      (13.10)                          (168.38)
White                                16.24***                        -148.40***
                                      (4.83)                           (42.27)
Born outside the US                 269.78***                        2,033.19***
                                     (33.93)                           (244.01)
College                              84.88***                           146.21
                                      (11.01)                          (177.85)
Private sector                       18.61***                        -461.43***
                                      (4.88)                           (57.39)
Public sector                        -20.01**                        -820.14***
                                       (7.13)                          (84.63)
Income per capita                    0.00***                            0.02*
                                      (0.00)                            (0.01)
Housing values                        -0.00***                         0.00***
                                        (0.00)                           (0.00)
Constant                             -87.88***                       -585.07***
                                       (10.47)                         (142.31)
Observations                           408,000                         408,000
Number of ZCTAs                         16,320                          16,320
All specifications include year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parenthesis,
clustered at the ZCTA level. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                        50
                                                                 TABLE B.3

             Number of Ventures and RECPI By Institutional and Geographic Characteristics
Columns 1 and 5 examine the effect of the quality of the universities in a 5 miles radius of the focal ZCTA. Columns 2 and
6 examine the effect of the presence of specialized schools in a 5 miles radius of the focal ZCTA. Columns 3 and 7 examine
the interaction between the presence of at least one research university and the urbanization/income of the focal ZCTA.
Columns 4 and 8 present the full specification.
                                                              # of Ventures                                                RECPI
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)

Research university                         24.40***        11.25         2.04         -7.32         260.19***     84.52       -167.90*     -166.48
                                             (5.14)         (7.47)       (7.01)        (8.88)         (71.13)     (160.68)      (67.68)     (145.72)
National Laboratory                         -35.92***     -42.52***    -40.92***     -38.14***       -765.70***   -275.49*     -258.86*    -760.65***
                                              (7.38)        (7.02)       (7.37)        (7.82)         (184.71)    (118.28)     (118.11)     (184.13)

Quality of the university
Top 50                                        -6.26                                   -10.01           -45.18                               -116.26
                                             (11.82)                                  (12.14)         (152.09)                              (162.51)
Top 10                                        -9.16                                   -22.16         2,229.9***                            2,094.4***
                                             (17.56)                                  (17.73)         (445.11)                              (438.82)

Specialized School
Business School                                             -9.85                      -7.18                       74.20                     -84.19
                                                            (8.66)                     (8.84)                     (138.70)                  (139.62)
Medical School                                               3.31                       6.06                       64.68                     197.95
                                                            (9.57)                     (9.86)                     (142.49)                  (144.38)
Law School                                                 27.19**                    30.48**                     366.37**                   88.91
                                                           (10.43)                    (10.56)                     (137.23)                  (130.07)

Characteristics of the ZCTA
Research University*Urban ZCTA                                            10.12         4.34                                  398.48***      177.84
                                                                          (8.57)       (9.01)                                  (106.04)     (120.50)
Research University*High Income ZCTA                                    40.53***     45.19***                                 948.25***    742.77***
                                                                         (11.78)      (12.13)                                  (204.00)     (192.95)

Constant                                                                                                              -
                                            -87.49***     -89.43***    -92.36***     -92.99***       -645.46***   612.27***   -615.81***   -664.86***
                                             (10.47)       (10.43)      (10.57)       (10.48)         (141.48)     (142.25)    (145.89)     (146.18)

Observations
                                             408,000       408,000      408,000       408,000         408,000      408,000     408,000      408,000
R-squared                                     0.362         0.363        0.367         0.368           0.257        0.239       0.247        0.265
Number of ZCTAs                              16,320        16,320       16,320        16,320          16,320       16,320      16,320       16,320
Year FE                                        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Census 1990 Controls                           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

Robust standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the ZCTA level. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                                                                           51
                                                       APPENDIX C

                                                         TABLE C1

                  The Impact of Funding on Number of Ventures: Robustness Checks
                                           Long Panel with FE                              Long First Differences
                                                [2 years]                                        [2 years]

                                 Before   After 2000     97-99         Stanford & Before 2000 After 2000    97-99     Stanford &
                                  2000                  excluded          MIT                              excluded      MIT
                                                                        excluded                                       excluded
                              (#Ventures) (#Ventures) (# of Ventures) (#Ventures) (#Ventures) (#Ventures) (#Ventures) (#Ventures)
                                  (1)        (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

Covariates in levels
(# of Ventures)-1             0.992***    0.862***     0.979***     0.981***
                               (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Federal funds
(R&D funds to univ. )t-1      0.120***    0.046***     0.023***     0.017***
                               (0.014)     (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.003)
(Non R&D funds to univ. )t-     0.037     0.088***     0.066***     0.091***
                               (0.026)     (0.025)      (0.020)      (0.024)
(R&D funds to NL)-1            -0.003       0.000       -0.000        0.001
                               (0.008)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)

Covariates in first
differences
(# of Ventures)-1                                                               0.729***     0.618***    0.620***     0.647***
`                                                                                (0.016)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.009)
Federal funds
(R&D funds to univ. )t-1                                                        0.141***     0.102***    0.105***     0.127***
                                                                                 (0.024)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.014)
(Non R&D funds to univ. )                                                        -0.067       0.104*      0.091*        0.077
                                                                                 (0.052)      (0.046)     (0.045)      (0.062)
(R&D funds to NL)-1                                                               0.000      0.016***    0.016***     0.015***
                                                                                 (0.016)      (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.003)

Constant                      -1,160***   7,5130***     -270**       -206*      9,051*** -10,300*** 9,235***        9,021***
                              (190.112)   (268.117)    (100.423)    (97.071)   (1,068.782) (1,990.329) (1,071.081) (1,048.849)

Observations                   163,200     212,160     326,400      374,279      34,410       68,820      80,290      102,825
R-squared                       0.874       0.797       0.933        0.935       0.650        0.591       0.587        0.595
Number of ZCTAs                16,320      16,320      16,320       16,273       11,470       11,470      11,470      11,425
Year FE                         YES         YES         YES          YES
ZCTA FE                         YES         YES         YES          YES
Counties FE                                                                       YES          YES         YES          YES
State*Year FE                                                                     YES          YES         YES          YES

Note: In columns (1-4), both endogenous variable and covariates are expressed as 2-year averages of the original
             = +-1. In columns (5-8), we reduce the 25-year panel into 12 periods and difference out the resulting
variables: X
                   2
panel: X   =   X - X  -4 . Notation simplified and Number of Ventures scaled by 1000 for exposition. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 .




                                                                                                                              52
                                                         TABLE C2

                           The Impact of Funding on RECPI: Robustness Checks
                                           Long Panel with FE                                Long First Differences
                                                [2 years]                                          [2 years]

                                Before      After 2000     97-99     Stanford &    Before     After 2000    97-99      Stanford &
                                 2000                     excluded      MIT         2000                   excluded       MIT
                                                                      excluded                                          excluded
                               (RECPI)      (RECPI)       (RECPI)     (RECPI)     (RECPI)     (RECPI)      (RECPI)     (RECPI)
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)

Covariates in levels
(RECPI)-1                      0.950***     0.659***     0.874***    0.858***
                                (0.030)      (0.046)      (0.017)     (0.020)
Federal funds
(&    . )-1                    3.530***     0.941**      1.354***    1.103***
                                (0.765)     (0.336)       (0.160)     (0.169)
(Non R&D funds to univ. )t-1     0.902     -4.558***     -2.816**     -1.076
                                (1.028)     (1.335)       (0.934)     (0.735)
(R&D funds to NL)-1              0.203       -0.004       -0.025      -0.030
                                (0.288)     (0.037)       (0.021)     (0.021)

Covariates in first
differences
(RECPI)-1                                                                         0.753***    0.280***     0.281***    0.341***
                                                                                   (0.073)     (0.026)      (0.026)     (0.029)
Federal funds
(R&D funds to univ. )t-1                                                          4.106*        0.535        0.672*     0.669+
                                                                                  (1.739)      (0.352)      (0.322)     (0.397)
(Non R&D funds to univ. )t-1                                                       0.448      -8.808***    -8.491***   -4.553**
                                                                                  (2.024)      (2.300)      (2.174)     (1.580)
(R&D funds to NL)-1                                                                0.267       -0.153*      -0.181*     -0.183*
                                                                                  (0.624)      (0.067)      (0.077)     (0.079)


Constant                       -24,044**   149,564***     6,425*     10,075**      30,146     94,235***    20,397*     33,540**

Observations                   163,200      212,160   326,400     374,279     34,410      68,820      80,290      102,825
R-squared                        0.612       0.383     0.737       0.709       0.347      0.135        0.133       0.160
Number of ZCTAs                 16,320       16,320    16,320      16,273     11,470      11,470      11,470      11,425
Year FE                          YES          YES       YES         YES
ZCTA FE                          YES          YES       YES         YES
Counties FE                                                                    YES         YES         YES         YES
State*Year FE                                                                  YES         YES         YES         YES
Note: In columns (1-4), both endogenous variable and covariates are expressed as 2-year averages of the original
             = +-1. In columns (5-8), we reduce the 25-year panel into 12 periods and difference out the resulting
variables: X
                   2
panel: X  =    X - X  -4 . Notation simplified and RECPI scaled by 1000 for exposition. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001




                                                                                                                               53
                                                      APPENDIX D

                                   Case Study: Weber State University (UTAH)

In 1998, WSU's R&D federal funding more than tripled. The Table highlights the substantial increase in RECPI and in the
Number of Ventures in the immediate vicinity of the university.


  Distance           Year       # of Ventures       RECPI        Lagged R&D       Growth # of       Growth           Lagged
                                                                  fed funding      Ventures         RECPI         Growth R&D
                                                                                                                   fed funding

 5-50 miles         1998            9,479           14,093         2,148,481

 5-50 miles         1999            10,528          14,464         2,242,103         11.1%           2.6%             4.4%



  <5 miles          1998             686              564            1,502


  <5 miles          1999             803              798            5,247           17.1%           41.7%           249%

Note: R&D funding to WSU is lagged one year to mitigate reverse causality concerns: the 249% increase in funding refers to the
1997-1998 period. Again, all funding amounts are in thousands (2012 baseline year).




                                                                                                                    54
