                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RESEARCH AND MARKET STRUCTURE:
                      EVIDENCE FROM A PATHOGENIC OUTBREAK

                                       Mayank Aggarwal
                                      Anindya Chakrabarti
                                      Chirantan Chatterjee
                                      Matthew J. Higgins

                                      Working Paper 28840
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28840


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Xavier Castaner, Philippe Gorry, Dietmar Harhoff, Bruce Hollingsworth, Katharina
Janke, Gerard Llobet, Catalina Martinez and Ceu Mateus as well as seminar participants at
Lancaster University, HEC Lausanne and Mercados, Innovación y Medio Ambiente - Comunidad
de Madrid, and the Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition for helpful comments
and suggestions. Chatterjee acknowledges support of the Campbell and Edward Teller National
Fellowship, the Visiting Fellow program at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University and the
ICICI Bank Chair in Strategic Management, IIM Ahmedabad. Higgins acknowledges support
from the Sorenson Center for Discovery and Innovation. Usual disclaimers apply. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mayank Aggarwal, Anindya Chakrabarti, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J.
Higgins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Research and Market Structure: Evidence from A Pathogenic Outbreak
Mayank Aggarwal, Anindya Chakrabarti, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Matthew J. Higgins
NBER Working Paper No. 28840
May 2021
JEL No. I18,L1,L65

                                          ABSTRACT

Do upstream research shocks directly and contemporaneously impact related but disconnected
downstream product markets? We explore this question using a natural experiment involving the
New Delhi Metallo-Beta-Lactamase 1 superbug pathogenic outbreak in India. Using a difference-
in-differences strategy, we find that this upstream research shock caused multinational firms
selling antibiotics in India to reduce their market exposure. Surprisingly, this void was filled by
domestic Indian firms. These results are bolstered by a concurrent decline in multinational
prescriptions of focal products by Indian physicians relative to prescriptions for domestic firm
products. We present a stylized model building on a Cournot differentiated duopoly model to
explain these heterogeneous responses. Results are robust to alternate control groups, including
synthetic controls, as well as placebo testing. Implications for health policy and innovation policy
are discussed.

Mayank Aggarwal                                  Chirantan Chatterjee
IIM Ahmedabad                                    Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad, Guja 380015                           Room 15F, Wing 15, Heritage Campus
India                                            Ahmedabad
phd16mayanka@iima.ac.in                          India
                                                 and Stanford University
Anindya Chakrabarti                              chirantan@gmail.com
IIM Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad, Guja 380015                           Matthew J. Higgins
India                                            David Eccles School of Business
anindyac@iima.ac.in                              University of Utah
                                                 1731 E Campus Center Drive
                                                 Salt Lake City, UT 84112
                                                 and Max Planck Institute for
                                                 Innovation and Competition
                                                 and also NBER
                                                 matt.higgins@eccles.utah.edu
1.0      Introduction
      Research and development (R&D) is often viewed as a linear process as exemplified by
the adage "yesterday's research becomes today's development and tomorrow's products". In
the pharmaceutical industry, for example, university technologies are often commercialized
by small, research-intensive firms and ultimately licensed or acquired by larger, downstream
firms for development prior to being taken to market. This technology push view of
innovation (e.g., Mowery and Rosenberg, 1979) is long and expensive with high rates of
failure (e.g, DiMasi et al, 2016). Shocks to this kind of system ripple, for example, from
(yesterday's) research through (today's) development before impacting (tomorrow's) product
market. But what if the innovation process is not linear (e.g., Higgins et al., 2014)? Would
this imply that shocks to one aspect of R&D could directly impact some other non-connected
part of the innovation ecosystem?

         It is not surprising that shocks to research will impact future development activities.
Prior research has explored the impact of development shocks on future development
activities (e.g, Krieger et al., 2018; Hermosilla and Wu, 2018; Higgins and Rodriguez, 2006;
Danzon et al., 2005) development shocks on product markets (e.g., Higgins et al., 2021); and,
product market shocks on development activities (e.g., Agarwal and Gaule, 2021; Manso et
al., 2019; Branstetter et al., 2014; Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2013; Dranove et al., 2013;
Dubois et al., 2013; Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Finkelstein, 2004). The relationships from
these more demand-pull (e.g., Mowery and Rosenberg, 1979) studies, however, are not
unexpected as the focal shocks occur between connected parts of the R&D process. More
recently researchers have considered the impact of downstream product market shocks on
disconnected but related upstream research activities (e.g., Byrski et al, 2021). Missing from
the literature is a clear understanding whether a causal relationship exists in the opposite
direction; do upstream research shocks directly and contemporaneously impact related but
disconnected downstream product markets?

         Using a natural experiment involving the publication of the discovery of the broad
spectrum antibiotic resistant New Delhi Metallo-Beta-Lactamase (NDM-1) superbug in India,
we fill this gap in the literature. Prior to the publication in Lancet Infectious Diseases
(Kumarasamy et al., 2010) little attention was paid to this particular superbug (Figure 1).
Using this event as a plausibly exogenous shock to research, coupled with unique and
disaggregate data from the pharmaceutical industry, we are able to examine the direct and
contemporaneous impacts of this event on unconnected but related downstream antibiotic

                                                                                                   3
product markets. Importantly, we are able to exploit variation across product markets (i.e.,
broad spectrum and narrow spectrum antibiotics), firm types (i.e., domestic and multinational
firms) and countries (e.g., India and U.S.).

         We start with a theoretical model to hypothesize about ex post strategic behavior of
multinational and domestic firms in reaction to the NDM-1 research shock. We adopt a
duopoly model with differentiated goods and linear demand and apply a solution concept
from Cournot competition in terms of quantity choice (Dixit, 1979). Using this model, we are
able to ask important research questions that contribute to the literature. First, we find that the
effects of the NDM-1 research shock were dramatic and immediate in the downstream Indian
antibiotic market. More specifically, multinational firms withdrew drugs from the affected
antibiotic market. Within the context of our model, this pivot away from the Indian market
can be explained by decreases to expected revenues coupled with increases in marginal costs.
The lost revenues are driven by the withdraw from the market while the increase in marginal
cost is driven by changes to reputational costs faced by multinational firms.

         The behaviors observed by these multinational firms aligns with the extant literature
focused on the trade-offs firms face in deciding between ethics and profits, especially in the
presence of negative market shocks (e.g., Cheah et al., 2007; Rhee and Haunschild, 2006).
Relatedly, multinationals also face a "liability of foreignness" amidst calls for corporate
social responsibility in host countries (e.g., Crilly et al., 2016; Campbell et al., 2012; Zaheer
and Mosakowski, 1997). This is especially pertinent given the reputational costs
multinationals potentially face by selling "dodgy" products in host markets, in this case India,
once a shock credibly reveals negative information about a product. Since multinationals may
not have the same institutional backing as domestic firms, they will need a higher rate of
responsiveness to scientific evidence to avoid possible sanction by regulators (Kostova et al.,
2008).

         Corresponding to this withdraw from the market, we find that the average number of
prescriptions for multinational firm drugs in the affected markets also declines relative to
domestic firm antibiotic prescriptions. This suggests that the change in physician behavior
that we observe occurred through the intensive margin. We know from prior literature that
pharmaceutical advertising and detailing impacts physician behavior (e.g., Datta and Dave,
2017; Manchanda and Honka, 2005); this is no different in the Indian pharmaceutical market.
Moreover, we are able to track `bonus quantities' that firms provide as a direct incentive to


                                                                                                    4
sellers (Bhaskarabhatla et al., 2016). In the post-treatment period, we find a significant
reduction in bonus quantities by multinational firms compared to domestic firms.

         Within affected markets, variation also exists in terms of drug age or vintage.
Pharmaceutical innovation within antibiotics has been relatively sparse (e.g., Spellberg and
Gilbert, 2014). Thus, in the face of newly discovered resistance, firms should respond more
rapidly within newer classes of drugs in order to protect them. Dividing drugs in affected
markets by vintage (e.g., Chahine et al., 2010; Papp-Wallace et al., 2011), we find that
multinational firms reacted more sharply in pulling newer drugs from the Indian market.
More broadly, this finding provides evidence of the nature of how an upstream research
shock impacts downstream product markets. In our context, this suggests that newer
innovations are impacted more severely than older innovations. This has significant
implications for firms as newer innovations (i.e., drugs) tend to be higher priced as they are
still covered by some type of regulatory or patent protection versus older drugs that most
likely already face generic competition. To the extent that current revenues are used to fund
future R&D (e.g., Branstetter et al., 2016), our results suggest there could be implications for
future innovation.

         Next, we find that the void in the market left by multinational firms is filled by
domestic firms who increase production. Within the context of our model, the intuition is that
given the demand function from the unit mass of consumers and a given degree of
substitutability, any reduction in one firm's output (i.e., multinational firm), due to their
strategic interaction, creates an opportunity for the other firm (i.e., domestic firm) to step in
and increase their own output. Importantly, domestic firms are manufacturers and are not
involved in novel R&D so their business is driven primarily by quantity considerations.
Domestic firms, therefore, do not face the same global reputational concerns as multinational
firms. The important distinction here is that multinational firms are producing branded, novel
drugs while domestic firms are producing generic versions of previously branded drugs. In
most countries, branded drugs are held responsible for harm to patients, as long as generics
versions were truly bioequivalent.1

         This finding, worryingly, implies that downstream demand for drugs in affected
markets does not wane. Antibiotic overuse is a global public health crisis (e.g., Ackerman and

1
  For example, in 2011the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of protecting generic firms from being sued for
failing to provide adequate label warning about side effects because federal law requires them to use the branded
versions' labels.

                                                                                                               5
Gonzales, 2012; Davies et al., 2013) and is even more acute in India (e.g., Thakolkaran et al.,
2017).2 Our results suggest, however, that some combination of downstream actors, including
physicians, pharmacists and/or patients are either choosing to act in a medically irrational
manner or are oblivious to the shock.3 Sadly, survey evidence appears to support both
explanations. In one survey, 89 percent of physicians believed that providers were
overprescribing antibiotics (Thakolkaran et al., 2017). In the same survey, however, 80
percent of physicians stated that they did not receive periodic information on trends in
bacterial resistance. Of those that did receive information, 8 percent reported receiving
information from clinical laboratories, 2 percent from medical journals and 1 percent from
the pharmaceutical industry. Combined with our core findings, this would imply that as
multinational firms pulled out of the Indian market, they failed to sufficiently inform
physicians as to why they were leaving.

        The heterogeneous firm reaction between multinationals and domestic firms also
relates to the broader literature on technology choice and product abandonment (e.g., Bayus
and Agarwal, 2007; Klepper and Simons, 1997). Much of this literature has focused on how
technologies emerge and diffuse (Murmann and Frenken, 2006; Rogers, 2003) while usually
finding they are welfare enhancing (e.g., Trajtenberg, 1989). Less investigated is why firms
reduce their commitment to existing technologies. Reducing market commitment to existing
technologies is difficult because it entails foregoing sunk cost investments (Finkelstein and
Gilbert, 1985) and conceding the product market to competitors (Younkin, 2016). Our results
provide a new, plausible channel ­ increased reputational costs in the face of negative
upstream research shocks - that may help explain why firms abandon a product or market.

        Along with our core findings we conduct numerous robustness and placebo tests to
ensure the validity of our results. First, our results are robust with respect to pre-trends; both
synthetic control analysis and event-study plots show that pre-trends do not exist. We have
also tested for placebo treatment in April 2008 to rule out pre-trend due to the diagnosis of
the first-ever patient with NDM-1, which is also insignificant. Second, our findings are robust
with respect to an alternate control group comprising all broad-spectrum antibiotic molecules,


2
  The WHO just recently (re-)sounded the alarm on drug-resistant bacteria:
https://www.ft.com/content/f04275a3-5095-4f9e-a711-6fe7d59216dc.
3
  To contrast with our focal analysis on the Indian market, we have estimated the market impact using data from
the U.S. as well; the effects are not significant. This is in line with the explanation that such aggressive
reorientation in market structure combined with overprescription of antibiotics, is predicated on a weaker
regulatory body. Results are described more fully in the main text.

                                                                                                              6
excluding carbapenems. Third, our results are robust to controlling for regional heterogeneity
within India. Fourth, we truncated our sample of molecules by excluding Ertapenem which
was sold only by an Indian domestic firm; results remain robust. Fifth, we consider whether
this research shock spilled over into other markets that were not exposed to the levels of
NDM-1 antibiotic resistance found in India. Using data from the U.S., we find no evidence of
any impact on antibiotic markets.

        Finally, our findings also have important policy implications given the Red Queen
Effect in antibiotics resistance (Baquero et al., 2009; Dieckmann et al., 1995). The Red
Queen Effect depicts a situation where - it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the
same place.4 In the context of antibiotics, pharmaceutical firms are globally running a
(difficult) R&D race to produce newer antibiotics, but at the same time, as more antibiotics
are consumed (often indiscriminately prescribed) it increases the probability of resistance
thereby destroying incentives for innovation. This horse race between economics and clinical
externalities is at the heart of designing optimal health and innovation policies (Eswaran and
Gallini, 2019), prompting infectious disease experts like Dr. Anthony Fauci to comment:
"Resistant microbes outstrip new antibiotics. It's an ongoing problem. It's not like we can fix
it, and it's over. We have to fight continued resistance with a continual pipeline of new
antibiotics and continue with the perpetual challenge".5

2.0     Institutional Background

        2.1      Antibiotic discovery, consumption and resistance

        Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928. By 1940, scientists had already
discovered the existence of resistant bacterial strains and acknowledged the fear of over-use
(Spellberg and Gilbert, 2014).6 By the mid-1940s, streptomycin, a successful drug for
tuberculosis was introduced, but very soon after resistant bacteria were discovered. The
1950s saw the development of many classes of antibiotics that are still used today (e.g.,
tetracyclines, macrolides/lincosamides/streptogramins, glycopeptides, rifamycins and
nitroimidazoles). Besides the discovery of quinolones and trimethoprim in the 1960s there


4
  The Red Queen Effect is aptly pulled from Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking Glass, a sequel to Alice's
Adventures in Wonderland.
5
  See: https://www.post-gazette.com/healthypgh/2014/05/25/Medical-marathon-Race-is-on-to-develop-new-
antibiotics-Medical-marathon-U-S-Centers-for-Disease-Control-and-Prevention-employ-shotgun-approach-to-
bring-antibiotic-resistance-under-control/stories/201405250015
6
  See: https://www.nytimes.com/1945/06/26/archives/penicillins-finder-assays-its-future-sir-alexander-fleming-
says.html

                                                                                                             7
was a long development gap until the oxazolidinones in the early 2000s (see Conly and
Johnston, 2005; Davies and Davies, 2010). The early triumphs of the global pharmaceutical
industry over infectious diseases was captured by Nobel laureate M. Burnet's quip "...the
virtual elimination of the infectious diseases as a significant factor in social life..." (Burnet et
al., 1972).
        A large set of global pharmaceutical firms including Novartis, AstraZeneca, Sanofi,
Allergen, Merck, Roche, GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer are active in antibiotics development
and manufacturing. While antibiotics have been shown positively impact long-run economic
development (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007), the supply of new antibiotics has slowly dried
up. Unfortunately, bacteria continue to evolve (Spellberg and Gilbert, 2014). For example,
per the World Health Organization's list of antibiotics in clinical development, only three of
them can potentially target the NDM-1 bacteria. This bacterium is the focus of our analysis
and has shown resistance towards carbapenems, the broad-spectrum antibiotic also known as
the `last line of defense' for bacterial infections.7,8
        High levels of antibiotic consumption and the related rise in antibiotic resistance is a
globally well-recognized problem (e.g., Goff et al., 2016). Antibiotic resistance kills more
than 700,000 people each year with projected deaths exceeding 10 million per year by 2050
(O'Neill, 2014). While the dangers have been recognized since the 1940s, it has proven
difficult to reduce the use of the antibiotics. Between 2000 and 2015, global antibiotic
consumption has increased by 65 percent (Klein et al., 2018). Much of this increase, and
resulting rise in resistance, has occurred in low-and-middle income countries. India is an
important contributor to this global rise in antibiotic resistance, including the presumed
source of the broad spectrum antibiotic resistant NDM-1 superbug.9 NDM-1 has now spread
to more than 70 countries and the latest report of its outbreak has emerged from as far away
as a remote Norwegian archipelago.10 Important, however, for our analysis is the fact that
during our sample period the spread of NDM-1 to the U.S. was extremely limited (and mostly
as a result of patients having come into the U.S. from foreign countries).




7
  See: https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/17-01-2020-lack-of-new-antibiotics-threatens-global-efforts-to-
contain-drug-resistant-infections
8
  See: https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/jan/17/big-pharma-failing-to-invest-in-new-antibiotics-says-
who
9
  See: https://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/health/india-the-antibiotic-capital-of-the-world-63097
10
   See: https://www.wsj.com/articles/superbug-from-india-spread-far-and-fast-study-finds-11548633600 and
http://outbreaknewstoday.com/italy-superbug-ndm-1-outbreak-reported-in-tuscany-24484/

                                                                                                            8
         With respect to India, antibiotic consumption has dramatically outpaced the growth in
global consumption, expanding by 103 percent over the same 2000 to 2015 time period
(Klein et al., 2018). On a relative basis, India's share in the global antibiotics market
increased from 15.1 percent in 2000 to 18.6 percent in 2015. While it is impossible to pin
down a single reason to explain this trajectory in India, there are several demand-side culprits
contributing to this problem. First, rising incomes and economic growth in India do not
appear to have translated into improvements in water, sanitation and public health
(Laxminarayan and Heymann, 2012). Second, physicians continue to prescribe antibiotics for
upper respiratory infections and diarrheal diseases for which they have limited value
(Thakolkaran et al., 2017; Chatterjee et al., 2015; Laxminarayan and Heymann, 2012). Third,
physicians routinely receive compensation in exchange for prescribing antibiotics (Roy et al.,
2007).11 Fourth, some antibiotics are available over-the-counter allowing patients easy (and
often uninformed) access to drugs (Laxminarayan and Chaudhury, 2016). Finally, there is
increased use of antibiotics in the animal sector driven by demand for meat and poultry (Van
Boeckel et al., 2015).

         2.2 The supply side of the Indian pharmaceutical industry

         From the supply side, the Indian pharmaceutical industry is marked by over-
dependence on antibiotics as the source of revenue. In 2006, most of the best selling drugs in
India were antibiotics (Duggan, et al., 2016). Some of the highest selling brands in India
includes products from both multinationals and domestic firms like GlaxoSmithKline's
AugmentinTM and Alkem Laboratories' ClavamTM (both having the active ingredient
amoxicillin and clavulanic acid), and Aristo Pharmaceuticals' MonocefTM (active ingredient
being ceftriaxone, a cephalosporin).12

         In developed countries, antibiotics account for around 8 percent of total
pharmaceutical sales, however, in developing countries, such as India, their share is around
20 percent (Chaudhuri et al., 2006).13 Prior to the identification of the NDM-1 superbug in
India, it would be safe to suggest that neither the demand nor the supply side were paying


11
   Competition between physicians also play a role. Physicians report feeling pressured by patients for a quick
remedy otherwise they risk losing the patient to other physicians (Kotwani et al., 2010). In conversations with
physicians they report to us that they believe it is better to err on the side of caution because they feel that a
Type-I error is more acceptable, both psychologically and socially.
12
   See: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/dcgi-moves-to-curb-sales-of-antibiotics-without-prescriptions-
11577380637918.html
13
   Based on AIOCD reports, we find that anti-infective accounts for 17 percent of sales in 2012.

                                                                                                                     9
enough attention to the brewing problem of drug-resistance. Luckily, rationalizing drug usage
in India has slowly started to take hold (Pulcini et al., 2012). In 2014, the Indian government
instructed pharmacists to set up registers to maintain detailed record of drug sales and also
implemented other comunnity surveillance programs to monitor medically irrational
prescribing behavior.14

           Adding to the complexity of the problem, the Indian pharmaceutical industry is highly
fragmented with over 5,000 (multinational and domestic) firms operating in the market (
Adbi et al., 2019; Adbi et al., 2018). Traditionally, the market has been dominated by generic
manufacturers due to India relaxing their intellectual property regime in the 1970s. The
liberalization of the Indian economy in the 1990s led many of these generic manufacturers to
begin to export to other developing economies (Hafner and Popp, 2011). Coupled with the
passage of The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act (otherwise known
as the "Hatch-Waxman Act") in 1984, Indian generic manufacturers also began to export to
the U.S. market (Branstetter et al., 2016; Chatterjee, 2009; Chaudhuri, 2005). This dynamic
shifted in 2005 with the implementation of the World Trade Organization's Trade Related
Intellectual Property Rights (WTO-TRIPs) requirements which re-strengthened the
intellectual property regime in India. One major implication of WTO-TRIPs has been the rise
of multinational firms within the domestic Indian market (e.g., Duggan et al., 2016;
Chatterjee et al., 2015; Kapczynski, 2009).

3.0        Theoretical Model

           We use a theoretical model to help explain and illustrate possible firm-level reactions
in downstream product markets to upstream research shocks. Fundamentally, the main
mechanism involves strategic behavior between domestic and multinational firms in the
presence of an adverse event. For this purpose, we adopt a duopoly model with differentiated
goods and linear demand, and we will apply the solution concept from Cournot competition
in terms of quantity choice.15 The baseline framework is built on Dixit (1979). For simplicity
and to retain tractability, we treat the multinational firms as one composite set of firms and
the domestic firms as another composite set of firms. This assumption not only simplifies the
model considerably, but is also consistent with our econometric approach. We denote the




14
     See: http://origin.searo.who.int/india/topics/antimicrobial_resistance/amr_containment.pdf
15
     Product differentiation can either be real or perceived.

                                                                                                  10
aggregate quantities produced by the multinational firms and domestic firms as qf and qd,
respectively.

        We start by defining the demand side and assume a continuum of consumers with a
quasi-linear utility function (Singh and Vives, 1984) in terms of quantity supplied by
multinationals ( ) and domestic firms ( ) as follows:

                                                     2   2
        ( , , ) =  ( +  ) -                         (  +   + 2  ) +                                      (1)
                                               2


where  and  are shape parameters of the utility function. The parameter  represents the
degree of product differentiation. As  goes up, the products become more identical. All
parameters are positive and, in particular,  has a magnitude between 0 and 1. The parameter
restrictions in the current representation are standard (e.g., Haraguchi and Matsumura, 2014).
Z represents a bundle of outside consumption goods that are competitively provided. We
assume that the price of commodity bundle Z is normalized to 1. We can generate the inverse
demand functions for the multinational and domestic firms, respectively, by equating
marginal utilities to prices:

            =  ­   ­                               and        =  ­   ­    .                              (2)

        On the producer side, we assume that the marginal cost of production is constant for
both the multinational and domestic firms. We denote these marginal costs by  and  ,
respectively. Assuming that  > , , the profit functions of these firms are given by: 16

              = ( -  )                         and            = ( -  ) .                                 (3)

By maximizing profits, we can write

                                                                
             =  - 2 -  = 0                          and             =  - 2 -  = 0,                       (4)
                                                                


where  =  -  and  =  -  . 17

        From (4) we can generate the reaction functions for the multinational and the
domestic firms, respectively:



16
   The autonomous component is greater than the marginal costs for both multinational and domestic firms. This
is a necessary condition for ensuring an interior solution.
17
   The second-order conditions are satisfied.



                                                                                                           11
                    -                                     -  
        ( ) =                      and        ( ) =                 .                         (5)
                        2                                   2


       Finally, by solving the reaction functions, we can generate the equilibrium quantities
in terms of exogenous parameters as:

              2 -                                     2 - 
        =                          and            =             .                             (6)
              (4- 2 )                                 (4- 2 )


       It is important to analyze equilibrium quantity choices and their relationships. We
note that the equilibrium quantity choices for both the multinational and domestic firms arise
from the strategic interactions in a duopoly set up. In particular, the cost of production as well
as the degree of product differentiation is embedded in the equilibrium quantity choices. In
order to understand the dynamics of the model we engage in a series of simulations. We start
by assuming  = 1 and  = 2 throughout. Three panels in Figure 2 describe the firm-level
response functions.

       In Panel (a), we further assume that the degree of substitutability is  = 0.5, marginal
costs for domestic firms are fixed at  = 0.5, and the marginal costs for the multinational
firms,  , vary from 0 to 1. On the y-axis we plot the equilibrium output of the multinational
                                                                                            
firms,  . As marginal costs,  , increase the decrease in the output by multinational firms,  ,
is evident. Importantly, beyond a threshold of approximately 0.85, multinational firm
                                        
equilibrium output falls to zero (i.e.,  = 0).

       In Panel (b), we fix the marginal costs for both multinational and domestic firms at
0.5 (i.e., c and c = 0.5) and we vary  from 0 (complete product differentiation) to 1 (zero
product differentiation). As can be seen, low product differentiation is associated with smaller
output in equilibrium as the products compete closely against each other, whereas high
product differentiation reduces competition across firms and therefore leads to higher output.

       Finally, in Panel (c), we plot the multinational firm's output in equilibrium as a
function of marginal cost,  , as well as the degree of product differentiation, . The shade of
the color (color online) is scaled with respect to the quantity; a lighter shade indicates higher
output. As can be seen for very high marginal cost and high product substitutability, the
equilibrium output is zero (as is indicated by the flat region).

       We posit that the NDM-1 research shock leads to two major changes for these firms'
strategic choices. First, the reputational cost for multinational firms go up for selling a


                                                                                                12
potentially controversial product in a foreign market (i.e., the domestic market of India is a
foreign market for the multinational firms), reflected by an increase in marginal costs,  . Our
model generates a clear prediction for such a change. If  goes up, then  goes down (since
                                                   
 =  -  ). Thus, the output of multinational firms,  , goes down and simultaneously the
                              
output of the domestic firms,  , goes up. We note that the first part of the result is intuitively
obvious that if the marginal cost of production goes up for multinational firms, it is natural to
expect that they will produce and sell less.

       The less-obvious result, however, arises from the response by domestic firms, who
increase sales by producing more. The intuition is that given the demand function from the
unit mass of consumers and a given degree of substitutability, any reduction in one firm's
output, due to their strategic interaction, creates an opportunity for the other firm to step in
and increase their own output. For multinational firms, reducing production is perfectly
consistent with exiting the market. In terms of the model, we see both the reduction in output
(intensive margin) and market exit (extensive margin) as inducing effectively the same
                                           
downward adjustment in equilibrium output,  . The opposite is true for the domestic firms.
These observations lead to our first research question: Will an upstream research shock cause
multinational firms to abandon downstream product markets and induce domestic firms to fill
this void?

       Next, it is important to note that the NDM-1 research shock alters the degree of
product substitutability between the antibiotics produced by multinational and domestic
firms. In the presence of a reputational cost, multinational firms may behave differently than
domestic firms with respect to the demand side. Since markets can be reciprocal, it is
conceivable that there will be differences from the demand side in terms of how domestic and
multinational firm antibiotics are treated. Upon publication of the article in Lancet, there
were multiple high-profile discussions among policymakers and within the relevant medical
community in India. As such, it is natural to expect the degree of substitutability between the
focal antibiotic (i.e., carbapenems) produced by domestic and multinational firms to go down.

       This mechanism can be modelled by a fall in  and the resulting effect can be readily
                                                                 2 
seen by considering the signs of the cross-partial derivatives         (the sign is positive) and
                                                                   




                                                                                                    13
2 
       (the sign is negative).18 The intuition is as follows. A fall in substitutability will
 

positively impact both firms' output. However, the direct effect of a rise in marginal cost is
much larger for multinational firms and hence, the net impact will be negative. Domestic
firms, on the other hand, gain on both counts due to higher product differentiation as well as
an increase in competitor marginal cost. This observation leads to our second research
question: To what extent do upstream research shocks induce differential impacts on supply-
and demand-side factors that shift the composition of downstream product markets?

4.0     Data

        For this study, we utilize two main sources of data. First, we use the Pharmatrac
database maintained by the All India Organisation of Chemists and Druggists (AIOCD) for
drug sales data at the molecule-region-time level in India. This data is collected from more
than 500,000 retailers representing about 60 percent of drug sales in India. Sales are reported
at the stock-keeping unit (SKU)-region-month level and includes price at which drugs are
supplied to the retailer, maximum retail price and quantity sold. This dataset has become the
standard source of sales data to study the Indian pharmaceutical market (e.g., Adbi et al.,
2019; Adbi et al., 2018; Bhaskarabhatla et al., 2016). Our time frame covers the period from
April 2007 to October 2013, with monthly data consisting of a total of five carbapenems and
sixteen narrow-spectrum antibiotics sold by more than 100 firms.
        In our baseline specification, the treatment group consists of the carbapenem
antibiotics (ATC codes J01DH03, J01DH04, J01DH02 and J01DH51) and the control group
consists of narrow-spectrum antibiotics. 19 Important for our identification strategy, narrow
spectrum antibiotics are not an effective treatment for the NDM-1 superbug. To compile our
control group of narrow spectrum antibiotics, we follow the medical literature. In particular,
following Kristensen et al. (2019), the narrow spectrum antibiotics consist of: (1) -lactamase
sensitive penicillin (J01 CE with suffix 01, 02); (2) -lactamase resistant penicillin (J01CF
with suffix 01, 02); (3) first-generation cephalosporins (J01DB with suffix 01, 04, 05; and,




18
   The function is continuous in both  and  (along with having first and second derivatives). Thus,
differentiating with respect to  and then with respect to  makes the calculations easier. One can change the
order and check that the result is identical.
19
   ATC is Anatomical Therapeutic Code, a standard code used in the pharmaceutical economics literature specified
by the World Health Organization. For details see: https://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/

                                                                                                             14
(4) macrolides (J01FA with suffix 01). All molecules along with their corresponding ATC
classification are given in Appendix Table A1.20
         Second, we are also interested in physician prescribing behavior. For this purpose, we
utilize a unique dataset drawn from the IQVIA Prescription Audit Database that consists of
approximately 1 million physician prescriptions, at a monthly frequency, covering all of
India. IQVIA is a well-recognized, global provider of pharmaceutical data. As before, this
dataset has been used in prior work (Adbi et al., 2019; Bhaskarabhatla and Chatterjee, 2017;
Dutta, 2011; Farooqui et al., 2019).
         In our robustness analysis we examine whether the NDM-1 research shock impacted
market structures outside India. For this analysis we picked the U.S., which has a low level of
reported carbapenem-resistance (see Figure 3). Thus, we obtain additional sales data from
IQVIA for the U.S. market. More specifically, we obtain sales data at the molecule-time level
for the antibiotics market for the period April 2007 to October 2013. The antibiotics cover 10
molecules; four of them are carbapenems and the remaining are six narrow spectrum
antibiotics.
         Finally, a detailed listing of all of our variables along with a description of how they
were constructed are given in Table 1. We also identify the data source for each variable.
5.0      Identification and Empirical Strategy
      5.1         Multinational shares in the downstream carbapenem product market

         Building on our theoretical arguments in Section 3.0 and in order to understand the
causal effect of the upstream NDM-1 research shock on downstream multinational firm
product markets, we estimate the following specification:

 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  ×
 + 4    + 5  + 6  +  (7)

         The dependent variable,  , is defined as multinational firm market share
at the molecule (m) and monthly time unit (t) level. The variable Carbapenemm is defined as
a dummy variable equal to one if a molecule belonging to the treatment group, zero
otherwise. NDMdummyt is defined as a time-varying dummy that differentiates between the
pre- and post-Lancet publication (i.e., research shock) periods. The coefficient of interest, 3,
provides the estimate for the impact of the NDM-1 research shock on downstream

20
  As a robustness check we have also tested all other broad-spectrum antibiotics (i.e., other than carbapenems)
as an alternate control group. All results hold qualitatively and quantitatively.

                                                                                                              15
multinational firm market share in the carbapenem market (i.e., treated group) relative to
narrow spectrum antibiotics (i.e., control group). We anticipate this coefficient of interest to
be negative based on our theoretical discussion in Section 3.0.
         Next,    represent monthly molecule sales and controls for
molecule-time varying effects, like variation in market sizes and any associated firm-level
incentives to enter and exit. Molecule specific idiosyncrasies are accounted for by
incorporating molecule-level fixed effects, Moleculem. In order to account for time-specific
variations in our data we also control for time specific fixed effects, Timet. We use both OLS
and fractional probit methods for estimation (Papke and Wooldridge, 2008) and standard
errors are clustered at the molecule level.
         In order to capture inter-firm heterogeneity, we follow Dutta (2011) and estimate firm
sales based on Defined Daily Dosages (DDD).21 Our unit of observation changes to the firm-
molecule-month level and we estimate the following triple differences specification:

log( ) = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  +
4 ( ×  ) + 5 ( ×  ) + 6 ( ×
 ) + 7 ( ×  ×  ) + 8 log (  ) +
9  + 10  + 11  + 12 ( ×  ) +
13 ( ×  ) +                                                                                        (8)


where the dependent variable,  , corresponds to the sales of a particular firm, f, in
molecule, m, in period t. The interpretations of the dummy variables remain identical to those
in Equation (7), except MNCf which is defined as a dummy equal to one if a firm is
multinational, zero otherwise. The coefficient of interest in this specification, 7, provides the
estimate of change of multinational sales in carbapenems post-NDM-1 research shock.
         In Equation (8) we also control for the log of molecule prices,  . To account
for potential endogeneity of prices we utilize the richness of our data. The final cost paid by
consumers is broken down into retailer price and margin. Retailer margin influences the
profit of the manufacturer and their marketing expense (Lal and Narasimhan, 1996; Sudhir,



21
  While computing the Defined Daily Dosage (DDD) in the paper, we followed the recommendation of the
World Health Organisation (WHO). For example, as per WHO, DDD of Doripenem is 1500 mg per day for a
person weighing 70 kg. Thus, for Q mg of Doripenem, the DDD units would be Q/1500. In the case of
intravenous injections for antibiotics as well as oral administration, we convert the mg content into DDD counts
following the above method. Thus, all medicines are comparable in terms of DDD.

                                                                                                              16
2001) and thus acts as a cost shifter (Ellison et al., 1997; Nevo, 2001).22 Hence, retail margin
influences the price but not sales thereby satisfying the exclusion criteria. Building on this
insight, we use it as an instrumental variable for prices.23
         We also control for unobserved heterogeneity at the month, molecule and firm level
with respective fixed effects. We account for any seasonal changes in molecule sales (e.g.,
due to weather) with a control for seasonality using an interacted fixed effect, ( ×
 ), where  is a representation of calendar month (January,
February, etc.). To account for molecule-firm level idiosyncrasies, such as time-invariant
heterogeneity in historical capabilities of some firms in producing some molecules over
others, we also control for molecule-firm paired fixed effects. Standard errors in this
specification are clustered at the molecule-firm level.
         5.2      Physician prescription behavior

         In order to unpack the intensive margin mechanisms of our overall market structure
effects, we explore the impact of the NDM-1 research shock on physician prescription
behavior. Physicians are a major stakeholder in this phenomenon as they directly influence
patients (Guan et al., 2019; Ahmadi and Zarei, 2017; Basu et al., 2008). It is not unreasonable
to suggest that they would understand the problem of over-prescription of antibiotics and the
consequent growth of antibiotic resistant strains. Additionally, drug companies regularly
engage in detailing by sending sales personnel to interface with physicians. This should,
theoretically, create a clear channel for information to flow from firms to physicians. In order
to understand if and how physicians prescribing behavior changed in reaction to the NDM-1
research shock, we test the following specification:

 = 0 + 1  + 2  +
3  ×  + 4  + 5  +  (9)


         Equation (9) is the same as Equation (7) except we replace the dependent variable
with rescriptionsharemt, defined as share of prescriptions written for molecule (m) in month
(t). As before, our coefficient of interest is 3 which captures the impact of the treatment on

22
   The demand of a particular product is directly related to the price paid by consumer. The final price consists
of two factors, price at which the drug is procured by the retailer and retailer margin which includes the retailer
profit along with marketing, distributional and other expenses borne by the retailer. This variable represents a
cost shifter for the firm, as the consumer will be unaware of the mark-up but the firm needs to incorporate this
margin in their profit maximising exercise as this represents a cost for them to distribute and sell their product.
23
   The first stage F-statistic was 520 which is substantially more than recommended value of 10 (Staiger and
Stock, 1994) in our instrumental variable estimations.

                                                                                                                  17
the prescription share for multinationals in the post-treatment period. To account for the
presence of excess zeroes and the bounded nature of the dependent variable (between 0 to 1),
we use a fractional probit model (Papke & Wooldridge, 2008).
        Next, we consider an analogue of the quantity model described in Equation (8) but at
the prescription level:

log( ) = 0 + 1  + 2  +                                                                         3  +
4 ( ×  ) + 5 ( ×  ) + 6 ( ×
 ) + 7 ( ×  ×  ) + 8  +
9  + 10  + 11 ( ×  ) + 12 ( ×
 ) +                                                                                             (10)



        Equation (10) is the same as Equation (8) except we replace the dependent variable
with  defined as prescriptions of a particular firm, f, in molecule, m, in
period t. We take the natural log of this variable and add one. As before, our coefficient of
interest is 7,which provides the estimate of change of multinational prescriptions in
carbapenems post-NDM-1 research shock.


        5.3      Analysis of pre-trends
        Following Angrist and Pischke (2008), we check for the existence of pre-trends using
the following derivative of Equation 7:24

 = 0 + 1  + 2 2008 + 3 2009 + 4 2010 +
5 2011 + 6 2012 + 7 2013 + 8(  × 2008 ) +
9 ( × 2009 ) + 10 ( × 2010 ) +
11 ( × 2011 ) + 12 ( × 2012 ) +
13 ( × 2013 ) + 14    + 15  +
16  +  (11)



24
  A question arises about the correct timing of the NDM-1 shock as the super-bug was first discovered in 2008
(Kumarasamy et al., 2010). While correct, its discovery did not get public attention until the Lancet paper was
published 2010. This pattern is clear from Google search data (Figure 1) and is also supported by Saliba et al.
(2016). To further ensure our pre-treatment period is not contaminated, we conduct the same estimation with a
placebo treatment in 2008. Results are presented in Appendix Table A7 and show no evidence of pre-trends. We
thank Philippe Gorry for insightful comments on this issue.

                                                                                                            18
        Insignificant coefficients in the pre-trend periods (i.e., 8, 9 , 10) would signify the
absence of pre-trends between our treatment and control markets in our estimated results. We
find that the coefficients in the pre-treatment period are near zero and insignificant. We also
plot the coefficients 8 to 13 in Figure 6. In the post-treatment period, the coefficients are
negative and significant. As a robustness check, we introduce placebo treatment in 2008
(prior to the true shock). There is no significant effect due to this placebo treatment (see
Appendix Tables A7). We perform a second robustness check with a subsample of data for
the 36 month period April 2009 to March 2012.25 Our results are qualitatively similar and
reported in Appendix Table A3.

6.0     Empirical Findings

        6.1      Descriptive analysis

        We start by examining the overall market trends over our sample period, 2007-2013.
Figure 4 plots sales in DDDs over this period.26 We note that even after the NDM-1 research
shock (i.e., paper publication) in August 2010, the overall market for carbapenems expanded
in India.27 However, in Figure 5, we observe that the multinational market share both in terms
of quantity sold (from 71.5 percent in April 2007 to 29.5 percent in October 2013) and
monetary sales (from 74.4 percent in April 2007 to 33.8 percent in October 2013) declined in
the post NDM-1 research shock period.28 In the market for narrow spectrum antibiotics,
however, multinational firms maintained their presence with a relatively stable market share
of approximately 10 to 20 percent, both in quantity and monetary sales.

        In Table 2, we provide descriptive statistics. We see that in terms of the narrow
spectrum antibiotic market (Panels 1 and 2), fewer firms were operating in the market after
the research shock, while the size of the market substantially expanded in terms of share and
monetary sales. Changes in the level of competition (measured by a Hirschman-Herfindahl


25
   Due to introduction of Doripenem by multinationals firms in June 2009, there is an upward bump in Figure 4.
We try to address this issue by focussing on a sample with a smaller time period, and find our results to be
consistent. It may also be noticed that Ertapenem was introduced in 2010 and this drug was sold only by
domestic firms, which might bias the MNC shares downward in the post-treatment period. We have estimated
the main model after taking out Ertapenem. The results continue to hold (see Appendix Figure 2 and Appendix
Table A6).
26
   The observe cyclicality in sales due to monsoon season which is strongly associated with infections.
27
   Sales of carbapenems in our data in April 2007 were 57.3 million DDDs which amounted to around $7.4
million USD whereas in October 2013, the combined sales were 113.5 million DDD resulting in sales of around
$9.5 million USD.
28
   We also observe a bump in the pre-treatment period, which is attributable to introduction of Doripenem in
early 2009 followed by Lupin's introduction of Ertapenem.

                                                                                                           19
index computed over sales in DDD) were minor. In contrast, in the carbapenem market
(Panels 3 and 4), we see that the multinational share declines and monetary sales decrease.
The level of competition, however, remains stable. A complementary analysis in terms of
prescribing behaviour of physicians, indicates a very similar scenario. In Panels 5 and 6, the
market share for narrow spectrum antibiotics increases while in Panels 7 and 8, the market
share for carbapenems declines.

       6.2     Impact of the upstream research shock on downstream product markets

       We start by estimating Equation (7). In Model 1, Table 3 we report OLS regression
results with multinational market share as the dependent variable. Model 2 reports results
using a fractional probit specification. Models 3 and 4 report corresponding results using a
second dependent variable, monetary market share, using OLS and fractional probit
specifications. In short, we find strong support across all the models that the market share of
multinationals went down for carbapenems in the post-treatment period. Interpreting Model
1, we observe that the NDM-1 research shock led to a reduction of 13.9 percent in
multinational firm market share for an average carbapenem molecule. Given average sales of
20.29 million DDD per month for an average carbapenem molecule, this 13.9 percent
reduction in market share translates into a 2.63 million DDD reduction per month, per
carbapenem molecule.

       Along similar lines, in Model 3, we observe a market share reduction of 11.42 percent
in terms of monetary share, which translates into a reduction of Indian Rs. 9.35 million or
about $128,000 USD per carbapenem molecule, per month. In order to test the effects at the
intensive margin, we redefine the dependent variable as the multinational share of
prescriptions by physicians. The results are presented in Model 5 and the effect is even
stronger. We will discuss this physician behavior more fully below.

       Finally, we present the results from Equation (8) in Model 1, Table 4. Here the
dependent variable is firm level sales measured in DDD and prices are instrumented. In this
triple difference setting, we observe a sharp drop in the quantity of carbapenems sold by
multinationals in the post-treatment period. Collectively, and consistent with theory, the
results across Tables 3 and 4 point to a causal decline in terms of sales and market shares of
carbapenems by multinational firms in the post NDM-1 research shock period.




                                                                                                 20
       6.3     Unpacking underlying heterogeneous mechanisms

       6.3.1   Impact on physician prescribing behavior

       As noted above, in Table 3, Model 5, we find a decline in the share of multinational
firm prescriptions by physicians. This result holds in a quantity-model specification, Model 3,
Table 4. In this triple difference setting, our coefficient of interest is again negative and
significant. Combined, these results provide convincing evidence that the total number of
prescriptions for carbapenems went down in the post-treatment period for multinational firms
compared to domestic firms. We can conjecture on why this occurs. First, it is probable that
fewer physicians were prescribing carbapenems after the shock. Second, on average,
physicians may have written fewer prescriptions after the shock.

       Unfortunately, our dataset does not allow us to track individual physician
prescriptions. However, we can extract the average number of carbapenem prescriptions, per
physician, for a particular firm. In Model 4, Table 4 we estimate Equation (8) but with a
dependent variable defined as the log of prescriptions per physician. In this triple difference
setting, we see that the average number of multinational firm carbapenem prescriptions, per
physician, declined significantly compared to domestic firms. This suggests that the shift in
physician behavior occurred through the intensive margin.

       To summarize our results so far, we have established two major points. First, in the
post-treatment period, multinational firms were significantly reducing their market presence.
Second, physicians exhibited a complementary response, they prescribed fewer carbapenems
produced by multinationals relative to domestic firms. These findings are consistent with the
predictions of our theoretical model and also clearly demonstrate that upstream research
shocks can have contemporaneous impacts on downstream product markets.

       6.3.2   Vintage: Old versus new carbapenems

       Thus far in our investigation we have considered carbapenems as one homogeneous
group of molecules that belong to the same class. But there are generational differences
within carbapenems in terms of vintage of the active ingredient. Broadly, we can divide
carbapenems into "old" versus "new" following prior work (e.g., Chahine et al., 2010; Papp-
Wallace et al., 2011; Shah and Isaacs, 2003). We divide our treatment group into two sub-
groups consisting of newer carbapenems (Ertapenem and Doripenem) and older carbapenems
(combination of Imipenem and Cilastatin, combination of Meropenem and Sulbactam, and


                                                                                                21
only Meropenem) and examine which sub-group within carbapenems saw higher reduction of
market shares for multinationals.29

        This division is important for a number of reasons. Newer drugs are more likely to
still be under patent protection and hence may be more valuable to a firm. Because of this
they would likely want to protect newer drugs from exposure to drug resistant bacteria. If
bacteria indeed became resistant to newer drugs then there are fewer incentives left at the
margin, especially for global multinational innovator firms. This is highly problematic given
that antibiotic innovation is already limited (Spellberg and Gilbert, 2014). On the flip side,
older drugs will be more stable in the sense that their side-effects are known. It is also more
likely that older drugs are generics, thus the reputational costs for selling them should be
muted, at least with respect to newer drugs.

        In order to explore whether multinational firms react more aggressively with respect
to their newer drugs we estimate Equation (7) with this split sample in Table 5. Models 1 and
2 present results for multinational sales share in newer carbapenems, while Models 3 and 4
show the same for older carbapenems. Models 5 and 6 present results for prescription-level
regressions for newer and older carbapenems, respectively. Across all models, we find that
multinational firms reacted more sharply with respect to their newer carbapenems. In all
cases, they actively reduced their sales. Similarly, in Model 5 physicians reduced
prescriptions for newer carbapenems.

       6.3.3     Supply-side responses to the NDM-1 research shock

        So far, our analyses have focused on firm choices and physician behavior. It is
conceivable that the supply-side would also react to the NDM-1 research shock. As a
mechanism of the average multinational firm's revealed preferences, we can analyze the level
of bonus quantities that firms provide as a direct way to incentivize sellers. This strategic use
of bonus quantities has been highlighted earlier to be a pervasive phenomenon in Indian
pharmaceutical markets (Bhaskarabhatla et al., 2016). Bonus quantity represents the extra
quantity provided to retailers to increase sales of a particular molecule. For example, a firm
may give a retailer one extra strip of a drug for free for every 100 strips of drugs they are able


29
  See Appendix Table A1 for the set of molecules along with the ATC classification. Ertapenem and
Doripenem were introduced after 2000 whereas Imipenem and Meropenem were patented in the 1970s and
1980s and marketed long before 2000. Appendix Table A2 lists the introduction dates of carbapenem in the U.S.
Imipenem and Meropenem were introduced before 2000 and Ertapenem and Doripenem were introduced after
2000.

                                                                                                          22
to sell within a fixed time period. We examine this issue using Equation (8) in Model 2,
Table 4. To estimate the effects on bonus quantities, we use an inverse hyperbolic sine
transform (Bahar et al., 2020; Bellemare and Wichman, 2020) which is well-defined for
zeros. We find that in the post-treatment period, multinational firms reduced bonus quantities
of carbapenems compared to domestic firms. This reduction in incentives is entirely
consistent with a firm that is pulling a product out of a market.

        6.3.4    Is there regional heterogeneity in India?

        Previous studies (e.g., Adbi et al., 2019; Dandona et al., 2017) identify the importance
of regional heterogeneity in India. In order to account for this spatial component, we
incorporate three sets of dummies into Equation (7): (1) Geography; (2) Molecule-
Geography; and, (3) Geography-Time. Geography is defined as 23 regions in India as per
AIOCD database broadly corresponding to state boundaries in India. Results are presented in
Table 6a for sales and Table 6b for monetary sales. Across Models 1 to 6, we find that our
baseline results hold both qualitatively and quantitatively. In summary, after controlling for
regional heterogeneity sales of carbapenems by multinational firms declined in the post-
treatment period.
        6.4      Robustness
        6.4.1. Alternative control groupings
        Our current control group consists of narrow spectrum antibiotics. In an effort to
ensure that our results are not driven by this choice, we re-examine our core results using an
alternate control group comprised of other broad spectrum antibiotics, excluding
carbapenems. The rationale for considering this alternate control group comes from the
Lancet publication itself. More specifically, the paper explicitly mentioned carbapenem in its
abstract: "Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae with resistance to carbapenem conferred by
New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1) are potentially a major global health
problem." (Kumarasamy et al. 2010). Thus, there is a possibility that physicians might
consider carbapenems as a separate entity within the group of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
        We re-estimate Equation (7) using the rest of the broad spectrum antibiotics,
excluding carbapenems (eighty six broad spectrum molecules barring five carbapenems) as
the control group and present results in Table 7.30 Results are robust in Models 1 and 2 when


30
  As an alternate specification we took all the antibiotic molecules (more than 150 molecules) minus
carbapenems as control group. Results are reported in Appendix Table A4 and are quantitatively and
qualitatively robust.

                                                                                                       23
we consider multinational market share. However, in Models 3 and 4 when we consider
multinational monetary market share, results are negative but not significant. This result is
not entirely unexpected because this control group is closer to our treatment group, i.e, they
are all broad spectrum antibiotics.
          Next, we explore a second alternate control group based on the synthetic control
method (Abadie et al., 2010; Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003). The synthetic control method is
a matching technique, which creates an artificial control group matched to the characteristic
of the treated group in the pre-treatment period. This data-driven approach makes the
synthetic control method a more objective way to create a counterfactual, as opposed to more
subjective choices. The advantages of the synthetic control method had led to wide-spread
use in recent studies (e.g., Adbi et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2018; Greene et al., 2014). For our
analysis, the outcome of interest is the mean multinational market share of carbapenems in
the pre- and post-NDM-1 research shock time period. Using the synthetic control method, we
assign weights to narrow-spectrum molecules to create an artificial matched sample of
carbapenem molecules. Our new synthetic control group along with our treatment group is
plotted in Figure 7. As can be seen from this non-parametric analysis our core results are
supported; there is a negative and significant effect on our treatment sample in the post-shock
period.
          6.4.2. Did the research shock spill over to other markets?
          Given that antibiotics are globally available; one can reasonably ask whether the
structural shift in the Indian market spilled over into other countries. To answer this question,
we obtain data for the U.S. as it represents a lower antibiotic resistant market (see Figure 3).
If our focal research shock was general in nature, then we would expect to see similar kinds
of effects in lower antibiotic resistant markets. Physicians, in the U.S. for example, may
begin to proactively prescribe fewer carbapenems. Regulators and/or multinational firms may
also begin to limit the sale of these `last line of defense' drugs. If so, we would expect to see
a negative impact at the aggregate level in US antibiotics markets.
          To better understand this we use IQVIA data for the U.S. market. Our treatment group
matched with the Indian sample, consists of four carbapenem molecules sold in US while our
control group consists of six narrow spectrum molecules. These are plotted in Appendix
Figure 1. From this plot there is no visual evidence of any impact from the NDM-1 research
shock. Regression results are reported in Appendix Table A8 and are consistent with the lack
of visual evidence, our interaction term of interest is not significant in either model. While we
do not have access to global antibiotic data, it is not a stretch to conjecture that we would
                                                                                                   24
anticipate similar non-responses in other low-antibiotic resistant markets, such as Canada or
the European Union. From a policy perspective, this non-response suggests that U.S.
regulators do not (yet) appear concerned that this particular antibiotic resistance will spread
to the U.S. or at least the concern does not rise to the level of trying to protect these particular
antibiotics.

7.0      Conclusion and Discussion
      The effects of market structure on R&D are well documented; however, the impacts of
research directly on market structure are less established. We fill this gap by exploring the
contemporaneous, causal impacts of a shock to upstream research on related but unconnected
downstream market structure. We use a natural experiment involving the publication of the
discovery of the broad spectrum antibiotic resistant New Delhi Metallo-Beta-Lactamase
(NDM-1) superbug in India. The focal article was published in August 2010 in highly
prestigious Lancet Infectious Diseases, with little evidence that much attention was paid to
NDM-1 prior to that event (Figure 1). This publication stirred an intense policy debate in
India ranging from speculation about regional discrimination (similar to what was witnessed
with the "Wuhan" coronavirus (Hu et al., 2020; Masters-Waage et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020)) to the potential adverse impact on medical tourism in India (Saliba et al., 2016), and
what this finding meant for health policy in India ­ especially given that these particular
drugs are the `antibiotics of last resort'.

         We start with a theoretical model to conjecture about ex post strategic behavior of
multinational and domestic firms in reaction to this research shock. Using this model, we
make several contributions to the literature. First, we find that the upstream NDM-1 research
shock caused multinational firms to withdraw products from the downstream domestic Indian
market. We theorize that multinational firms suffer a reputational cost due to their `liability of
foreignness' (Zaheer and Mosakowski, 1997). This in turn increases a firm's marginal cost
leading them to exit the downstream product market. This result contributes to the
abandonment literature by providing a new channel by which firms may choose to exit a
market. We bolster this finding by showing that, at the physician level, prescriptions for
multinational firm drugs declined, relative to domestic drugs. Importantly, we show that these
effects do not carry over into markets with low-antibiotic resistance.

         While declining antibiotic use in the post-treatment period may be viewed positively
for public health and antibiotic stewardship reasons, this was not meant to be. Instead, the


                                                                                                  25
void created in the market by multinational firms was filled by domestic producers; antibiotic
use did not wane. Again, these actions are consistent with our theoretical model. Domestic
firms are manufacturers and not involved in novel R&D so their business is driven primarily
by quantity considerations. Domestic firms, therefore, do not face the same global reputation
concerns as multinational firms. An important distinction here is that multinational firms
produce branded, novel drugs while domestic firms are producing generics. In most
countries, branded drug producers are held responsible for any harm to patients, even if
generics are also being sold.

       Our findings have profound public health policy implications. Antibiotic overuse is a
global public health crisis (Ackerman and Gonzales, 2012) and the resulting issues with
resistance do not stop at national borders. While 89 percent of physicians believe antibiotics
are overprescribed (Thakolkaran et al., 2017), in the face of this shock, our results suggest
that the volume of prescriptions did not decline. The only change in physician behavior
observed was the rotation from prescribing multinational firm products to domestic firm
products. It would be easy to blame physicians, especially given some of the financial
incentives to prescribe drugs, however this ignores the demand from patients (consumers)
and the role of government. Patients continually demand antibiotics, even in cases when they
are not medically necessary (e.g., most ear infections in children). Furthermore, governments
could take more aggressive actions with respect to antibiotic stewardship and limit their use
in other areas, such as farming. Lest we believe the implications of antibiotic resistance are
not serious, in one study (CDC, 2016) 2 million illnesses and 23,000 deaths were attributed to
antibiotic resistance in just the U.S. That same study assigned a direct cost of $20 billion plus
an additional $35 billion in lost productivity; global costs are even higher.

       Our results also have implications for innovation policy. To the extent that sales from
current products fund future R&D (e.g., Branstetter et al, 2016), as multinational firms
withdraw from India, this could dampen future innovation. Antibiotics also suffer from the
Red Queen Effect ­ the innovation-resistance cycle is never ending. Multinational firms are
globally running a (difficult) R&D race to produce newer antibiotics, while at the same time,
as more antibiotics are consumed there is the probability of increased resistance. This creates
the situation where the newest antibiotics may be held back in reserve, which may be
appropriate from a stewardship perspective, but this limits revenues thereby creating
disincentives for companies to undertake their development. Recent procurement policies
from COVID-19 may offer a new path forward. In the COVID-19 response governments

                                                                                                 26
directly funded both push (i.e., direct funding of R&D) and pull (i.e., rewards for successful
development of products) mechanisms instead of relying on traditional market mechanisms,
such as patents (Sampat and Shadlen, 2021).

        It is worth noting that the pathogenic outbreak we explore here is markedly different
than the one caused by COVID-19. In our case, we were dealing with an established product
market that experienced an upstream research shock. This upstream shock caused
contemporaneous responses in downstream product markets. In the case of COVID-19, in
contrast, there was no established market, this was a shock to the entire system. And while
we know see new research (`R') taking place, the strongest initial response was in
development (`D') as the underlying technologies used for the vaccines (e.g., viral vectors
and mRNA) were already developed for use in other areas (Agarwal and Gaule, 2021). But
the greatest take-away from COVID-19, in terms of innovation policy, as Sampat and
Shadlen (2021) point out are the extraordinary measures taken by governments. It is yet to be
seen whether governments will use those bold measures to combat other problems, such as
antibiotic resistance.

        Our work is not without limitations. First, while we test and find that there were no
effects of the Indian NDM-1 shock in U.S. antibiotics market, it would be worth investigating
if there are variations in this result by the entirety of the "global north" and "global south".
Data for such a study would be costly but a more complete analysis could help coordinate
global policy responses. Second, our results suggest a more detailed analysis on upstream
innovation is warranted. Given the public welfare importance of antibiotics, more fully
understanding possible disincentives for innovation is critical. Finally, it may be worthwhile
for future work to understand more deeply the speed of exit between heterogeneous firms. As
with all research, more is left to be done.




                                                                                                   27
References
Abadie, A., Diamond, A., & Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic control methods for
    comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of California's tobacco control program.
    Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493­505.
Abadie, A., & Gardeazabal, J. (2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the
    Basque Country. American Economic Review, 93(1), 113­132.
Acemoglu, D., & Johnson, S. (2007). Disease and development: the effect of life expectancy
    on economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 115(6), 925­985.
Acemoglu, D., & Linn, J. (2004). Market size in innovation: theory and evidence from the
    pharmaceutical industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1049­1090.
Ackerman, S., & Gonzales, R. (2012). The context of antibiotic overuse. Annals of Internal
    Medicine, 157(3), 211­212.
Adbi, A., Bhaskarabhatla, A., & Chatterjee, C. (2018). Stakeholder Orientation and Market
    Impact: Evidence from India. Journal of Business Ethics, 1­18.
Adbi, A., Chatterjee, C., Drev, M., & Mishra, A. (2019). When the Big One Came: A Natural
    Experiment on Demand Shock and Market Structure in India's Influenza Vaccine
    Markets. Production and Operations Management, 28(4), 810­832.
Adbi, A., Chatterjee, C., & Mishra, A. (2019). Nations within a Nation: Pandemic, Regional
    Heterogeneity, and MNC Share of Vaccine Uptake. In Academy of Management
    Proceedings (Vol. 2019, p. 12668).
Agarwal, R., & Gaule, P. (2021). What drives innovation? lessons from covid-19 r&d.
    International Monetary Fund.
Ahmadi, F., & Zarei, E. (2017). Prescribing patterns of rural family physicians: a study in
   Kermanshah Province, Iran. BMC Public Health, 17(1), 908.
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
    companion. Princeton university press.
Bahar, D., Choudhury, P., & Rapoport, H. (2020). Migrant inventors and the technological
    advantage of nations. Research Policy, 103947.
Baquero, F., Alvarez-Ortega, C., & Martinez, J. L. (2009). Ecology and evolution of
    antibiotic resistance. Environmental Microbiology Reports, 1(6), 469­476.
Basu, S., Chatterjee, M., & Chandra, P. K. (2008). Antibiotic misuse in children by the
    primary care physicians-an Indian experience. Nigerian Journal of Clinical Practice,
    11(1), 53­58.
Bayus, B. L., & Agarwal, R. (2007). The role of pre-entry experience, entry timing, and
    product technology strategies in explaining firm survival. Management Science, 53(12),
    1887­1902.
Bellemare, M. F., & Wichman, C. J. (2020). Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine
     transformation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 82(1), 50­61.
Bhaskarabhatla, A., & Chatterjee, C. (2017). The role of physicians in prescribing irrational
    fixed-dose combination medicines in India. Social Science & Medicine, 174, 179­187.

                                                                                              28
Bhaskarabhatla, A., Chatterjee, C., Anurag, P., & Pennings, E. (2016). Mitigating regulatory
    impact: the case of partial price controls on metformin in India. Health Policy and
    Planning, 32(2), 194­204.
Bhaskarabhatla, A., Chatterjee, C., & Karreman, B. (2016). Hit where it hurts: cartel policing
    using targeted sales and supply embargoes. The Journal of Law and Economics, 59(4),
    805­846.
Blume-Kohout, M. E., & Sood, N. (2013). Market size and innovation: Effects of Medicare
    Part D on pharmaceutical research and development. Journal of Public Economics, 97,
    327­336.
Branstetter, L., Chatterjee, C., & Higgins, M. J. (2014). Starving (or fattening) the golden
    goose?: Generic entry and the incentives for early-stage pharmaceutical innovation
    (NBER Working Paper No. w20532).
Branstetter, L., Chatterjee, C., & Higgins, M. J. (2016). Regulation and welfare: evidence
    from paragraph IV generic entry in the pharmaceutical industry. The RAND Journal of
    Economics, 47(4), 857­890.
Byrsiki, D., Gaessler, F., Higgins, M.J., (2021). Market size and research: Evidence from the
    pharmaceutical industry. Working paper, Max Planck Institute for Innovation and
    Competition
Burnet, M., Burnet, F. M., & White, D. O. (1972). Natural history of infectious disease. CUP
    Archive.
Campbell, J. T., Eden, L., & Miller, S. R. (2012). Multinationals and corporate social
   responsibility in host countries: Does distance matter? Journal of International Business
   Studies, 43(1), 84­106.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016. Newly reported gene, mcr-1, threatens last
    resort antibiotic. https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/mcr1.html (Accessed 19 April
    2017)
Chahine, E. B., Ferrill, M. J., & Poulakos, M. N. (2010). Doripenem: a new carbapenem
    antibiotic. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 67(23), 2015­2024.
Chatterjee, C. (2009). New Suppliers & New Markets: Essays on the Global Pharmaceutical
    Industry. Carnegie Mellon.
Chatterjee, C., Kubo, K., & Pingali, V. (2015). The consumer welfare implications of
    governmental policies and firm strategy in markets for medicines. Journal of Health
    Economics, 44, 255­273.
Chaudhuri, Shubham, Goldberg, P. K., & Gia, P. (2006). Estimating the effects of global
    patent protection in pharmaceuticals: a case study of quinolones in India. American
    Economic Review, 96(5), 1477­1514.
Chaudhuri, Sudip. (2005). The WTO and India's pharmaceuticals industry: Patent
    protection, TRIPS, and developing countries. Oxford University Press, USA.
Cheah, E. T., Chan, W. L., & Chieng, C. L. L. (2007). The corporate social responsibility of
    pharmaceutical product recalls: An empirical examination of US and UK markets.
    Journal of Business Ethics, 76(4), 427­449.


                                                                                               29
Conly, J. M., & Johnston, B. L. (2005). Where are all the new antibiotics? The new antibiotic
    paradox. Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology, 16(3),
    159­160.
Crilly, D., Ni, N., & Jiang, Y. (2016). Do-no-harm versus do-good social responsibility:
     Attributional thinking and the liability of foreignness. Strategic Management Journal,
     37(7), 1316­1329.
Dandona, L., Dandona, R., Kumar, G. A., Shukla, D. K., Paul, V. K., Balakrishnan, K., ...
    others. (2017). Nations within a nation: variations in epidemiological transition across
    the states of India, 1990--2016 in the Global Burden of Disease Study. The Lancet,
    390(10111), 2437­2460.
Danzon, P. M., Wang, Y. R., & Wang, L. (2005). The impact of price regulation on the
    launch delay of new drugs--evidence from twenty-five major markets in the 1990s.
    Health Economics, 14(3), 269­292.
Datta, A., & Dave, D. (2017). Effects of physician-directed pharmaceutical promotion on
     prescription behaviors: longitudinal evidence. Health Economics, 26(4), 450­468.
Davies, J., & Davies, D. (2010). Origins and evolution of antibiotic resistance. Microbiology
    and molecular biology reviews, 74(3), 417­433.
Davies, K. J., Walters, J. H., Kerslake, I. M., Greenwood, R., & Thomas, M. J. C. (2013).
    Early antibiotics improve survival following out-of hospital cardiac arrest.
    Resuscitation, 84(5), 616­619.
Dieckmann, U., Marrow, P., & Law, R. (1995). Evolutionary cycling in predator-prey
    interactions: population dynamics and the Red Queen. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
    176(1), 91­102.
DiMasi, J. A., Grabowski, H. G., & Hansen, R. W. (2016). Innovation in the pharmaceutical
   industry: new estimates of R&D costs. Journal of Health Economics, 47, 20­33.
Dixit, A. (1979). A model of duopoly suggesting a theory of entry barriers. The Bell Journal
     of Economics, 20­32.
Dranove, D., Garthwaite, C., & Hermosilla, M. (2014). Pharmaceutical profits and the social
    value of innovation (No. w20212).
Dubois, P., De Mouzon, O., Scott-Morton, F., & Seabright, P. (2015). Market size and
    pharmaceutical innovation. The RAND Journal of Economics, 46(4), 844­871.
Duggan, M., Garthwaite, C., & Goyal, A. (2016). The market impacts of pharmaceutical
    product patents in developing countries: Evidence from India. American Economic
    Review, 106(1), 99­135.
Dutta, A. (2011). From free entry to patent protection: Welfare implications for the Indian
     pharmaceutical industry. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 160­178.
Ellison, S. F., Cockburn, I., Griliches, Z., & Hausman, J. (1997). Characteristics of demand
     for pharmaceutical products: an examination of four cephalosporins. The RAND Journal
     of Economics, 426­446.
Eswaran, M., & Gallini, N. (2019). Can competition and Patent Policies Avert the Antibiotic
    crisis? Canadian Public Policy, 45(1), 74­92.

                                                                                               30
Farooqui, H. H., Mehta, A., & Selvaraj, S. (2019). Systemic antibiotic prescription rates and
    patterns in private sector in India: Evidence from medical audit data. International
    Journal of Infectious Diseases, 79, 41­42.
Finkelstein, A. (2004). Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the
    vaccine industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 527­564.
Finkelstein, S. N., & Gilbert, D. L. (1985). Scientific evidence and the abandonment of
    medical technology: A study of eight drugs. Research Policy, 14(4), 225­233.
Goff, D. A., Kullar, R., Goldstein, E. J. C., Gilchrist, M., Nathwani, D., Cheng, A. C., ...
    others. (2017). A global call from five countries to collaborate in antibiotic stewardship:
    united we succeed, divided we might fail. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 17(2), e56--
    e63.
Green, C. P., Heywood, J. S., & Navarro, M. (2014). Did liberalising bar hours decrease
    traffic accidents? Journal of Health Economics, 35, 189­198.
Guan, X., Tian, Y., Song, J., Zhu, D., & Shi, L. (2019). Effect of physicians' knowledge on
    antibiotics rational use in China's county hospitals. Social Science & Medicine, 224,
    149­155.
Hafner, T., & Popp, D. (2011). China and India as suppliers of affordable medicines to
    developing countries. National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w17249.
Haraguchi, J., & Matsumura, T. (2014). Price versus quantity in a mixed duopoly with
    foreign penetration. Research in Economics, 68(4), 338­353.
Hermosilla, M., & Wu, Y. (2018). Market size and innovation: The intermediary role of
    technology licensing. Research Policy, 47(5), 980­991.
Higgins, M. J., & Rodriguez, D. (2006). The outsourcing of R&D through acquisitions in the
    pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Financial Economics, 80(2), 351­383.
Higgins, M. J., Thursby, J., & Thursby, M. (2014). Bench-to-bench bottlenecks in translation.
    Science Translational Medicine, 6, 250.
Higgins, M. J., Yan, X., & Chatterjee, C. (2021). Unpacking the effects of adverse regulatory
    events: Evidence from pharmaceutical relabeling. Research Policy, 50(1), 104126.
Hu, Z., Yang, Z., Li, Q., & Zhang, A. (2020). The COVID-19 Infodemic: Infodemiology
    Study Analyzing Stigmatizing Search Terms. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
    22(11), e22639.
Kapczynski, A. (2009). Harmonization and its discontents: a case study of TRIPS
    implementation in India's pharmaceutical sector. California Law Review., 97, 1571.
Klein, E. Y., Van Boeckel, T. P., Martinez, E. M., Pant, S., Gandra, S., Levin, S. A., ...
     Laxminarayan, R. (2018). Global increase and geographic convergence in antibiotic
     consumption between 2000 and 2015. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
     115(15), E3463--E3470.
Klepper, S., & Simons, K. L. (1997). Technological extinctions of industrial firms: an inquiry
    into their nature and causes. Industrial and Corporate Change, 6(2), 379­460.
Kostova, T., Roth, K., & Dacin, M. T. (2008). Institutional theory in the study of
    multinational corporations: A critique and new directions. Academy of Management

                                                                                              31
     Review, 33(4), 994­1006.
Kotwani, A., Wattal, C., Katewa, S., Joshi, P. C., & Holloway, K. (2010). Factors influencing
    primary care physicians to prescribe antibiotics in Delhi India. Family Practice, 27(6),
    684­690.
Krieger, J., Li, D., & Papanikolaou, D. (2018). Developing novel drugs (No. w24595).
    National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, MA.
Kristensen, P. K., Johnsen, S. P., & Thomsen, R. W. (2019). Decreasing trends, and
     geographical variation in outpatient antibiotic use: a population-based study in Central
     Denmark. BMC Infectious Diseases, 19(1), 337.
Kumarasamy, K. K., Toleman, M. A., Walsh, T. R., Bagaria, J., Butt, F., Balakrishnan, R., ...
   others. (2010). Emergence of a new antibiotic resistance mechanism in India, Pakistan,
   and the UK: a molecular, biological, and epidemiological study. The Lancet Infectious
   Diseases, 10(9), 597­602.
Lal, R., & Narasimhan, C. (1996). The inverse relationship between manufacturer and retailer
     margins: A theory. Marketing Science, 15(2), 132­151.
Laxminarayan, R., & Chaudhury, R. R. (2016). Antibiotic resistance in India: drivers and
    opportunities for action. PLoS Medicine, 13(3), e1001974.
Laxminarayan, R., & Heymann, D. L. (2012). Challenges of drug resistance in the developing
    world. BMJ, 344.
Manchanda, P., & Honka, E. (2005). The effects and role of direct-to-physician marketing in
   the pharmaceutical industry: an integrative review. Yale J. Health Pol'y L. & Ethics, 5,
   785.
Manso, G., Balsmeier, B., & Fleming, L. (2019). Heterogeneous innovation and the
   antifragile economy. Unpublished Working Paper.
Masters-Waage, T. C., Jha, N., & Reb, J. (2020). COVID-19, Coronavirus, Wuhan Virus, or
    China Virus? Understanding How to "Do No Harm" When Naming an Infectious
    Disease. Frontiers in Psychology, 11.
Mowery, D., & Rosenberg, N. (1979). The influence of market demand upon innovation: a
   critical review of some recent empirical studies. Research Policy, 8(2), 102­153.
Murmann, J. P., & Frenken, K. (2006). Toward a systematic framework for research on
   dominant designs, technological innovations, and industrial change. Research Policy,
   35(7), 925­952.
Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica,
    69(2), 307­342.
O'neill, J. I. M. (2014). Antimicrobial resistance: tackling a crisis for the health and wealth of
    nations. Review on Antimicrobial Resistance 20, 1­16.
Papke, L. E., & Wooldridge, J. M. (2008). Panel data methods for fractional response
    variables with an application to test pass rates. Journal of Econometrics, 145(1­2), 121­
    133.
Papp-Wallace, K. M., Endimiani, A., Taracila, M. A., & Bonomo, R. A. (2011).
    Carbapenems: past, present, and future. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,

                                                                                                32
     55(11), 4943­4960.
Peng, L., Meyerhoefer, C., & Chou, S.-Y. (2018). The health implications of unconventional
    natural gas development in Pennsylvania. Health Economics, 27(6), 956­983.
Pulcini, C., Bush, K., Craig, W. A., Frimodt-Møller, N., Grayson, M. L., Mouton, J. W., ...
     for Antibiotic Policies, E. S. G. (2012). Forgotten antibiotics: an inventory in Europe,
     the United States, Canada, and Australia. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 54(2), 268­274.
Rhee, M., & Haunschild, P. R. (2006). The liability of good reputation: A study of product
    recalls in the US automobile industry. Organization Science, 17(1), 101­117.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. Free Press of Glencoe. Simon and Schuster.
Roy, N., Madhiwalla, N., & Pai, S. A. (2007). Drug promotional practices in Mumbai: a
    qualitative study. Indian Journal of Medical Ethics, 4(2), 57­61.
Saliba, V., Washer, P., Pett, P., Kakkar, M., Abbas, S., Raghuvanshi, B., & McKee, M.
     (2016). A comparative analysis of how the media in the United Kingdom and India
     represented the emergence of NDM-1. Journal of Public Health Policy, 37(1), 1­19.
Sampat, B.N. & Shadlen, K. (2021). The COVID-19 innovation system. Health Affairs,
   40(3), 400-409.
Shah, P. M., & Isaacs, R. D. (2003). Ertapenem, the first of a new group of carbapenems.
    Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 52(4), 538­542.
Singh, N., & Vives, X. (1984). Price and quantity competition in a differentiated duopoly.
    The Rand Journal of Economics, 546­554.
Spellberg, B., & Gilbert, D. N. (2014). The future of antibiotics and resistance: a tribute to a
     career of leadership by John Bartlett. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 59(suppl_2), S71--
     S75.
Staiger, D., & Stock, J. H. (1994). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
     National Bureau of Economic Research., No. t0151.
Sudhir, K. (2001). Structural analysis of manufacturer pricing in the presence of a strategic
    retailer. Marketing Science, 20(3), 244­264.
Thakolkaran, N., Shetty, A. V., D'Souza, N. D. R., & Shetty, A. K. (2017). Antibiotic
    prescribing knowledge, attitudes, and practice among physicians in teaching hospitals in
    South India. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, 6(3), 526.
Trajtenberg, M. (1989). The welfare analysis of product innovations, with an application to
     computed tomography scanners. Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 444­479.
Van Boeckel, T. P., Brower, C., Gilbert, M., Grenfell, B. T., Levin, S. A., Robinson, T. P., ...
    Laxminarayan, R. (2015). Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(18), 5649­5654.
Wang, L.-F., Anderson, D. E., Mackenzie, J. S., & Merson, M. H. (2020). From Hendra to
   Wuhan: what has been learned in responding to emerging zoonotic viruses. The Lancet,
   395(10224), e33--e34.
Younkin, P. (2016). Complicating abandonment: how a multi-stage theory of abandonment
    clarifies the evolution of an adopted practice. Organization Studies, 37(7), 1017­1053.

                                                                                                33
Zaheer, S., & Mosakowski, E. (1997). The dynamics of the liability of foreignness: A global
    study of survival in financial services. Strategic Management Journal, 18(6), 439­463.




                                                                                          34
Figure 1. Patterns in Google Search: Cumulative frequency of Google searches within India
for NDM-1 from April 2007 to October 2013. The sudden surge around August 2010 (NDM-
1 paper's publication) illustrates increased public awareness about NDM-1. The vertical bar
denotes the treatment (i.e., publication of NDM-1 article in The Lancet Infectious Diseases) in
August 2010.




Figure 2. Firm-level Reactions: Firm-level reaction functions in a market characterized by
Cournot competition with multinational and domestic firms. Panel (a): Optimal quantity choice
( ) of the multinational firm decays as a function of increasing marginal cost ( ). Panel (b):
Optimal quantity choice of the multinational and domestic firms ( and  ) decay as a
function of increasing product differentiation (). Panel (c): Optimal quantity choice for the
multinational firms as a function of the degree of product substitutability and cost.




                                                                                            35
Figure 3. Resistance to Carbapenems across Countries all over the World: India has the
highest resistance. Resistance has been measured by randomly testing bacteria with respect to
treatment in carbapenems and noting the frequency of resistant bacteria. Used with permission
from The Center for Disease, Dynamics Economics & Policy. Resistance Map: Antibiotic
resistance. 2019. Source: https://resistancemap.cddep.org/AntibioticResistance.php. Date
accessed: Dec 30, 2019




                                                                                          36
Figure 4. Total Sales of Carbapenems in India from April 2007 to October 2013, in terms
of log of Defined Daily Dosages (DDD): The total sales time series shows an increasing trend
in the post-treatment period. The vertical bar denotes the treatment (i.e., publication of NDM-
1 article in The Lancet) in August 2010. Source: AIOCD Pharmatrac.




Figure 5. Multinational Share in Sales and Monetary terms during pre- and post-
treatment periods (separated by the vertical line) in the Carbapenems and Narrow-
spectrum Antibiotics Markets. Multinational market shares show a steep decline both in
terms of sales (left panel) and monetary sales (right panel) in the post-treatment period while
the corresponding share in the market for narrow spectrum antibiotics remain stable. The x-
axis denotes the number of months (data spans over 79 months from April 2007 to October
2013). Source: AIOCD Pharmatrac.




                                                                                            37
Figure 6. Coefficient Estimates from Equation 11 of year-Carbapenem Interaction
Dummies: In the pre-treatment period, the coefficients are statistically zero and in the post-
treatment period, they are negative. We conclude an absence of pre-trends in multinational
sales (left panel) and monetary shares (right panel).




Figure 7. Synthetic Control Results for Multinational Sales Share (left panel) and
Monetary Share (right panel). In both cases, the simulated series (synthetic control) is
substantially above the realized sales path, indicating a substantial decay in sales in the
multinational share in the post-treatment period (treatment period is indicated by the vertical
line) compared to the counterfactual of no treatment.




                                                                                            38
Table 1. Variable description
 Dependent variables                Description                                    Data Source
 MNCshare                           We measure MNCshare in two different            AIOCD
                                    ways.                                           Pharmatrac
                                     (a) sales:-Aggregated market share of
                                         multinational firms in a particular
                                         molecule in particular month in terms
                                         of sales in Defined Daily Dosage
                                         (DDD).
                                     (b) monetary sales:-Aggregated market
                                         share of multinational firms in a
                                         particular molecule in particular
                                         month in terms of sales revenue (Rs).
 log (Sales)                        Logarithm of sales in Defined Daily Doses      AIOCD
                                    (DDD) of a particular firm for a particular    Pharmatrac
                                    molecule in a particular month.
 Prescriptionshare                  Aggregated market share of multinational       IQVIA
                                    firms in a particular molecule in particular   Prescription
                                    month in terms of prescriptions written.       Audit Database-
                                                                                   India
 Invsine (Bonus)                    Inverse sine transform of Bonus in Defined     AIOCD
                                    Daily Doses (DDD) of a particular firm for     Pharmatrac
                                    a particular molecule in a particular month.
 log (Prescriptions)                Logarithm of prescriptions of a particular     IQVIA
                                    firm for a particular molecule in a            Prescription
                                    particular month.                              Audit Database-
                                                                                   India
 log (Prescription per Physician)   Logarithm of prescriptions per physician of    IQVIA
                                    a particular firm for a particular molecule    Prescription
                                    in a particular month.                         Audit Database-
                                                                                   India
 log (Sales (US))                   Logarithm of focal molecule sales in           IQVIA US drug
                                    standard units in a particular month.          sales database
 log (Revenue (US))                 Logarithm of focal molecule revenue (US        IQVIA US drug
                                    $) in a particular month.                      sales database
 Independent variables              Description
 NDMdummy                           0 for months before August 2010 and 1
                                    after August 2010 (NDM-1 article
                                    appeared online in August 2010).
 Carbapenem                         Molecules belonging to the carbapenem
                                    (ATC code J01DH) have a value of 1,
                                    otherwise 0.
 NDMdummy × Carbapenem              Interaction term between variables
                                    NDMdummy and Carbapenem. It takes the
                                    value one for carbapenem from August
                                    2010.
 MNC                                1 if a firm had majority foreign ownership     IQVIA
                                    as on August 2010, otherwise 0.                Prescription
                                                                                   Audit Database-
                                                                                   India and CMIE
                                                                                   Prowess
 MNC × NDMdummy × Carbapenem        Interaction term between variables, MNC,
                                    NDMdummy and Carbapenem. It takes the
                                    value one for carbapenem molecules sold
                                    by MNC from August 2010.
 Year                               Dummy variable for each year from 1
                                    (2007) to 7(2013).
 Placebotreatmentapril2008          0 for months before April 2008 and 1 after
                                    April 2008.

                                                                                                 39
Placebotreatmentapril2008 × Carbapenem   Interaction term between variables
                                         Placebotreatmentapril2008 and
                                         Carbapenem. It takes the value one for
                                         carbapenem from April 2008.
Control variables                        Description
Total monetary sales                     Total revenue of a particular molecule in a   AIOCD
                                         particular month aggregated over all the      Pharmatrac
                                         firms (in Rs. million).
log (Price)                              Logarithm of average maximum retail price     AIOCD
                                         in Rs. per DDD of molecule.                   Pharmatrac
Time                                     Dummy variable for each month t where t
                                         ranges from 1 (April 2007) to 79 (October
                                         2013).
Molecule                                 Dummy variable for each molecule m.           AIOCD
                                                                                       Pharmatrac
Firm                                     Dummy variable for each firm.                 AIOCD
                                                                                       Pharmatrac
Molecule × Firm                          Interaction between molecule dummies and      AIOCD
                                         firm dummies.                                 Pharmatrac
Molecule × Calendar month                Interaction of calendar month with            AIOCD
                                         molecule to account for seasonality.          Pharmatrac
Geography                                Dummy variable for each geographical          AIOCD
                                         region g covering 23 geographical markets     Pharmatrac
                                         in India.
Molecule × Geography                     Interaction between molecule dummies and      AIOCD
                                         geography dummies.                            Pharmatrac
Geography × Time                         Interaction between geography dummies         AIOCD
                                         and time dummies.                             Pharmatrac




                                                                                                    40
Table 2. Summary Statistics. This table presents summary statistics of the narrow-spectrum
and carbapenem antibiotics for the pre- and post-treatment period. We note that during the
post-treatment period, market share of carbapenems sold by multinationals decreased in terms
of sales, monetary sales and prescriptions compared to narrow-spectrum antibiotics.
                                      (1)                               (2)
                         Narrow spectrum pre-treatment    Narrow spectrum post-treatment
                          mean      sd         Count       mean             sd        Count
 MNCshare (sales)        0.1076   0.2487        591       0.1471         0.2865        461
 MNCshare (monetary
                         0.1119   0.2646       591        0.1498         0.3016        461
 sales)
 HHI (sales)             0.6843   0.2986       591        0.7030         0.3172        461
 Number of firms         11.529
                                  19.9636      591        9.0868         13.0937       461
                            6
 Total monetary sales
                          26.4     55.0        591          34.8          63.7         461
 (Rs. million)



                                    (3)                                 (4)
                          Carbapenem pre-treatment           Carbapenem post-treatment
                         mean         sd       Count      mean          sd          Count
 MNCshare (sales)       0.5992     0.3447       100      0.3636       0.3263         179
 MNCshare
                        0.6280      0.3317      100      0.3948       0.3304        179
 (monetary sales)
 HHI (sales)             0.4496     0.3273      100       0.4777      0.3527        179
 Number of firms        15.3100    11.3464      100      14.2011     12.9165        179
 Total monetary sales
                         148.0      102.0       100       106.0       109.0         179
 (Rs. million)



                                      (5)                                (6)
                        Narrow spectrum pre-treatment     Narrow spectrum post-treatment
                                (prescription)                    (prescription)
                          mean          sd      Count     mean          sd          Count
 Prescriptionshare       0.0260      0.1324      353     0.0673       0.2483         258
 Number of firms        10.9518     19.0459      353     8.5271      11.6566         258
 HHI (Prescriptions)     0.5956      0.2974      353     0.5718       0.2968         258
 Total prescriptions    438897      900373       353     431824      682620          258



                                       (7)                                (8)
                          Carbapenem pre-treatment            Carbapenem post-treatment
                                 (prescription)                     (prescription)
                          mean            sd    Count      mean           sd         Count
 Prescriptionshare       0.2628        0.4069    56       0.1544        0.3401        41
 Number of firms         2.3929        1.3028    56       1.4390        0.7433        41
 HHI (Prescriptions)     0.5794        0.2641    56       0.4485        0.2808        41
 Total prescriptions    687.3036      615.1142   56      528.1951     519.7750        41




                                                                                              41
Table 3. Multinational Shares in Sales, Monetary Sales and Prescriptions fall in
Carbapenems after NDM-1 publication. We estimate impact of NMD-1 publication on
Multinationals' market shares as per Equation 7 in terms of sales (Models 1 and 2) and
monetary sales (Models 3 and 4) and find that market share decreased significantly in the post-
treatment period compared to the pre-treatment period, in both OLS and fractional probit
estimation. Quantitatively and qualitatively similar effects are seen in physicians' prescribing
pattern (Equation 9) as well (Model 5). Constant term is included in all the specifications but
not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.


                             (1)                   (2)               (3)                  (4)                    (5)
                          MNCshare            MNCshare           MNCshare            MNCshare               Prescription
                           (sales)               (sales)         (monetary           (monetary                  Share
                           (OLS)              (fractional           sales)               sales)              (fractional
                                                probit)            (OLS)             (fractional               probit)
                                                                                        probit)
       NDMdummy              0.0000            -0.5292*             0.0000            -0.6089**              4.5358***
                               (.)             (0.2771)               (.)              (0.2660)               (1.4715)

        Carbapenem           0.0000            4.5050***            0.0000            4.7591***              4.2116***
                               (.)              (0.3514)              (.)              (0.3820)               (1.0533)

    NDMdummy ×             -0.1391***         -0.6501***          -0.1142**           -0.5655**             -4.7347***
      Carbapenem             (0.0463)           (0.2174)           (0.0530)            (0.2389)               (1.4736)

     Total monetary        0.0006***           0.0040***          0.0007***           0.0047***
              sales         (0.0001)            (0.0013)           (0.0002)            (0.0016)

     Time dummies              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
          Molecule             Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
          dummies
                 R2            0.96                                  0.97
        Log pseudo                              -244.77                                 -231.32                -35.23
         likelihood
                  N           1331                1331               1331                1331                   708
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                           42
Table 4. Decline in Multinational Sales, Bonus Quantity, Prescriptions & Prescriptions
per Physician in Carbapenems after NDM-1 discovery. We estimate impact of NDM-1
publication on firm sales according to Equation 8 and find significantly negative coefficient
for the triple interaction term indicate that in the post-treatment period sales of carbapenems
decreased for multinational firms in absolute value (Model 1). In our model we instrumented
price with retailer margin. Model 2 shows multinational firms offered lesser bonus quantity to
retailers compared to local firms, in the post-treatment period. We also estimated impact of
NDM-1 publication on prescriptions as per Equation 9 and find that number of prescriptions
of carbapenems produced by multinationals decreased in the post-treatment period (Model 3).
Similarly, average number of prescriptions per physician (Model 4) also decreased for
carbapenems produced by multinationals in the post-treatment period. Constant term is
included in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.
                                                         (1)                (2)              (3)                    (4)
                                                         log              Invsine             log                     log
                                                       (Sales)            (Bonus)       (Prescriptions)          (Prescription
                                                                                                                      per
                                                                                                                  Physician)
                                 Log (Price)         -0.3228**
                                                      (0.1452)

                     MNC × NDMdummy                  0.8045**             1.2301            0.0455                0.2301
                                                     (0.3380)            (0.8980)          (0.2761)              (0.2107)

             NDMdummy × Carbapenem                   0.7105***            0.8314          0.9073***               -0.3711
                                                      (0.1835)           (0.5208)          (0.2335)              (0.2744)

   MNC × NDMdummy × Carbapenem                      -1.0394***          -4.0140***        -1.4791***         -1.2693***
                                                      (0.3908)            (1.4190)          (0.5657)           (0.3288)

                             Time dummies               Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes

                        Molecule dummies                Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes

                             Firm dummies               Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes

    Molecule × Calendarmonth dummies                    Yes                 Yes               Yes                   Yes

                Molecule × Firm dummies                 Yes                 Yes              Yes                   Yes
                                        R2              0.02                0.01             0.86                  0.51
                             First stage F             520.24
                                         N             15047               15050             6232                  6232
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule-firm level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                            43
Table 5. Vintage Effect - Multinational Shares in Sales, Monetary sales and Prescriptions
fall more in newer Carbapenems after NDM-1 discovery. We estimate multinationals'
market shares as per Equation 7 for with subsample of newer and older carbapenems in terms
of sales and monetary sales and find that the market share decreased significantly post the
publication of NDM-1 article more in newer carbapenems (Models 1 and 2) compared to older
carbapenems (Models 3 and 4). The same feature is seen more aggressively in prescription
patterns (Models 5 and 6). Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported.
Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013. All models have been estimated via fractional probit
specification.


                              (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)
                       MNCshare (sales)       MNCshare          MNCshare          MNCshare        Prescription    Prescription
                          (newer              (monetary        (sales) (older     (monetary       share (newer    share (older
                        carbapenems)         sales) (newer    carbapenems)       sales) (older     carbapenems)   carbapenems)
                                             carbapenem)                        carbapenems)


     NDMdummy               -0.2923             -0.3870           -0.3072        -0.3694**          2.2926***      3.4384***
                           (0.3114)            (0.2925)          (0.2063)         (0.1726)           (0.7679)       (0.7670)

      Carbapenem           0.4832*            0.5243**          4.1933***        4.3066***         13.2898***      2.1961**
                           (0.2602)           (0.2660)           (0.2076)         (0.2136)          (0.9205)       (0.8948)

  NDMdummy ×              -5.3337***         -5.2912***        -0.4342***        -0.3149**         -12.1298***       -1.7108
    Carbapenem              (0.1818)           (0.1817)          (0.1273)         (0.1278)           (0.9489)       (1.0545)

   Total monetary           0.0015              0.0013          0.0026***        0.0030***
            sales          (0.0018)            (0.0016)          (0.0005)         (0.0004)

   Time dummies               Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes

         Molecule             Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes
         dummies
       Log pseudo           -156.29            -139.93           -218.49           -204.69            -17.65         -28.82
        likelihood
                 N           1150                1150              1233             1233                629           690
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                     44
Table 6a. Robustness of Baseline Results for sales after accounting for Regional
Heterogeneity. Even after accounting for regional heterogeneity expanding the unit of
observation at the regional level within India, multinationals' market share in carbapenems is
seen to be significantly reduced in the post-treatment period in both OLS (Models 1 to 3) and
fractional probit estimation (Models 4 to 6) with respect to sales. Constant term is included in
all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.
                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                  MNCshare     MNCshare     MNCshare     MNCshare      MNCshare      MNCshare
                   (sales)      (sales)      (sales)        (sales)       (sales)       (sales)
                   (OLS)        (OLS)        (OLS)       (fractional   (fractional   (fractional
                                                             logit)        logit)        logit)
  NDMdummy          0.0000       0.0000       0.0000     -0.2423**     -0.2698**      -0.5988*
                      (.)          (.)          (.)       (0.1111)      (0.1284)      (0.3236)

   Carbapenem       0.0000       0.0000       0.0000     5.0376**       0.6827*        0.5116
                      (.)          (.)          (.)      (1.9969)       (0.3616)      (0.4294)

  NDMdummy        -0.1490***   -0.1406***   -0.1393***   -0.5633***    -0.5856***    -0.5825***
 × Carbapenem       (0.0247)     (0.0241)     (0.0241)     (0.0992)      (0.1102)      (0.1037)

         Total    0.0056***     0.0035*      0.0037*
 monetary sales    (0.0016)     (0.0021)     (0.0020)

    Geography        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
      dummies
     Molecule-       No           Yes          Yes          No            Yes           Yes
    Geography
      dummies
   Geography-        No           No           Yes          No            No            Yes
 Time dummies
             R2      0.78         0.86         0.87
    Log pseudo                                            -5464.03      -4783.45      -4608.88
     likelihood
              N     22540        22528        22528        22540         22540         22540




                                                                                                   45
Table 6b. Robustness of Baseline Results in terms of monetary sales after accounting
for Regional Heterogeneity. Even after accounting for regional heterogeneity expanding the
unit of observation at the regional level within India, multinationals' market share in
carbapenems is seen to be significantly reduced in the post-treatment period in both OLS
OLS (Models 1 to 3) and fractional probit estimation (Models 4 to 6) with respect to
monetary sales. Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported. Time
horizon is April 2007- October 2013.
                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                     MNCshare       MNCshare       MNCshare       MNCshare       MNCshare        MNCshare
                     (monetary      (monetary      (monetary      (monetary      (monetary       (monetary
                    sales) (OLS)       sales)         sales)         sales)         sales)          sales)
                                      (OLS)          (OLS)        (fractional    (fractional     (fractional
                                                                     logit)         logit)          logit)
   NDMdummy            0.0000         0.0000         0.0000      -0.2973***      -0.3332**       -0.9559***
                         (.)            (.)            (.)         (0.1140)       (0.1319)         (0.2841)

    Carbapenem         0.0000         0.0000         0.0000         4.8518         0.5215          0.4141
                         (.)            (.)            (.)            (.)         (0.3643)        (0.4383)

  NDMdummy          -0.1209***     -0.1122***     -0.1112***     -0.4278***     -0.4325***       -0.4227***
 × Carbapenem         (0.0257)       (0.0251)       (0.0252)       (0.1039)       (0.1153)         (0.1099)

         Total       0.0056**        0.0037*        0.0039*
 monetary sales      (0.0019)        (0.0024)       (0.0023)

    Geography           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
      dummies
     Molecule-           No            Yes            Yes             No            Yes              Yes
    Geography
      dummies
   Geography-            No             No            Yes             No             No              Yes
 Time dummies
             R2         0.79           0.87           0.88
    Log pseudo                                                     -5260.68       -4611.71        -4429.51
     likelihood
              N        22540          22528          22528          22540          22540           22540
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the Molecule-Geography level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.   All
models include time and molecule fixed effects




                                                                                                                      46
Table 7. Robustness of Baseline Results with Alternate Control Group of Other Broad
Spectrum Antibiotics. Instead of narrow spectrum antibiotics, here we consider broad
spectrum antibiotics (86 molecules) other than carbapenem itself, to constitute the control
group and estimate impact of NDM-1 publication on MNCshare (Equation 7) Since this is a
within group comparison, the effects are expected to be muted. We see that multinationals'
sales share in carbapenem has decreased significantly (Models 1 and 2), the results for
monetary sales share are negative but insignificant (Models 3 and 4). Constant term is included
in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.


                               (1)                            (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                          MNCshare (sales)            MNCshare (sales)            MNCshare                MNCshare
                             (OLS)                    (fractional probit)       (monetary sales)        (monetary sales)
                                                                                    (OLS)                 (fractional
                                                                                                            probit)
      NDMdummy                   0.0000                      -0.3928                   0.0000                 -0.3532
                                   (.)                      (0.2427)                     (.)                 (0.2357)

       Carbapenem                0.0000                   -1.0567***                   0.0000               -1.0789***
                                   (.)                      (0.2583)                     (.)                  (0.2840)

    NDMdummy ×                 -0.1146**                   -0.4040*                    -0.0933                -0.3309
      Carbapenem                (0.0533)                   (0.2235)                   (0.0606)               (0.2491)

    Total monetary               0.0000                      0.0003                    0.0000                 0.0004
             sales              (0.0001)                    (0.0006)                  (0.0001)               (0.0006)

    Time dummies                  Yes                         Yes                        Yes                   Yes

          Molecule                Yes                         Yes                        Yes                   Yes
          dummies
                 R2               0.94                                                   0.95
        Log pseudo                                         -1299.14                                          -1343.92
         likelihood
                  N               6057                        6057                      6057                  6057
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                         47
Online Appendix
Figure A1. Carbapenems and Narrow-spectrum Antibiotics Sales during pre- and post-
treatment periods (separated by the vertical line) in the US market. The quantity difference
between carbapenems and narrow spectrum remain stable, apart from a dip in the carbapenem
sales
in the beginning of the observed time period. However, there is no visible impact of the NDM-
1 shock on the US market. The x-axis denotes the number of months (data spans from April
2007 to October 2013 i.e. over 79 months) and y-axis denotes sales in standard units
(logarithm). Source: IQVIA US drug sales database.




                                                                                          48
Figure A2. Multinational Share in Sales and Monetary terms during pre- and post-
treatment periods (separated by the vertical line) in the Carbapenems and Narrow-
spectrum Antibiotics Market, without the newly introduced molecule (Ertapenem). As in
the full sample, multinational market shares show a steep decline both in terms of sales (left
panel) and monetary sales (right panel) in the post-treatment period while the corresponding
share in the market for narrow spectrum antibiotics remain stable. The x-axis denotes the
number of months (data spans from April 2007 to October 2013 i.e. over 79 months). Source:
AIOCD Pharmatrac.




                                                                                           49
Table A1. Molecule Classification based on ATC-code


                                                                        US FDA        US patent structure
                                                                        Approval      year
 Molecule                                 ATC_code Classification       year
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 AMBROXOL + CEFADROXIL                    J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFADROXIL + CLAVULANIC ACID             J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFADROXIL + LACTOBACILLUS ACIDOPHILUS   J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFADROXIL + PROBENECID                  J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFADROXIL COMBINATIONS                  J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1978      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFADROXIL                               J01DB05     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1975      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFALEXIN + BROMHEXINE                   J01DB01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1975      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFALEXIN + CARBOCISTEINE                J01DB01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1975      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFALEXIN + PROBENECID                   J01DB01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1975      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFALEXIN                                J01DB01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1967      First-generation cephalosporins
 CEFAZOLIN                                J01DB04     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1962      First-generation cephalosporins
 CLOXACILLIN                              J01CF02     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   1971      Beta-lactamase resistant penicillins
 DICLOXACILLIN                            J01CF01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        2007          1994      Carbapenems
 DORIPENEM                                J01DH04     carbapenem
                                                                        2001          1993      Carbapenems
 ERTAPENEM                                J01DH03     carbapenem
                                                                        1985          1966      Macrolides
 ERYTHROMYCIN                             J01FA01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        1985          1975      Carbapenems
 IMIPENEM + CILASTATIN                    J01DH51     carbapenem
                                                                        1996          1983      Carbapenems
 MEROPENEM + SULBACTAM                    J01DH02     carbapenem
                                                                        1996          1983      Carbapenems
 MEROPENEM                                J01DH02     carbapenem
                                                                        Before 1982   NA        Beta-lactamase sensitive penicillins
 PENICILLIN G                             J01CE01     narrow-spectrum
                                                                        Before 1982   NA        Beta-lactamase sensitive penicillins
 PENICILLIN V                             J01CE02     narrow-spectrum




                                                                                                                                       50
Table A2: Antibiotic Classification (orange denotes Broad-spectrum, blue denotes Carbapenems and yellow denotes Narrow-spectrum)


                       J01AA Tetracyclines
 J01A TETRACYCLINES    (1950s)
                       J01BA Amphenicols
 J01B AMPHENICOLS      (1950s)



                                                                                             J01CG Beta-      J01CR Combination
 J01C BETA-LACTAM      J01CA Penicillins with    J01CE Beta-           J01CF Beta-           lactamase        s of penicillins, incl.
 ANTIBACTERIALS,       extended spectrum         lactamase sensitive   lactamase resistant   inhibitors       beta-lactamase
 PENICILLINS           (1950s)                   penicillins (1940s)   penicillins (1960s)   (1970s)          inhibitors

                                                 J01DC Second-         J01DD Third-          J01DE Fourth-
 J01D OTHER BETA-                                generation            generation            generation
 LACTAM                J01DB First-generation    cephalosporins        cephalosporins        cephalosporins   J01DF Monobactam          J01DH Carbapenem
 ANTIBACTERIALS        cephalosporins (1960s)    (1970s)               (1980s)               (1980s)          s (1980s)                 s (1980s)




                                                                                             J01ED Long-      J01EE Combination
                                                 J01EB Short-acting    J01EC Intermediate-   acting           s of sulfonamides
 J01E SULFONAMIDES     J01EA Trimethoprim        sulfonamides          acting sulfonamides   sulfonamides     and trimethoprim,
 AND TRIMETHOPRIM      and derivatives (1960s)   1940s)                (1960s)               (1960s)          incl. derivatives


 J01F MACROLIDES,
 LINCOSAMIDES AND      J01FA Macrolides          J01FF Lincosamide     J01FG Streptogramin
 STREPTOGRAMINS        (1950s)                   s (1960s)             s (1990s)


 J01G AMINOGLYCOSID    J01GA Streptomycins       J01GB Other
 E ANTIBACTERIALS      (1960s)                   aminoglycosides



                                                                                                                                                       51
J01M QUINOLONE      J01MA Fluoroquinolone    J01MB Other
ANTIBACTERIALS      s (1960s)                quinolones


J01R COMBINATIONS   J01RA Combinations of
OF ANTIBACTERIALS   antibacterials


                                                                                         J01XD Imidazol
J01X OTHER          J01XA Glycopeptide       J01XB Polymyxins   J01XC Steroid            e derivatives    J01XE Nitrofuran      J01XX Other
ANTIBACTERIALS      antibacterials (1980s)   (1970s)            antibacterials (1960s)   (1960s)          derivatives (1950s)   antibacterials




                                                                                                                                                 52
Table A3: Robustness of Baseline Results in Truncated Sample. This table provides the
findings from a truncated sample with an 18 months pre and 18 months post truncated sample
as per Equation 7. Results are consistent with our baseline findings in Table 3, where there
continues to be decrease in multinationals' market share both in terms of sales and monetary
sales. Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April
2009 to March 2012, i.e. 3 years in total.
                            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)               (5)
                         MNCshare             MNCshare               MNCshare            MNCshare           Prescription
                          (sales)                (sales)             (monetary           (monetary              share
                          (OLS)               (fractional           sales) (OLS)             sales)          (fractional
                                                probit)                                  (fractional           probit)
                                                                                            probit)
      NDMdummy              0.0000              -0.0386                0.0000               -0.0379            1.9746
                              (.)              (0.1357)                  (.)               (0.1402)           (1.5489)

       Carbapenem           0.0000              0.5642                 0.0000               0.5392           4.3304**
                              (.)              (0.4417)                  (.)               (0.4725)          (1.8183)

    NDMdummy ×            -0.0728**            -0.3573*                -0.0615              -0.3125         -5.1442***
      Carbapenem           (0.0325)            (0.2139)               (0.0365)             (0.2290)           (1.7228)

    Total monetary         0.0008*              0.0051                0.0009*               0.0056
             sales         (0.0005)            (0.0032)               (0.0005)             (0.0036)

    Time dummies             Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes               Yes

          Molecule           Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes               Yes
          dummies
                 R2          0.98                                       0.99
        Log pseudo                              -105.73                                     -99.24             -10.19
         likelihood
                  N          601                  602                    601                  602               311
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
Table A4: Robustness of Baseline Results with wild cluster bootstrap error. We have
replicated the same model estimation with wild clustered bootstrap error. P-value for
coefficient of interest NDMdummy × Carbapenem are reported separately for OLS model.
Overall our results are robust even with wild cluster bootstrap error (p-value .001 and .036).
We have also controlled for number of firms and our results remain consistent and significant.
Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007-
October 2013.


                                 (1)                       (2)                   (3)                (4)               (5)
                              MNCshare                 MNCshare               MNCshare          MNCshare        Prescription
                               (sales)                    (sales)             (monetary         (monetary     share (fractional
                               (OLS)               (fractional probit)       sales) (OLS)          sales)         probit)
                                                                                                (fractional
                                                                                                  probit)

         NDMdummy                -0.0643                -0.0636*               -0.6016**         -0.6667**       4.5358***
                                (0.0379)                (0.0363)                (0.2669)          (0.2654)        (1.4715)

          Carbapenem          0.1484***                 0.1434**               4.3801***         4.6481***       4.2116***
                               (0.0495)                 (0.0571)                (0.2904)          (0.3120)        (1.0533)

      NDMdummy ×               -0.1133**                -0.0920*               -0.3865*           -0.3324*       -4.7347***
        Carbapenem              (0.0408)                (0.0462)               (0.2020)           (0.1900)         (1.4736)

      Total Monetary          0.0007***                0.0007***               0.0041***         0.0048***
               Sales           (0.0001)                 (0.0002)                (0.0013)          (0.0017)

     Number of firms             -0.0023                  -0.0020              -0.0168*            -0.0150
                                (0.0015)                 (0.0014)              (0.0102)           (0.0101)

       Time dummies               Yes                      Yes                    Yes               Yes             Yes

  Molecule dummies                Yes                      Yes                    Yes               Yes             Yes
                  R2              .96                      .97
        Log pseudo                                                              -244.10           -230.82          -32.66
          likelihood
    wildbootpvalue              0.0010                   0.0360
                   N             1331                     1331                    1331              1331            708
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                            54
Table A5: Robustness Of Baseline Results with Alternate Control Group of all other
Antibiotics (WHO ATC J01 class). Instead of narrow spectrum antibiotics, we consider all
other antibiotics other than carbapenems itself, to constitute the control group. Since this is a
within group comparison, the effects are expected to be muted. We see that multinationals'
sales share in carbapenems has decreased significantly (Models 1 and 2), the results for
monetary sales share (Model 3 and 4) and Prescriptionshare (Model 5) are negative but
insignificant. Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon
is April 2007- October 2013.


                            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)                (5)
                         MNCshare             MNCshare               MNCshare            MNCshare           Prescription
                          (sales)                (sales)             (monetary           (monetary              share
                          (OLS)               (fractional           sales) (OLS)             sales)          (fractional
                                                probit)                                  (fractional           probit)
                                                                                            probit)
      NDMdummy              0.0000            -0.3104**                0.0000             -0.2961*          -0.3034***
                              (.)              (0.1559)                  (.)               (0.1519)           (0.1173)

       Carbapenem           0.0000            4.6156***                0.0000             4.7825***          0.5484***
                              (.)              (0.2785)                  (.)               (0.3005)           (0.1483)

    NDMdummy ×            -0.1142**            -0.4076*                -0.0917              -0.3260            -1.4535
      Carbapenem           (0.0527)            (0.2217)               (0.0601)             (0.2475)           (1.1067)

    Total monetary          0.0000              0.0004                 0.0001               0.0006
             sales         (0.0001)            (0.0005)               (0.0001)             (0.0005)

    Time dummies             Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes               Yes

          Molecule           Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes               Yes
          dummies
                 R2          0.93                                       0.93
        Log pseudo                             -2246.52                                    -2321.69          -1963.14
         likelihood
                  N         10426                10426                 10426                10426              8785
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                           55
Table A6: Robustness of Baseline Results without Ertapenem (the molecule with zero
presence of MNCs). In this exercise, we replicate the main estimation (Equation 7) exercise
by taking out Ertapenem from the group of molecules. The reason is that Ertapenem was
introduced in 2010 and were sold exclusively by domestic firms, thereby potentially biasing
the MNC shares. All results continue to hold in the truncated sample. Constant term is included
in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.


                             (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)
                          MNCshare            MNCshare            MNCshare           MNCshare
                           (sales)               (sales)          (monetary          (monetary
                           (OLS)              (fractional        sales) (OLS)            sales)
                                                probit)                              (fractional
                                                                                        probit)
       NDMdummy              0.0000            -0.5292*             0.0000            -0.6089**
                               (.)             (0.2775)               (.)              (0.2663)

        Carbapenem           0.0000            4.5051***            0.0000            4.6638***
                               (.)              (0.3518)              (.)              (0.3833)

    NDMdummy ×             -0.1538***         -0.6500***          -0.1266**           -0.5656**
      Carbapenem             (0.0504)           (0.2177)           (0.0589)            (0.2392)

     Total monetary        0.0007***           0.0040***          0.0007***           0.0047***
              sales         (0.0001)            (0.0013)           (0.0002)            (0.0016)

     Time dummies              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          Molecule             Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          dummies
                 R2            0.96                                  0.97
        Log pseudo                              -244.77                                 -231.32
         likelihood
                  N           1286                1286               1286                1286
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                            56
Table A7: Robustness of Baseline Results with respect to Placebo Treatment date (before
the actual treatment). In this exercise, we replicate the main estimation (Equation 7) with an
additional alternate placebo treatment dated April 2008, to rule out pre-trends. The first
appearance of the NDM-1 was in April 2008 which may potentially create a treatment effect
before the Lancet publication, resulting in a pre-trend. The results are pre-dominantly
insignificant with the OLS estimates (Models 1 and 3) or marginally significant with the
fractional probit estimates (Models 2 and 4). Constant term is included in all the specifications
but not reported. Time horizon is April 2007- October 2013.


                                           (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                        MNCshare           MNCshare           MNCshare            MNCshare
                                         (sales)              (sales)         (monetary         (monetary sales)
                                         (OLS)             (fractional       sales) (OLS)         (fractional
                                                             probit)                                probit)

     Placebotreatmentapril2008             0.0000             -0.0726           0.0000                -0.1243
                                             (.)             (0.1670)             (.)                (0.1802)

                     Carbapenem            0.0000           4.7091***           0.0000              4.9197***
                                             (.)             (0.3436)             (.)                (0.3636)

     Placebotreatmentapril2008             -0.0547            -0.2734           -0.0316               -0.2159
                × Carbapenem              (0.0395)           (0.1986)          (0.0432)              (0.1728)

                    NDMdummy               0.0000           -0.3904*            0.0000               -0.4307*
                                             (.)            (0.2308)              (.)                (0.2413)

   NDMdummy × Carbapenem                 -0.1253**          -0.5859**           -0.1062             -0.5162**
                                          (0.0580)           (0.2428)          (0.0651)              (0.2634)

            Total monetary sales         0.0006***          0.0041***         0.0006***             0.0048***
                                          (0.0002)           (0.0014)          (0.0002)              (0.0017)

                   Time dummies              Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes

              Molecule dummies               Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes
                              R2             .96                                  .96
                    Log pseudo                               -244.60                                  -231.22
                      likelihood
                               N            1331               1331              1331                  1331
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                                   57
Table A8: Discovery of NDM-1 does not Impact US Markets for Antibiotics. We estimate
the main model with the US data with impact on overall sales (in standard units) and revenue
(US $) for the matched list of four carbapenem molecules and six narrow-spectrum molecules.
The results are insignificant indicating there is no response to NDM-1 publication in the US
market. Constant term is included in all the specifications but not reported. Time horizon is
April 2007- October 2013.


                                 (1)                                (2)
                          log (Sales (US))                  log (Revenue (US))
     NDMdummy                  0.0000                             0.0000
                                 (.)                                (.)

      Carbapenem               0.0000                              0.0000
                                 (.)                                 (.)

  NDMdummy ×                   -0.2404                             0.0754
    Carbapenem                (0.4015)                            (0.3636)

   Time dummies                  Yes                                 Yes

         Molecule                Yes                                 Yes
         dummies
               R2                0.93                               0.86
               N                 779                                780
Note: Robust clustered standard errors at the molecule level in parentheses; * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                                                            58
