                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES AND RACE SPECIFIC SPILLOVERS

                                        Elizabeth Ananat
                                            Shihe Fu
                                         Stephen Ross

                                      Working Paper 28847
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28847


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




The authors are grateful for comments from participants at the Labor Market Networks session of
the 2013 American Economic Association Meetings, the 2012 Housing-Urban-Labor-Macro
Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2011 Greater Boston Area Urban and Real
Estate Economics Seminar at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and seminars at SERC in the
London School of Economics, the CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, Ohio
State University, Peking University, and Shanghai University of Finance and Economics. This
research was supported by the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at the University of
Connecticut and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Basic Scientific Center
Project #71988101). The majority of the analyses presented in this paper were conducted using
restricted data at a Census Research Data Center. Opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau.
Results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The authors
have no competing interests to declare. Some research results in this paper were presented earlier
in 2013 NBER Working Paper #18933. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Elizabeth Ananat, Shihe Fu, and Stephen Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Agglomeration Economies and Race Specific Spillovers
Elizabeth Ananat, Shihe Fu, and Stephen Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 28847
May 2021
JEL No. J15,J24,L11,R12,R23,R32

                                         ABSTRACT

Racial social isolation within and across workplaces may reduce firm productivity. We provide
descriptive evidence that African-Americans feel socially isolated from Whites. To test whether
isolation affects productivity, we estimate models of Total Factor Productivity for manufacturing
firms allowing returns to local area concentrations of economic activity and human capital
spillovers to vary with the racial and ethnic composition of both the establishment and the local
area employment. Higher own-race exposure for establishment workers to workers at surrounding
establishments strengthens the relationship between productivity and both employment density
and concentrations of college educated workers. Effects for human capital spillovers are largest
for firms with more patents and more research and development spending. Looming demographic
changes suggest that this drag on productivity may increase over time.


Elizabeth Ananat                                Stephen Ross
Barnard College                                 Department of Economics
Columbia University                             University of Connecticut
3009 Broadway                                   341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Office 1019 Milstein Building                   Storrs, CT 06269-1063
New York, NY 10027                              and NBER
and NBER                                        stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
eananat@barnard.edu

Shihe Fu
Wang Yanan Institute for Studies
 in Economics (WISE)
Xiamen University
Xiamen, 361005
China
fushihe@xmu.edu.cn
                      Agglomeration Economies and Race Specific Spillovers

1. Introduction

    Many studies document the role of knowledge spillovers as a key factor in explaining firm

productivity in cities. Moretti (2004) finds that knowledge spillovers in U.S. cities increase the

productivity of manufacturing plants. Glaeser and Maré (2001) and De la Roca and Puga (2017)

find that learning plays an important role in explaining the urban wage premium. Ellison, Glaeser

and Kerr (2010) find evidence that spillovers between firms explain a significant portion of the co-

agglomeration of industries using metrics for the extent that firms share workers and ideas.

Rosenthal and Strange (2008), using wages, and Rosenthal and Strange (2003), examining firm

births, document a fairly rapid decay of spillovers across space, consistent with agglomeration

resulting from social interactions. Similarly, Audretsch and Feldman (1996) and Feldman and

Audretsch (1999) demonstrate that the composition of surrounding industry affects the rate of new

ideas as captured by product innovation. 1

    Racial and ethnic isolation and racially segregated networks among workers appear to be

important drivers of differences in labor market outcomes, especially for African-Americans.

Hellerstein et al. (2008) find that an African-American's own employment depends not on nearby

overall employment density, but rather on whether nearby employers employ other African-

Americans. Hellerstein et al. (2011) find that workers are more likely to be employed at a firm that

contains other workers residing in the same neighborhood, but document that these network effects

are substantially stronger for African-Americans and Hispanics if those workers are the same

race/ethnicity. 2 Ananat, Fu and Ross (2018) demonstrate that the wage premium arising from



1
 See Combes and Gobillon (2015) for a recent review.
2
 Bayer et al. (2008) also documents labor market network effects based on residential proximity of similar workers.
Ioannides and Loury (2004) and Ross (2011) review the referral literature.

                                                        2
working in a location with high employment density is substantially smaller for African-

Americans, unless the surrounding employment is comprised predominantly of African-American

workers.

    Even when Blacks are in spatial proximity with other races, research has shown they remain

socially isolated from non-Blacks. For example, Davis et al. (2019) document racial segregation

in visits to restaurants and find that most of this segregation is due to social barriers and, moreover,

is strongest in isolating African-American diners and restaurants. Similarly, many studies

document racial isolation within schools (Fletcher et al. 2020; Moody 2001), particularly for Black

students (Echinique and Fryer, 2005).

    Given the patterns observed above, racial and ethnic social isolation between workers sharing

workplaces or in neighboring workplaces may have a significant impact on firm productivity, a

possibility we investigate in this study. First, we utilize the General Social Survey (GSS) to provide

descriptive evidence that African-Americans do in fact feel socially isolated from Whites,

including when working at majority White firms. Specifically, white respondents are 1.6 points in

terms of feeling closer to whites than they feel to blacks on a 9 point Likert scale, and black

respondents are 1.7 points closer to blacks than to whites. Further, we find no evidence that this

3.3 point closeness gap falls as the share of whites in the workplace increases. 3

    Second, we test whether this social isolation of African-American workers affects firm

productivity. We estimate models of Total Factor Productivity (TFP) for manufacturing firms in

which we allow the returns to concentrated economic activity and human capital spillovers to vary

by each establishment's racial and ethnic composition in a way that depends upon the racial and

ethnic composition of employment in the surrounding area. Specifically, consistent with individual


3
 While perhaps intuitive, this pattern has not to our knowledge been shown in previous work. Unfortunately, the
GSS does not collect similar information for Asians, Hispanics, or other race/ethnic groups.

                                                        3
employees' race-specific networks mattering for productivity, we find that manufacturing

establishments whose workers on average are exposed to a higher share of manufacturing workers

of the same race in the local work area experience a stronger relationship between productivity

and both local area employment density and share of workers with four years of college.

    Following Moretti (2004) and Hellerstein et al. (1999), we identify a sample of workers in each

manufacturing establishment from the 2000 Decennial Census Long Form data based on that

establishment's zip code and three-digit NAICS (industry) code, and then estimate the education

and racial composition of the workers in each zip code by industry establishment cell. 4 We then

estimate a standard translog production function with measures of each establishment's various

capital and labor inputs along with controls for the density and education of workers in this

establishment's nearby peers (defined as other manufacturing firms in the surrounding U.S. Census

Public Use Microdata Area, or PUMA). We then calculate the average exposure of the

establishment's workers to establishment workers of their own race/ethnicity in this PUMA and

allow the establishment's productivity returns to employment density and returns to the share of

workers in the PUMA who are college-educated to vary with this same-race exposure. Our

preferred estimates, in which the model includes a proxy for unobserved worker ability based on

Fu and Ross (2013), suggests that the estimated effects of employment density and share of

employees who are college graduates (share college) on productivity both fall to near zero for

establishments whose workers have no exposure to same-race workers in the PUMA.

    Our model and robustness checks attempt to address many of the common concerns in

empirical work on agglomeration and human capital externalities. Ciccone and Peri (2006) note



4
 While Moretti (2004) and Hellerstein et al. (1999) match establishments based on metropolitan area, we match
based on zip code and similar to Rosenthal and Strange (2003, 2008), Fu and Ross (2013) and Ananat et al. (2018)
examine variation within metropolitan areas.

                                                        4
that the educational composition of workers in a given location can affect local wages due to input

complementarities and substitutability, rather than production spillovers. A significant advantage

of our use of TFP models is explicitly allowing for substitution between inputs. Another concern

is that workers may sort into high-density work locations based on their unobserved productivity

(Glaeser and Maré 2001; Combes et al. 2008). To address this, we estimate a wage equation with

fixed effects for residential location at the census tract level. We then use the average of these

fixed effects over the residential location of workers at an establishment as a proxy for

establishment-level unobserved worker productivity, leveraging previous findings that workers

sort over residential locations based on permanent income (Bayer and Ross 2006; Fu and Ross

2013). Our results are also robust to allowing the effects of employment density and share college

within PUMAs to be heterogeneous across NAICS industry categories, as well as to allowing for

innate differences in place-specific productivity by including fixed effects for each establishment's

PUMA. Moreover, we also find that same-race exposure effects on the return to share college,

which may reflect human capital externalities or knowledge spillovers, are concentrated in

industries with higher levels of patent activity and research and development spending, suggesting

that racial isolation within firms may also influence firm operation and innovation. 5

2. Are Black workers socially isolated from Whites, even when they work in predominantly

White firms?

    First, we examine whether self-reported patterns of individual associations within and across

race/ethnicity are consistent with the hypothesis that social ties are disproportionately within-race

and that those workers whose workplaces include few or no same-race peers are unable to


5
 This is consistent with several previous studies that document the role of peers and social interactions within
companies. For example, Nanda and Sorenson (2010) find evidence of peer effects on self-employment that suggests
knowledge- or experience-sharing between workers. Other work suggests that peers may affect productivity through
establishing productivity-enhancing norms (De Paola 2010; Bandiera et al. 2005; Mas and Moretti 2009).

                                                       5
overcome this pattern. To test whether Blacks in majority-White workplaces nonetheless report

greater social distance from Whites than from Blacks, and vice versa, i.e. that race is a barrier to

social interactions in the workplace, we draw on data from the U.S. General Social Survey. This

survey has been fielded every one or two years since 1972 and contains a standardized set of

demographic and attitudinal questions, many of which are asked consistently over time. A

substantial number of respondents across a number of waves are surveyed on: racial attitudes; the

racial composition of their workplace; 6 and how close they feel to Blacks and to Whites. We focus

on Black and White respondents, as the survey did not ask comparable questions on closeness and

workplace composition concerning Hispanics, Asian-Americans, or other race or ethnicity

workers. Our sample includes employed Blacks and Whites who responded to the surveys in which

the relevant questions were asked.

    Survey respondents' workplaces are on average 68% White, and the racial distributions of

firms employing Blacks and Whites are heavily overlapping: the average White employee worked

in a 72% White workplace and the average Black employee worked in a 50% White workplace,

with standard deviations of around 37% for both groups. Thus, there is plenty of variation within

which to test the relationship between feelings of closeness across race and workplace racial

composition, for both Blacks and Whites.

    Our main focus is on a pair of personal attitude questions about how close the respondent is to

Whites and how close the respondent is to Blacks, reported on a Likert scale running from 1 to 9

where 1 is not close at all and 9 is very close. 7 Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 Panel 1 show the mean


6
  These responses could reflect the worker's establishment or their more immediate office environment, but would
not reflect the overall firm in the case of multi-establishment firms.
7
  Race, closeness to Whites and Blacks, and attitude toward government help for Blacks were asked in all years of
the survey. Workplace racial composition was surveyed in 1990 and biannually (i.e., in every survey) between 1996
and 2010. The exception is attitudes toward interracial marriage, which was discontinued as a question in 2002. The
regression samples include all employed Whites and Blacks who responded to the specific racial attitude question. If
workplace share white is missing, the variable is set to zero, and an indicator for the variable missing is set to one.

                                                          6
levels of closeness to Blacks and Whites respectively. Not surprisingly, both Black and White

workers report being closer to their own race than to the other race: Blacks report being 2.2 points

on a 9-point scale closer to Blacks than do Whites (rows 1 and 2 column 1), while Whites report

being 1.1 points closer to Whites than do Blacks (rows 1 and 2 column 2). Column 3 shows the

estimates for difference between a worker's closeness to Whites and closeness to Blacks, which

we view as a likely proxy for the racial composition of meaningful social interactions and treat as

our main metric. Blacks on average report feeling 1.7 points closer to Blacks than to Whites, while

Whites report feeling 1.6 points closer to Whites than to Blacks, an illustration of the high levels

of social distance between races in American society. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 1 report two

additional race-related attitudinal survey measures: whether the government provides too much

assistance to Blacks and support for interracial marriage. Whites are more likely to agree with the

first statement on government assistance, and less likely to support interracial marriage, than are

Blacks.

    These high levels of average social distance, however, would mean little for race-specific

spillovers at work if they merely reflected low average levels of interaction between races due to

segregation across work locations, while disappearing for workers with high levels of cross-race

exposure in the workplace. If that were the case, we would see that a worker's relative closeness

to a group would increase with the representation of that group in their workplace, so that, for

example, a Black worker in an all-White firm would report on average the same closeness to

Whites as would a White worker in an all-White firm. Therefore, we estimate models to explain

these variables that include an indicator for own race, a measure of the percent White in workplace,

and an interaction of the two; the model also includes the indicators for survey year. 8


8
 We have also estimated this set of regressions with fixed effects for MSA; standard errors increase but neither
coefficients nor the pattern of significance changes.

                                                          7
   Table 1 Panel 2 and Figure 1 report results. As percent White in the workplace increases,

Whites become substantially less close to Blacks (column 1) and minimally closer to Whites

(column 2). The interaction of Black with percent White in workplace implies that closeness of

Blacks to Blacks decreases modestly at most, but closeness to Whites does increase with percent

White. Turning to column 3, the net effect on relative closeness is that both groups increase their

closeness to Whites relative to Blacks as percent White increases, but the point estimates on the

interaction between Black and percent White implies that the effect for Whites is more than 50%

larger than the effect for Blacks. While the interaction estimate is somewhat noisy, the negative

sign implies that increasing percent White in the workplace does not mitigate the large gap between

Whites and Blacks in terms of their relative closeness to Whites.

   Figure 1 graphs the estimated relationship between firm racial composition and closeness to

Whites relative to Blacks separately for Whites and for Blacks. We observe a large gap of over

two Likert scale points in an all-Black workplace, where lower relative closeness to Whites might

be an advantage, but this large gap persists and may even grow as the percent White in the work

place increases. As a result, White workers may have a significant advantage in communication

opportunities within workplaces that contain primarily White workers. Finally, the estimates in

columns 4 and 5 in the second panel of Table 1 imply that unlike closeness to Whites and Blacks,

an increase in the share White in the workplace has no impact on more general racial attitudes like

support for government programs that are perceived as utilized heavily by Blacks or support for

interracial marriage.




                                                8
3. Do Racially-Segregated Networks Affect Productivity?

3.1 Methods

    Next, we test whether the apparent racial segregation of social networks affects firm

productivity by using establishment exposure to agglomeration economies and human capital

spillovers as a shifter of firm productivity. We model establishment Total Factor Productivity

(TFP) as a function of spatial spillovers that depends upon both firm demographics and local labor

market area demographics. Specifically, we estimate models for the logarithm of establishment

net revenue ( , total revenues minus material costs) as a translog function, given Ciccone and

Peri's (2006) concerns about factor substitution. The translog function includes establishment

structure capital, equipment capital, and following Moretti's (2004) analysis of human capital

externalities also includes separate estimates of college-educated and non-college educated

employment (  ). We then again follow Moretti (2004) and include linear controls for our

variables that may drive spillovers: manufacturing employment density and share manufacturing

workers with four years of college, for a sub-region of the metropolitan or labor market area

surrounding the establishment (- ).

     =   + - +  ,                                                                                                  (1)

where F is a quadratic additive function of all elements of  including all two-way interactions.

The - in - represents the omission of the establishment itself and same industry establishments

from the calculation of Z following Moretti (2004). 9 Moretti (2004) argues that it is impossible to




9
  Guryan et al (2009) and Bayer et al. (2008) show that omission of self or a cluster of related observations can bias
estimates of peer effects. Fletcher et al. (2020) generalize Guryan et al.'s solution to this bias to a broader set of
calculated variables where the control function is the difference between the variable calculated using all data and
the variable omitting a cluster of the data. We calculate this Guryan style control function for our employment
density and share college educated variables and include these in the TFP models. All results are robust to the
omission of these controls.

                                                           9
estimate spillovers within establishments from the same industry with establishment data as used

by him and ourselves, likely due to reflection problems that might arise in estimating effects of

own industry for many firms in the same industry that all contribute to each other's measures of

agglomeration. 10 All models also include metropolitan/labor market area fixed effects and industry

fixed effects.

     Next, for the surrounding sub-region or local area, we also calculate a measure intended to

capture race-specific opportunities for communication and the transfer of information between

workers at nearby establishments. If information transfer occurs at the individual worker level,

then the returns to agglomeration and human capital externalities should depend upon the

individual employees' opportunities for social interactions with workers at nearby firms. In order

to capture that, we measure each employee's exposure to workers of neighboring establishments

                               -
who are also of the same race (  ) based on their race r and their establishment's location j, and

then calculate the average of this exposure across all workers at each establishment i.

          -
      =     .                                                                                             (2)

where  is the share of workers in the establishment belonging to a specific racial category.

A larger value of this racial exposure index suggests workers of the dominant race/ethnicity in an

establishment are more heavily exposed to same-race peers in other establishments in the same

sub-region. We calculate a similar measure for exposure of workers to college-educated workers

of the same race in this local area.

     We then interact these two variables with the employment density and share college-

educated, respectively, to test whether returns to employment density and share college in terms


10
  For example, unobserved place attributes may attract many firms in the same industry even without spillovers.
This issue represents a common concern in empirical estimates of agglomeration economies, motivating for example
Rosenthal and Strange's (2003) focus on establishment births and Ellison et al.'s (2010) focus on co-agglomeration.

                                                        10
of firm productivity depend upon establishment employees' interaction opportunities with same-

race workers in other establishments.

      =   + - + -  +  + +  ,                                                                                 (3)

where  is a vector containing the two exposure variables, and  is a diagonal matrix containing

the parameters for the two interaction terms. The models also include a vector of controls capturing

the racial composition of establishment employment ( ).

3.2 Data

     Our TFP models are estimated using a combination of confidential datasets based on the Long

Form of the 2000 U.S. Decennial Census and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The

confidential long-form sample provides detailed geographic information on individual residential

and work location down to the census block level, and the LBD identifies the zip code of every

establishment. We restrict ourselves to manufacturing establishments that participate in the 2002

Annual Survey of Manufacturers, and merge in data on estimated establishment capital stock

(Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger 2016). 11 For each establishment, we observe revenue, materials

cost, number of employees, estimated capital stock of structures, and estimated capital stock of

equipment in 2002. We further restrict our sample to the 49 Consolidated Metropolitan and

Metropolitan Statistical Areas with populations over 1 million.

     Starting with our sample of establishments in large metropolitan areas, we link information

from the census long form following Moretti (2004) and Hellerstein et al. (1999). First, we assign

establishments into zip code by three-digit industry NAICS code cells to represent an

"establishment". We then use the census block of work matched to the zip code and industry of




11
  We thank Cheryl Grim at the US Census Bureau for both providing this data and providing advice in terms of its
application.

                                                       11
employment from the decennial census data to calculate the fraction of workers in each cell who

have four-years of college or more. This college educated share is multiplied by establishment

total employment to estimate the number of college-educated workers, and one minus this share is

multiplied by employment to estimate the number of non-college educated workers. 12 We use the

same strategy to calculate the fraction of workers who are non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic

African-American, Non-Hispanic Asian or Pacific Islander, and Hispanic for each

"establishment".

     Then, we use the census defined residential Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs), which are

geographically contiguous areas that contain a population of 100,000 residents or more, as our

definition of local labor market areas within each metropolitan area. Residential PUMAs provide

us with a local area that is larger than zip code, since we use zip code to define three digit industry

establishment clusters for merging data on worker education and race, and yet still small enough

to allow a minimum of 10 PUMA's in each metropolitan area in our sample. 13 We then merge

establishments into the residential PUMAs and use the long form decennial census data to calculate

employment density and share of employees with four years of college based on manufacturing

workers in each PUMA, omitting the employment associated with an establishment's own three

digit NAICS code industry. We also calculate the fraction of manufacturing workers who are non-

Hispanic White, non-Hispanic African American, non-Hispanic Asian or Pacific Islander, and

Hispanic in each PUMA in this case omitting the employment in the establishment zip code by




12
   In cases for which we cannot match to an establishment zip code, we base our estimates on industry-PUMA cells.
13
   The census also defines workplace PUMAs, but these areas are very uneven in size across states and often much
larger than residential PUMAs, sometimes encompassing entire central cities.


                                                       12
three digit industry cell since we are trying to capture establishment employee interactions with

employees of other establishments in the PUMA. 14

     As noted above, we use the decennial Census data to calculate: 1. the share of the workforce

at each establishment i that is White, Black, Hispanic, or Asian-American ( ) based on the

establishment's industry-zip code cell, and 2. the share of the manufacturing workforce in each

PUMA j that is of a given race r omitting the employment associated with the establishment cell

 -                                                                     -
(  ). Using these shares and aggregating individual own race exposure (  ) across all employees

in an establishment cell, see equation (2) above, we calculate the average exposure of workers in

an establishment to manufacturing workers of the same race in the establishment's PUMA. We

calculate a similar measure for exposure of workers in an industry-zip code cell to college-educated

workers of the same race in this PUMA, again omitting college educated workers from the zip

code- three digit industry cell, where share of college educated manufacturing workers of a given

race is relative to all college-educated manufacturing employment. As discussed above, we then

interact these two variables with the PUMA-manufacturing employment density and the PUMA-

manufacturing share college-educated, respectively. We also include direct controls for the

estimated racial composition of the workers in each establishment (i.e. industry-zip code cell).

     The summary statistics of all variables are presented in Table 2.

3.3 Results

     The results of our initial translog model in equation (1) are shown in Column 1 of Table 2. 15

We estimate the conditional correlation between establishment productivity and employment

density finding that a one-standard-deviation increase in employment density (SD=1.032) and in


14
   We first match each plant in the 2002 Census of Manufacturing firms with a plant in the Standard Statistical
Establishment List (SSEL) data by plant ID. The SSEL data are used to assign a PUMA ID to each plant through the
census tract-PUMA cross-reference file.
15
   A full set of estimates for the first three columns of Table 2 are shown in Appendix Table A1.

                                                      13
share college (SD=0.1060) in a local work area PUMA are associated with 0.030 and 0.022 log

points increase in net revenue, respectively. The share college estimate is comparable in magnitude

to Moretti's cross-MSA estimates of between 0.035 and 0.049 for human capital externality

spillovers for a one standard deviation increase in share college in an MSA, especially considering

that our estimate is reduced substantially by the inclusion of the control for employment density,

which was not included in Moretti's model. All models control for three digit industry and MSA

fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the PUMA level.

   We next estimate equation (3), which includes the interactions of agglomeration and share

college with the establishment's average own race exposure of workers. These results are shown

in column 2 of Table 3. We find a strong, statistically significant estimate on the interaction

between employment density and workers' average exposure to own-race manufacturing workers

in the PUMA (row 2). A one standard deviation increase in exposure to own race or ethnicity

workers (SD=0.207) implies an increase in the effect of employment density of 0.019, relative to

a baseline effect of employment density (column 1 row 1) of 0.029. In fact, our estimates suggest

that there is no relationship between productivity and employment density for an establishment

whose workers have no exposure to same-race workers in the PUMA. In other words, increased

density of employment is associated with increases in establishment's productivity, but likely only

if the increased density comes from an increase in workers of the same race as that establishment's

workers. A zero return to density for non-White firms in predominantly White local work areas is

consistent with the GSS results showing significant relative social isolation of Black workers from

Whites even in all-White workplaces.

   The estimated interaction between firm average exposure to same-race college-educated

workers and share college-educated workers in a PUMA (row 4), while not quite statistically



                                                14
significant in column 2 (p-value=.11), is in the expected direction and sizable, with nearly the same

magnitude as the estimate in column 1 of the direct estimate on share college-educated in the

PUMA. While noisily estimated, the standardized effect of exposure to own race college educated

workers is 0.041, relative to a baseline effect (column 1 row 3) of 0.203. The direct effect of share

college falls from 0.20 to 0.10 with the inclusion of the interaction term. An establishment with

zero exposure to college-educated workers in the PUMA who are the same race as its own workers

is estimated to have an association between productivity and college-educated workers in the

PUMA that is one-half the magnitude of the relationship for the average establishment, according

to the point estimates.

     A common concern in the agglomeration literature is that workers may sort across firms or

locations based on the unobserved attributes of either the firms or the locations. Unlike across-

metropolitan areas studies (Glaeser and Maré 2001; Combes et al. 2008), Fu and Ross (2013) and

Ananat et al. (2018) document that the within-metropolitan area, across-local work area

correlations of employment density with both observable worker human capital and worker race

are near zero. However, these studies suggest that workers may sort over education levels of work

locations based on individual education. Therefore, following Fu and Ross (2013), we use the

decennial census data to estimate a wage model for prime-age, full-time male workers in our large

metropolitan areas that includes controls for residential census tract fixed effects as a proxy for the

unobserved human capital of workers, as well as a standard set of individual demographic

variables. 16 If workers sort across residential locations based on permanent income, these fixed

effects may act as a partial control function for the unobserved productivity of workers (Bayer and


16
  Prime-age workers are defined as 30-59 years of age, and full time is defined as usual hours worked per week 35
or greater. Wages are calculated as last year's earnings divided by the product of number of weeks worked last year
and usual hours worked per week. Our demographic controls include categorical variables by race and ethnicity,
age, education, family structure, and immigration status. See Ananat et al. (2018) for additional details.

                                                        15
Ross 2006; Fu and Ross 2013). For each establishment, we calculate a proxy for unobserved

human capital by averaging the estimated census tract fixed effects from the wage regression over

the residential location of the workers matched to each three-digit industry by zip code

establishment cell. 17 This measure of worker human capital is then included in the translog

production function as a fifth input.

    In column 3, we present our results after including this new control for the unobserved human

capital of workers at each establishment. 18 The effect of the within-PUMA, own race exposure of

an establishment's workers on the return to density is very stable to the inclusion of controls for

worker human capital, as expected given the low correlation between employment density and

both worker race and education. Therefore, while establishment TFP depends strongly on the

unobserved productivity of the establishment's workers, we find no evidence that workers are

sorting based on those attributes over employment density. However, the relationship between an

establishment's worker's own race match on return to share college increases by 19 percent and is

statistically significant after the inclusion of this control for worker unobserved productivity,

suggesting that, if anything, the omission of worker unobservables biases these estimates

downwards. As a result, the estimated return to share college for an establishment with zero same-

race exposure is now only 12 percent of the original estimated return to share college in column 1.

    Column 4 of Table 3 presents robustness checks for the final model in Column 3 by adding

PUMA fixed effects as well as controls for three-digit industry dummy variables interacted with

PUMA employment density and share college. The PUMA fixed effects control non-




17
   The residential fixed effects have substantial explanatory power eroding the return to educational attainment in
wage regressions by about 25% (Fu and Ross 2013) and the Black-White wage gap by half (Ananat et al. 2018).
18
   In order to illustrate the effect of the mean tract FE on firm TFP, we also estimated the Cobb-Douglas model with
this control and find that the mean tract FE variable has a strong positive effect on TFP with standardized effect size
of 0.017 log points and a t-statistic of 3.23.

                                                          16
parametrically for any general relationship between establishment location and TFP arising from

location-specific productivity differences or correlated productivity shocks within locations. The

three-digit-industry interactions allow the returns to employment density and share college to vary

across different types of manufacturing industries, since establishments in different industries

likely differ in their innate productivity attributes. These changes greatly increase both the

magnitude and the precision of the estimates on the employment density and share college

interactions with own race exposure, doubling the own race effect for the returns to employment

density and increasing the own race effect for share college by two and one-half times. The

inclusion of the PUMA fixed effects to control for location-specific productivity is entirely

responsible for the increases in the interaction estimate magnitudes.

     In order to consider normative effects on workers, we also examine in Table 4 the impact of

exposure to own-race or own-ethnicity workers on the productivity of firms at which non-White

workers are employed, essentially measuring racial differences in worker exposure to

establishment productivity. Since Whites are the majority and tend to work at majority White

establishments, White workers tend to have a relatively high exposure to establishments who on

average have workers with high exposure to other own race workers within the establishment's

PUMA. White workers' average exposure (over all establishment workers) within work location

is 0.634 (column 1), while the exposures for African-American, Hispanic and Asian workers are

lower at 0.487, 0.407 and 0.406, respectively (column 2). 19 Multiplying the estimated coefficient

of 0.0913 (column 4) from column 3 of Table 3 by the mean employment density for the

establishment sample of 0.307 (column 3) implies a lower bound Black-White gap in exposure to

establishment productivity of 0.4 percentage points ((0.635-0.487)*0.0913*0.307), while the


19
  The average exposure rates are calculated by estimating the mean exposure index across establishments weighted
by the number of estimated workers of each race at each establishment.

                                                       17
larger coefficient from column 4 of Table 3 after controlling for PUMA fixed effects and

differential returns by three-digit industry implies an upper bound contribution of 0.8 percentage

points. Further, the exposure gaps for Hispanics and Asian workers are 50 percent larger than the

Black-White gap. These results are summarized in Panel 1 of Table 4. Similarly, the White,

African-American, Hispanic, and Asian worker exposures to their establishment's worker's own-

race match for college-educated workers are 0.665, 0.499, 0.376 and 0.419, respectively, and using

the estimates from column 3 of Table 3 these differences imply productivity exposure differences

of 0.9 percentage points, with gaps for Hispanics and Asians being 70 and 50 percent larger,

respectively. See Panel 2 of Table 4.

       If the hypothesis that information spillovers are segregated within same-race networks holds,

then high worker exposure to workers at surrounding establishments of the same race should

matter more for productivity in industries that rely on innovation and high-intensity social

interactions. We test this implication in Columns 2 through 5 of Table 4. Starting with column 3

of Table 2 as our baseline model (column 1 repeats these results), we show results for subsamples

split by how much establishments rely on innovation, i.e. whether the three-digit industry has a

high vs. low rate of patent production or has high versus low R&D spending. 20 For both patent

activity and R&D spending, share college/human capital externality effects are significantly higher

in the high-patent/high R&D spending industries than in the below median industries. Results are

less clear for employment density with larger agglomeration effects in low patent industries and

similar estimates over R&D spending.




20
     We are grateful to William Kerr at the Harvard Business School for providing this data (Kerr 2008).

                                                           18
4. Discussion

   In this paper, we examine the role of race and ethnicity in shaping the productivity spillovers

experienced by manufacturing firms operating within large metropolitan areas. First, we use the

General Social Survey to document communication barriers between Whites and Blacks, finding

that the racial differences in the social distance that Black workers report with respect to Whites

persists even among Blacks who work in all-White firms. These results suggest that Blacks

experience relatively little access to White workplace networks. Next, we use confidential

establishment data to estimate a model of firm total factor productivity for a sample of

manufacturing establishments, and we find strong evidence that the productivity returns to local

employment density and share college rise as the average exposure of workers in a firm to same-

race peers in the local work area or PUMA rises. These spillovers are quite low or even zero for

firms whose employees lack same-race peers at surrounding firms. Further, for human capital

externalities, same-race exposure matters even more in patent-intensive and R&D spending

industries.

   These findings are consistent with the idea that limited social interactions between workers

across race or ethnicity may have negative impacts on the overall productivity of manufacturing

firms and innovation in the manufacturing sector, as well as particularly large negative impacts on

majority non-White firms. We cannot distinguish whether these differences in spillovers arise from

implicit barriers to interracial social interactions or from working conditions and other institutional

barriers to communication. Our approach is unable to answer the question of whether this

differential exposure to establishment productivity leads to welfare differences between Blacks

and Whites, but evidence in Fu and Ross (2013) and Ananat et al (2018) imply that Black workers

experience lower wage returns than do Whites from exposure to higher levels of agglomeration.



                                                  19
     It is also worth noting, however, that the lower firm productivity among firms that have a worse

racial and ethnic match with the local employment area may also be harmful to the wages and

productivity of Whites, as it reduces the effective size of the agglomeration from which they can

benefit. 21 It is less harmful to Whites than to minorities merely because Whites currently make up

the majority of most manufacturing employment. Looming demographic changes suggest,

therefore, that social distance between races could become more of a drag on productivity for

Whites, and for the economy overall, going forward, unless proactive steps are taken to reduce

racial and ethnic isolation. Our results suggest that this holds in particular for high-innovation

industries expected to drive the nation's economic growth. Our findings thus provide additional

motivation for policies to improve race relations and increase interracial contact.




21
  It is also possible that White workers benefit from this phenomenon if the increased concentration of social
interactions with the members of a worker's own race leads to interactions for Whites with individuals who on
average are more skilled and have more advanced knowledge to share. See Logan and Zhang (2013) and De la Roca,
Ellen, and O'Regan (2014) for examples of evidence that Whites may benefit from segregation.

                                                     20
References

Ananat, Elizabeth, Shihe Fu, Stephen L. Ross, 2018. Race-specific Urban Wage Premia and the

   Black-White Wage Gap. Journal of Urban Economics 108, 141-153.

Audretsch, David B. and Feldman, Maryann P. 1996. R&D Spillovers and the Geography of

   Innovation and Production. American Economic Review, 86, 630-640.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul. 2005. Social Preferences and the Response to

   Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 917-62.

Bayer, Patrick, and Stephen L. Ross. 2006. Identifying Individual and Group Effects in the

   Presence of Sorting: a Neighborhood Effects Application. Working Paper no. 12211,

   National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bayer, Patrick, Stephen L. Ross, and Giorgio Topa. 2008. Place of Work and Place of Residence:

   Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116:

   1150-96.

Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri. 2006. Identifying Human-Capital Externalities: Theory with

   Applications. The Review of Economic Studies 73(2): 381-412.

Combes, Pierre-Philipi, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2008. Spatial Wage Disparities:

   Sorting Matters! Journal of Urban Economics 63: 723-42.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Laurent Gobillon. 2015. The Empirics of Agglomeration Economics.

   In The Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics Vol 5 (G. Duranton, V. Henderson, W.

   Strange). Elsevier BV.

De la Roca, Jorge, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Katherine M. O'Regan. 2014. Race and Neighborhoods

   in the 21st Century: What does Segregation Mean Today? Regional Science and Urban

   Economics 47:138­151.



                                               21
De la Roca, Jorge and Diego Puga. 2017. Learning by working in big cities. Review of Economic

   Studies 84(1): 106-142.

De Paola, Maria. 2010. Absenteeism and Peer Interaction Effects: Evidence from an Italian Public

   Institute. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 39(3): 420-28.

Davis, Donald R., Jonathan I. Dingel, Joan Monras and Eduardo Morales. 2019. How Segregated

   is Urban Consumption? Journal of Political Economy 127(4): 1684-1738.

Echinique, Federico and Roland G. Fryer, 2005. On the Measurement of Segregation. NBER

   Working Paper #11258.

Ellison, Glen, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. What Causes Industry Agglomeration?

   Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns. American Economic Review 100: 1195-213.

Feldman, Maryann P. and David B. Audretsch. 1999. Innovation in Cities: Science-based

   Diversity, Specialization, and Localized Competition. European Economic Review 43: 409-

   29.

Fletcher, Jason, Stephen L. Ross and Yuxiu Zhang. 2020. The Determinants and Consequences of

   Friendship Composition. Journal of Urban Economics 116: #103241.

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim and John Haltiwanger. 2016. Reallocation in the Great Recession:

   Cleansing or Not? Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1): S293-S331.

Fu, Shihe and Stephen L. Ross. 2013. Wage Premia in Employment Clusters: How Important is

   Worker Heterogeneity? Journal of Labor Economics 21: 271-304.

Glaeser, Edward L. and David C Maré. 2001. Cities and Skills. Journal of Labor Economics, 19:

   316-42.




                                              22
Guryan, Jonathan, Kory Kroft and Matt Notowidigdo. 2009. Peer effects in the workplace:

   Evidence from random groupings in professional golf tournaments. American Economic

   Journal: Applied Economics 1(4): 34-68.

Hellerstein, Judith K., Melissa McInerney, and David Neumark. 2011. Neighbors and Co-

   Workers: The Importance of Residential Labor Market Networks. Journal of Labor Economics

   29(4): 659-95.

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney. 2008. Spatial Mismatch or Racial

   Mismatch. Journal of Urban Economics 64: 464-69.

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1999. Wages, Productivity, and

   Worker Characteristics: Evidence from Plant Level Production Functions and Wages

   Equations. Journal of Labor Economics 17: 209-47.

Ioannides, Yannis M. and Linda Datcher Loury. 2004. Job Information Networks, Neighborhood

   Effects, and Inequality. Journal of Economic Literature 42: 1056-93.

Kerr, William R. 2008. Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion.

   The Review of Economics and Statistics 90: 518-37.

Logan, John R. and Weiwei Zhang. 2013. Separate but Equal: Asian Nationalities in the U.S.

   Report, US2010 Project.

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti 2009. Peers at Work. American Economic Review 99(1): 112-

   45.

Moody, James. 2001. Race, School Integration, and Friendship Segregation in America. American

         Journal of Sociology 107(3): 679-716.

Moretti, Enrico. 2004. Workers' Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from Plant

   Level Production Functions. American Economic Review 94: 656-90.



                                                 23
Nanda, Ramana and Jesper B. Sorenson. 2010. Workplace Peers and Entrepreneurship.

   Management Science 56: 1116-26.

Rosenthal, Stuart and William Strange. 2008. The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers.

   Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2): 373-89.

Rosenthal, Stuart and William Strange. 2003. Geography, Industrial Organization, and

   Agglomeration. Review of Economics and Statistics, 85: 377-93.

Ross, Stephen L. 2011. Social Interactions Within Cities: Neighborhood Environments and Peer

   Relationships. In Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning (Eds. N. Brooks, K. Donaghy,

   G. Knapp). Oxford University Press.




                                             24
Figure 1: Relative Closeness to Whites over Workplace Fraction White

Notes: The dashed line represents the product of workplace fraction White and the coefficient
estimate on workplace fraction White (i.e., 1.52) from a model of the closeness to Whites
relative to Black closeness (Column 3 of Table 1). The solid line takes the value of the race
coefficient at a zero percent White workplace, and then adds the product of the percent White in
workplace times the sum of the level and the race interaction coefficients on percent White in
workplace: -2.613+workplace fraction White*(1.52-0.606).




                                               25
Table 1: Relationship between workplace racial composition and responses to survey questions about race
                                                                                 Difference between how
                                                                                 close to Whites and how
                                                                                     close to Blacks (-
                            Closeness to Blacks (1=     Closeness to Whites          8=much closer to           Attitude toward gov't
                               not at all close to     (1= not at all close to    Blacks, 8=much closer        help for Blacks (1=too      Opposed to interracial
                                 9=very close)             9=very close)                to Whites)               little, 3=too much)            marriage
                                                                          Summary Statistics
Black mean                            7.625                     5.921                          -1.704                  1.242                        .035
White mean                            5.439                     6.997                          1.558                   1.991                        .091
                                                                        Coefficient Estimates
Black                               1.376***                  -1.274***                   -2.613***                  -0.754***                    -0.079*
                                     (0.198)                    (0.206)                        (0.235)                 (0.054)                    (0.033)
Workplace % White                   -1.226***                   0.273*                     1.520***                    0.051                       -0.042
                                     (0.136)                    (0.127)                        (0.163)                 (0.052)                    (0.031)
Black*workplace %
White                                0.980**                    0.438                          -0.606                  0.026                       0.025
                                     (0.320)                    (0.320)                        (0.383)                 (0.078)                    (0.046)
N                                     6,505                     6,469                          6,437                   6,603                       3,964

Notes: Estimates based on Black and non-Hispanic White sample respondents to the General Social Survey (GSS) in relevant years. Each column represents a
specific survey variable from the GSS except for the last column, which is based on the difference between the survey responses to the two preceding questions.
The first panel presents sample means, and the second panel presents coefficient estimates where each column contains the results of a single regression. The
regression model specification includes indicators for year of survey and for missing report of workplace % White and its interaction with Black;
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                               26
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for the Establishment Sample
Variables                                                         Mean             Standard Deviation
Revenue minus Materials Cost                                      5055.8               176398.3
Non College Employment                                           57641.8                213107
College Employment                                               17096.8               133139.6
Equipment Capital ($1,000s)                                       1762.7                16149.4
Structure Capital ($1,000)                                         632.6                 8725.2
Mean Tract FE                                                    -0.0287                 0.0931
Employment Density                                                0.3065                 1.0318
Own-Race Exposure Index                                           0.5564                 0.2073
Share College                                                     0.2598                 0.106
Share College Own Race Exp Index                                   0.574                 0.2331
Firm Percent Black                                                0.0773                  0.13
Firm Percent Hispanic                                             0.1859                 0.2302
Firm Percent Asian                                                0.0836                 0.1554
Firm Percent Other Race                                           0.0055                 0.0326
Single Establishment Firm                                         0.8663                 0.3404
Zip Code Missing                                                  0.2284                 0.4198
Sample size                                                                  111,695
Notes: The table presents the means and standard deviations of establishment and local work area
attributes for the large metropolitan area manufacturing establishment sample.




                                                       27
Table 3: Total Factor Productivity Regressions with Controls for Local Work Area

                                                                         Translog Model with     Own Race Translog             Industry
                                                                         Own Race Exposure        Model with Mean          Interactions and
Variables                                          Translog model              Indices               Tract FE                 PUMA FE


Employment Density                               0.0288*** (16.68)          -0.0012 (-0.10)         -0.0001 (-0.00)              NA
                                                                                   **                       ***
Density*Race Exposure Index                                                 0.0919 (2.57)          0.0913         (2.94)   0.1851*** (10.45)


Share College                                     0.2033*** (8.30)           0.096 (1.30)           0.0253 (0.34)                NA
Share College*Race College Exposure
Index                                                                        0.1779 (1.59)          0.2115* (1.91)         0.4897*** (2.87)


R Squared                                                0.9086                   0.9086                  0.9088                 0.9106
Sample Size                                             111695                    111695                  111538                111538
Notes: Coefficient estimates of establishment revenue net of materials cost on a translog model of production where inputs are capital
equipment, capital structure, college educated labor and non-college educated labor. Each column presents estimates from a single
regression. Column 1 presents the baseline estimates with just the controls for density, share college, factor inputs and metropolitan area
and three-digit industry fixed effects. The next column adds controls for the same race exposure to workers and college educated workers
plus the interaction of these variables with employment density and share college, respectively. The third column expands the translog
production function to include the average unobserved quality based on the residential locations of workers in the establishment's zip code
by 3-digit industry cell and the tract FE estimates from the wage model. The fourth column adds the interaction of employment density and
share college with the three-digit industry dummies and PUMA fixed effects. College and non-college labor are based on total labor inputs
and the fraction of workers in the Census long form data in an establishment's zip code by 3-digit industry cell who have a four year college
degree. Employment density and share college are calculated for all manufacturing workers in the census long form sample working in the
establishment's PUMA excluding the workers in the establishment's zip code by 3-digit industry cell. The exposure indices are the average
exposure of all workers in the establishment's zip code by three-digit industry cell to manufacturing workers or college educated
manufacturing workers of the same race in the establishment's PUMA (omitting employment in the establishment's zip code). Establishment
net revenue is estimated for respondents of the 1997 Census of Manufacturers in metropolitan areas with populations over 1 million
residents. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are clustered on PUMA of employment. T-statistics in parentheses.




                                                                              28
Table 4: Exposure to Establishment TFP Gains from Agglomeration
                            Differential Establishment Average Worker Exposure to Own Race
Worker Race                  Establishment Exposure                 Employment Density                  Racial Difference
                             White         Minority           Sample Mean               Estimate
Black                        0.634           0.487                0.307                   0.091               0.0041
Hispanic                     0.634           0.407                0.307                   0.091               0.0063
Asian                        0.634           0.406                0.307                   0.091               0.0064
                   Differential Establishment Average College Educated Worker Exposure to Own Race
Worker Race                  Establishment Exposure                    Share College                    Racial Difference
                             White         Minority           Sample Mean               Estimate
Black                        0.665           0.499                0.260                   0.212               0.0091
Hispanic                     0.665           0.376                0.260                   0.212               0.0159
Asian                        0.665           0.419                0.260                   0.212               0.0136
Notes: Panel 1 presents differences based on firm TFP returns from employment density, and Panel 2 presents
differences based on returns from share college in surrounding area. Column 1 present the average exposure of White
workers to their establishments' workers average exposure to own race workers in the surrounding PUMA, and column 2
presents the average exposure for minority workers. Column 3 presents the sample mean employment density or share
college exposure for establishments, and column 4 presents the estimated effects of establishment same race exposure on
returns to density and share college from column 3 Table 3. The final column presents the result of differencing minority
exposure from White exposure multiplying by the sample mean for employment density or share college and then
multiplying by the effect estimate.




                                                                      29
Table 5: Total Factor Productivity Regressions by Industry Patent Levels

                                                Own Race Translog       Industry Patent       Industry Patent       Industry R&D         Industry R&D
                                                 Model with Mean        Activity Above        Activity Below        Activity Above       Activity Below
Variables                                           Tract FE               Median                Median                Median               Median


Density*Race Exposure Index                       0.0913*** (2.94)      0.0952** (2.24)       0.2049*** (6.24)     0.1609*** (4.10)      0.1611*** (4.10)

Share College*Race College Exposure
Index                                             0.2115* (1.91)        0.7358*** (3.04)       0.0039 (0.02)       0.7386*** (2.92)       0.0551 (0.27)


R Squared                                               0.9106                  0.9049               0.9162                0.908                0.9125
Sample Size                                             111538                  65412                46126                61194                  50344
Notes: Coefficients estimates of establishment revenue net of materials cost on a translog model of production where inputs are capital equipment,
capital structure, college educated labor and non-college educated labor. Each column presents estimates from a single regression. Column 1 presents the
estimates with controls for unobserved worker quality in the translog production function, plus density, share college, factor inputs and metropolitan area
and three-digit industry fixed effects. The next four columns present estimates for this specification estimated separately for samples in three-digit
industries with above and below median levels of patent activity and above and below median levels of R&D activity. College and non-college labor are
based on total labor inputs and the fraction of workers in the Census long form data in an establishment's zip code by 3-digit industry cell who have a
four year college degree. Employment density and share college are calculated for all manufacturing workers in the census long form sample working in
the establishment's PUMA excluding the workers in the establishment's zip code by 3-digit industry cell. The exposure indices are the average exposure
of all workers in the establishment's zip code by three-digit industry cell to manufacturing workers or college educated manufacturing workers of the
same race in the establishment's PUMA (omitting employment in the establishment's zip code). Establishment net revenue is estimated for respondents of
the 1997 Census of Manufacturers in metropolitan areas with populations over 1 million residents. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are clustered
on PUMA of employment. T-statistics in parentheses.




                                                                              30
Table A1: Total Factor Productivity Regressions with Controls for Local Work Area


                                                                          Translog Model with   Own Race Translog
                                                                          Own Race Exposure      Model with Mean
Variables                                            Translog model             Indices               Tract FE
Non College Employment                              0.3502***(21.07)       0.3515***(21.37)      0.3461***(21.22)
Non College Employment Squared                      0.0512***(71.91)       0.0515***(76.59)      0.0523***(80.49)
College Employment                                  0.0695***(13.57)       0.0679***(13.15)      0.0745***(15.02)
College Employment Squared                          0.0169***(35.96)       0.0166***(37.01)      0.0159***(37.17)
Equipment Capital                                   0.4729***(27.42)       0.4743***(27.55)      0.4842***(29.21)
Equipment Capital Squared                           0.0217***(22.11)       0.0218***(22.11)      0.0215***(22.06)
Structure Capital                                   0.0872***(21.37)       0.0869***(21.27)      0.0872***(21.44)
Structure Capital Squared                           0.0022***(6.20)         0.0022***(6.19)       0.0023***(6.35)
Mean Tract FE                                                                                    -1.0220***(-4.58)
Mean Tract FE Squared                                                                              0.2806**(2.09)
Equipment Capital*Non College Employment           -0.0600***(-34.96)      -0.0604***(-36.30)   -0.0607***(-35.94)
Equipment Capital*College Employment               -0.0111***(-14.76)      -0.0109***(-14.45)   -0.0110***(-14.85)
Structure Capital*Non College Employment            -0.0027***(-4.47)       -0.0027***(-4.48)    -0.0027***(-4.46)
Structure Capital*College Employment                -0.0014***(-6.38)       -0.0014***(-6.39)    -0.0014***(-6.16)
Equipment Capital*Structure Capital                 -0.0053***(-8.22)       -0.0053***(-8.13)    -0.0054***(-8.22)
Non College Employment*College Employment           -0.0034***(-4.30)       -0.0033***(-4.16)    -0.0031***(-3.95)
Employment Density                                  0.0288*** (16.68)         -0.0012 (-0.10)      -0.0001 (-0.00)
Own-Race Exposure Index                                                        -0.065 (-0.70)      -0.0567 (-0.63)
Density*Race Exposure Index                                                  0.0919** (2.57)     0.0913*** (2.94)
Share College                                       0.2033*** (8.30)          0.096 (1.30)        0.0253 (0.34)
Share College Own Race Exp Index                                              0.0534 (0.42)       0.0236 (0.20)
Share College*Coll Race Exp Index                                             0.1779 (1.59)        0.2115* (1.91)
Mean Tract FE*Equipment Capital                                                                     0.0314(0.92)
Mean Tract FE*Structure Capital                                                                    -0.0030(-0.42)
Mean Tract FE*Non College Employment                                                             0.0722***(2.66)
Mean Tract FE*College Employment                                                                 0.0389***(5.18)
Firm Percent Black                                                            -0.0377 (0.93)       -0.0311 (0.79)
Firm Percent Hispanic                                                       -0.08473** (2.06)    -0.07597* (1.92)
Firm Percent Asian                                                          -0.07857** (2.04)    -0.06999* (1.89)
Firm Percent Other Race                                                       -0.0981 (1.57)       -0.0914 (1.46)
Guryan controls for emp den                           -0.5166(-0.02)          -3.8784(-0.12)       -4.6216(-0.16)
Guryan controls for college share                    -6.2514**(-2.19)        -5.8335**(-1.97)     -5.3116*(-1.82)
Guryan controls for emp den*Race Exposure Index                                2.7116*(1.77)        2.1239(1.43)
Guryan controls for college share*Coll Race Exposure Index                    -0.3994(-1.62)       -0.3420(-1.50)
R Squared                                                 0.9086                  0.9086               0.9088
Sample size                                               111695                  111695               111538


                                                     31
Notes: Coefficients estimates of firm revenue net of materials cost on a translog model of production where inputs are
capital equipment, capital structure, college educated labor and non-college educated labor plus for the last column average
unobserved quality based on the worker residential locations and the tract FE estimates from the wage model. Each column
contains estimates for a single regression, and these regressions are the same as the regressions presented in the first three
columns of Table 2. The regression model is estimated for respondents of the 1997 Census of Manufacturers for in the
metropolitan areas with populations over 1 million residents. The regression also includes metropolitan area and three-digit
industry fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are clustered on PUMA of employment. T-statistics in
parentheses.




                                                        32
