                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON ELECTIONS:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES

                                       Thomas Fujiwara
                                        Karsten Müller
                                        Carlo Schwarz

                                      Working Paper 28849
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28849


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We are grateful to Pablo Barbera, Levi Boxell, Matt Gentzkow, Ro'ee Levy, Alexey Makarin,
Jesse Shapiro, James Snyder, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, as well as seminar participants at Princeton
University, Imperial College, Warwick University, Bocconi University, University of California
San Diego, OPESS, Università di Bergamo, the 2021 ASSA Conference, and the NBER Political
Economy Spring 2021 Meeting for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Thomas Fujiwara, Karsten Müller, and Carlo Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Social Media on Elections: Evidence from the United States
Thomas Fujiwara, Karsten Müller, and Carlo Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 28849
May 2021
JEL No. D72

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how social media affects election outcomes in the United States. We use variation in
the number of Twitter users across counties induced by early adopters at the 2007 South by
Southwest (SXSW) festival, a key event in Twitter's rise to popularity. We show that this
variation is unrelated to observable county characteristics and electoral outcomes before the
launch of Twitter. Our results indicate that Twitter lowered the Republican vote share in the 2016
and 2020 presidential elections, but had limited effects on Congress elections and previous
presidential elections. Evidence from survey data, primary elections, and a text analysis of
millions of tweets suggests that Twitter's relatively liberal content may have persuaded voters
with moderate views to vote against Donald Trump.

Thomas Fujiwara                                 Carlo Schwarz
Department of Economics                         Bocconi University
Princeton University                            Department of Economics
131 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building              Milano
Princeton, NJ 08544                             Italy
and NBER                                        carlo.schwarz@unibocconi.it
fujiwara@princeton.edu

Karsten Müller
The Julis-Rabinowitz Center for
Public Policy and Finance
216-1 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
karstenm@princeton.edu
1       Introduction
Does social media affect election outcomes? A popular narrative holds that Twitter
played a decisive role in both recent American presidential elections and the United
Kingdom's "Brexit" referendum. Many see this as part of social media's broader influence
on political polarization and the re-emergence of populist politicians in many countries.
The U.S. Federal Election Commissioner, for example, has argued that Facebook "has
no idea how seriously it is hurting democracy" (NPR, 2020a).1
       An alternative view suggests that social media platforms are biased against con-
servatives (e.g., NPR, 2020b; Wall Street Journal, 2020) and that its younger, relatively
left-leaning user base unlikely to tilt elections towards right-wing politicians (e.g., Boxell
et al., 2017, 2018). However, there is limited evidence that can be used to evaluate these
contrasting (causal) claims.
       This paper focuses on the effects of Twitter, a platform used by almost a quarter
of American adults. We estimate how a county's number of Twitter users affects election
results by exploiting a persistent network effect sparked by early Twitter adoption,
building on M¨   uller and Schwarz (2019). Although it was launched in March 2006,
Twitter's popularity increased rapidly after its advertising campaign at the South by
Southwest festival (SXSW) in March 2007. The SXSW festival was also key for Twitter's
geographical diffusion: counties with more SXSW followers who joined during the
2007 festival saw disproportionately higher growth of Twitter adoption compared to
counties with SXSW followers who already joined before the festival. Consistent with
path dependence in technology adoption, this difference in Twitter use across counties
persists.
       Our identification strategy leverages the 2007 SXSW festival as a shock to early
Twitter adoption that is uncorrelated with pre-existing election results. Conditional
on geographic controls and previous interest in the SXSW Twitter account, a county's
number of SXSW followers who joined in March 2007 is essentially uncorrelated with a
host of county characteristics. It is also unrelated to election outcomes before Twitter's
launch (going back as far as 1924) and during the period it had fewer users (between
2006 and 2012). However, the number of SXSW followers who joined in March 2007 is
correlated with Twitter usage in 2016, and has predictive power for the 2016 and 2020
presidential election results.
    1
   See, for example, The New Yorker (2016); New York Times (2017); Allcott and Gentzkow (2017);
The Guardian (2018); UK Parliament (2019).


                                              1
      We estimate that a 10% increase in a county's number of Twitter users lowered the
vote share of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump by 0.2 percentage points
(p.p.) in both the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections. The implied persuasion rates
are 8.6% and 9.4%, respectively, which are smaller than the estimated pro-Republican
effect of Fox News (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017), the
pro-Democrat effect of the Washington Post (Gerber et al., 2009), or the effect of
get-out-the-vote canvassing on turnout (Gerber and Green, 2000).
      For presidential elections before 2016, we find effects that are small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. The same holds true for House and Senate races, including
the 2016 and 2020 elections. Twitter adoption thus lowered Trump's vote share but
did not do so for Republican candidates in congressional races in the same election.
Together with other "placebo tests," this pattern bolsters confidence that our estimates
are capturing the effect of Twitter, which contains more content on presidential than
congressional candidates.
      An earlier draft of this paper, using only data up to the 2018 election, was posted
online on October 2020. When updating it to include November 2020 election results,
we made no revisions to the research design and regression specifications. In other words,
the sample selection, choice of controls, and variable definitions in the regressions we
report were all decided before the 2020 election results became available. Hence, our
2020 results can be interpreted as a "pre-registered" research design.2
      To shed light on the mechanisms behind these results, we estimate Twitter's effect
on vote choices reported in the 2016 Cooperative Congressional Election Survey (CCES),
primary presidential candidates' approval in the Gallup Daily Tracker, and county-level
results in the 2016 and 2020 presidential primaries. Further, we explore data on the
partisanship of political content on Twitter.
      These exercises yield three findings. First, the CCES results indicate that Twitter's
effect is driven by independents and moderates switching their votes towards the
Democratic candidate (Hillary Clinton). This is consistent with Bayesian updating,
since moderates presumably have weaker priors and are thus more likely to be persuaded.
      Second, we find that Twitter also lowered Trump's vote share during the 2016
primaries, a finding we confirm using individual-level Gallup candidate approval ratings.
   2
    The "pre-registration" document being the October 2020 draft, which is available and "time-
stamped" at Social Science Research Network (SSRN):
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3719998.




                                              2
We find that Twitter decreased Trump's approval ratings and increased Clinton's with
only small effects on relatively more moderate Republican candidates.3
       Third, we document that political content on Twitter has a pro-Democratic slant.
We classify the slant of tweets based on two complementary approaches: one based on
the network of users and one using text of tweets in a machine learning approach in the
spirit of Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010). We apply these methods to the over 460 million
tweets mentioning the presidential candidates in the 2012, 2016, and 2020 elections. We
find a that the number and attention (proxied by "likes") of tweets mentioning Trump
was substantially larger than that of those mentioning Clinton and Joe Biden. Moreover,
tweets about Trump in 2016 and 2020 70% more more likely to have Democratic rather
than Republican slant. Overall, our results are consistent with Twitter and its relatively
pro-Democratic content persuading voters with moderate views to not vote for Trump
without inducing a more general negative effect on Republicans.
       From the outset, we stress what our findings do not imply. First, they cannot
speak about social media platforms other than Twitter, such as Facebook. Our empirical
strategy exploits a "shock" specific to early Twitter adoption and we do not have a
credible research design to estimate the effects of other platforms. While many other
platforms share similarities with Twitter, such as being popular among younger and
more educated people in urban areas (Pew Research Center, 2019c), other platforms may
have different effects on political outcomes. Second, our research design cannot separate
the effect of particular types of social media content on Twitter (e.g foreign governments
or misinformation), but rather speaks to the overall effect of Twitter exposure. Third,
given our research design, we estimate a "partial equilibrium" effect of adding Twitter
users to a county while keeping constant other counties' Twitter use. We thus cannot
address whether Twitter had a national-level effect on the election (e.g., Trump's tweets
driving traditional media content).
       Our work contributes to the literature on the impact of media on political outcomes.
Expansions of traditional media such as newspapers, radio, broadcast television, and
cable news have been associated with changes in voter turnout, polarization, and electoral
outcomes.4 While a set of papers studies the effect of overall internet access, the effects
   3
     We also estimate effects for the 2016 and 2020 Democratic primaries, detecting a (positive) effect
for Bernie Sanders in 2020.
   4
     See, for example, Gentzkow (2006); Huber and Arceneaux (2007); DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007);
Gerber et al. (2009, 2011); Gentzkow et al. (2011); Enikolopov et al. (2011); DellaVigna et al. (2014);
Larcinese and Miner (2017); Martin and Yurukoglu (2017); Spenkuch and Toniatti (2018); Chen and
Yang (2019).


                                                  3
of social media per se received less attention.5
      A nascent literature studies the political effects of social media on protest partici-
pation (Howard et al., 2011; Enikolopov et al., 2020; Acemoglu et al., 2017; Fergusson
and Molina, 2021) and xenophobia (M¨      uller and Schwarz, 2020; M¨    uller and Schwarz,
2019; Bursztyn et al., 2019).6 Additionally, a burgeoning field of experimental research
focuses on social media. Bond et al. (2012) and Jones et al. (2017) provide evidence
that online messages on social networks affect voter turnout. Allcott et al. (2020) and
Mosquera et al. (2020) find that individuals who deactivate Facebook react along many
dimensions, including some measures of political polarization. Levy (2021) studies the
effect of randomly assigning Facebook users subscriptions to conservative or liberal
media outlets. Bail et al. (2018) estimate the effect of paying Twitter users to follow a
bot with messages of the opposing political ideology. Perhaps the most related to our
paper is recent work by Rotesi (2019), who finds social media negatively affected the
Democratic vote share in 2012 and 2016 using variation in Twitter adoption resulting
from transfers of NBA players with Twitter accounts.7
      Existing research thus provides an incomplete picture. On one hand, social media
has been painted as a key force behind political change and experimental studies indeed
suggest that social media affects individuals' self-reported political beliefs. On the other
hand, it remains unclear whether social media can indeed persuade voters and affect
elections results at a larger scale. Our paper sheds light on this question by focusing on
how Twitter affects federal elections in the United States.


2       Background: Social Media and Politics
Most Americans use social media platforms or messaging applications. Data from the
Pew Research Center suggest that the most popular services are YouTube (used by
73% of adults in the U.S.), followed by Facebook (69%), and Instagram (37%) (Pew
    5
     There is evidence that broadband internet (Falck et al., 2014; Gavazza et al., 2019; Campante
et al., 2017; Lelkes et al., 2017) and mobile internet (Manacorda and Tesei, 2016; Guriev et al., 2020)
exert political effects.
   6
     For reviews, see DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010), Napoli (2014), Str¨    omberg (2015), Enikolopov
and Petrova (2015), and DellaVigna and Ferrara (2015) and in particular Zhuravskaya et al. (2020) for
the case of social media.
   7
     The difference between Rotesi's results and ours is likely driven by the difference in the local
average treatment effect (LATE). Rotesi relies on variation in Twitter users who follow NBA players. In
contrast, our methodology holds selection into social media constant under arguably milder identifying
assumptions. Our paper also covers a larger set of elections, including 2020.



                                                  4
Research Center, 2019c). 22% of adults in the U.S. use Twitter, a rate similar to that
of Snapchat (24%) and Whatsapp (20%) users. On average, adult users spend more
than an hour a day using social networks (eMarketer, 2019).8
       One popular perspective is that online networks, and social media in particular,
may give rise to so-called "filter bubbles" (Pariser, 2011) or "echo chambers" (Sunstein,
2017). The idea is that social media--unlike traditional mass media outlets--may
facilitate the provision and consumption of one-sided information, either through the
use of algorithms or by allowing individuals to self-select into preferred content. While
there is considerable empirical evidence supporting this idea (e.g. Conover et al., 2011;
Weber et al., 2013; Bessi et al., 2015; Del Vicario et al., 2016; Halberstam and Knight,
2016; Schmidt et al., 2017; Levy, 2021), other studies have found that individuals are
exposed to a wide range of political opinions on social media (Barber´    a, 2014; Bakshy
et al., 2015; Nelson and Webster, 2017; Beam et al., 2018), perhaps even more so than
via traditional media outlets or personal interactions (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2011).
Some work also challenges the notion that increased polarization due to online channels
is quantitatively important (Flaxman et al., 2016; Guess, 2018; Boxell et al., 2019).
       Much of the recent public discussion about the role of social media platforms
has been shaped by controversies, including the consulting firm Cambridge Analytica's
involvement in multiple political campaigns (e.g., The Guardian, 2018); the Russian
Internet Research Agency's efforts to support Trump's election campaign (e.g., New
York Times, 2017); and the role of widely shared false information ("fake news") in both
the 2016 U.S. elections (e.g., Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017) and the Brexit referendum in
the United Kingdom (e.g., UK Parliament, 2019). Both Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump have argued that these factors were instrumental in the 2016 election outcome,
as has former president Barack Obama (The New Yorker, 2016). As Brad Parscale,
Trump's digital media director in 2016, put it: "Facebook and Twitter were the reason
we won this thing. Twitter for Mr. Trump. And Facebook for fundraising" (Wired,
2016). In Appendix Figure A.3, we document that discussions of social media have
become increasingly frequent in major American news outlets. Mentions of Twitter in
particular spiked with the 2016 presidential election when compared to 2012 levels.
       Despite its prominence in the political discourse, the empirical relevance of social
media for electoral outcomes is largely unknown, and some have suggested that concerns
   8
    Pew bases its usage measures on the share of respondents who state they have ever used one of the
online platforms. Twitter reported around 69 million monthly active users in 2019 (see Statista, 2019),
which yields a slightly higher share of around a third of the 210 million adults in the U.S.


                                                  5
may be overblown. As one example, in the 2016 presidential election, Trump received
fewer votes from demographic groups with higher propensities to use social media or
the internet more broadly (The Hill, 2016; Boxell et al., 2017, 2018). Indeed, Trump's
broadest support came from older white voters without college education in rural areas,
who are among the least likely people to use social media actively (Hargittai, 2015; Pew
Research Center, 2015, 2018). These patterns seem difficult to square with the idea
that online channels were an important driver of the 2016 presidential election result,
although such observations also do not rule this out.
      Further, the content on social media platforms--particularly on Twitter--is dis-
proportionately left-leaning. While there appears to be a cluster of right-wing networks,
Pew Research Center (2019d) estimates that, in 2018, 60% of Twitter users identified
as Democrat and only 35% as Republican. Among Democrats, those on Twitter are
considerably more liberal and focus less on finding common ground with Republicans
(Pew Research Center, 2020). In 2019, 26% of American Twitter users followed Obama
and 19% followed Trump (Pew Research Center, 2019a). Survey evidence suggests
that 80% of Twitter content is produced by people who strongly disapprove of Trump
(Pew Research Center, 2019b). "Liberals" are also more likely to get political news
on Twitter or Facebook and follow more media and political accounts compared to
"conservatives" (Pew Research Center, 2014; Eady et al., 2019). Twitter and Reddit,
which are often said to be pro-Trump factors, were considerably more popular among
Clinton supporters before the 2016 election (Hargittai, 2015). Although social media
allows users to partially select which content they see, Twitter content disproportionately
leans toward the Democratic party.
      We provide additional evidence for the composition of political content on Twitter
by analyzing the Twitter reach of Democratic and Republican politicians. We collected
data on the Twitter accounts of all Senators and House Representatives from the 110th
to the 115th Congresses (2007-2019). In Figure 1, we plot the average number of tweets
and followers that members of each party have on Twitter, as well as the average number
of retweets and "likes" their tweets receive. The patterns here again clearly indicate
that Democratic politicians are more active on Twitter and have larger follower bases
than their Republican counterparts. Tweets by Democrats also receive, on average,
three times the number of "likes."9
   9
     In Appendix Figure A.2, we confirm that these patterns are not driven by a small group of Congress
members by showing that they also hold when we compare the median Twitter reach of Democrats
and Republicans.



                                                  6
                                       [Figure 1 about here.]



3      Data
The main analysis is based on a county-level dataset on election outcomes, political
opinions, and Twitter use. It covers 3,065 counties in 48 states (we exclude Alaska
and Hawaii) and the District of Columbia (except in congressional elections). County-
level election results are from Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections and the
MIT Election Lab. We complement our analysis with individual-level survey data on
approval ratings from the Gallup Daily Tracker and voting data from the Cooperative
Congressional Election Study (CCES). Our measure of Twitter usage is derived from an
archive of 475 million geo-located tweets compiled by Kinder-Kurlanda et al. (2017).
We combine this with newly collected data on Twitter's early adopters at the 2007
SXSW festival; data on the Twitter activity of U.S. Congress members; and a large
corpus of tweets related to the 2012, 2016, and 2020 presidential elections. Additional
county characteristics were obtained from the U.S. Census, the U.S. Religious Census,
the American Community Survey (ACS), and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We
describe the individual data sources in more detail below. Appendix Table A.2 provides
additional details and summary statistics.

Election Outcomes. We use county-level data on presidential election outcomes
between 1924 and 2020 from Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections. From
the same source, we also obtained county-level voting data for the Republican and
Democratic primaries in 2016 and 2020. We complement this with county-level results
on Senate and House elections from the MIT Election Lab for the 1996-2020 period. In
all cases, we focus on two-party vote shares. Figure 2 visualizes the Republican party's
vote share in the 2016 presidential elections.10

                                       [Figure 2 about here.]

  10
    While senatorial and presidential elections are decided at the state level and House elections at
the congressional district level, counties are usually smaller geographic units and far more numerous.
Additionally, unlike congressional districts, county boundaries are fixed over our sample period, allowing
us to observe changes across years.




                                                    7
Individual-Level Voting Decisions. The Cooperative Congressional Election Study
(CCES) is a nationwide survey that collects information on voter behavior in two waves
(before and after the election). We focus on votes for Trump and Clinton in 2016.11
The CCES contains a rich set of individual characteristics, including political affiliation,
family income (in 12 bins), gender, race, education (in 6 bins), marital status, age,
and interest in the news. Table A.3 provides summary statistics (weighted by sample
weights). The CCES also uses administrative data on turnout records to verify its
respondents have voted.

Presidential Candidate Approval. The Gallup Daily Tracker provides individual-
level survey data for a sample of 1,000 individuals per day since 2009.12 During the
2016 presidential campaign, it fielded survey items regarding approval of Republican
and Democratic presidential candidates. This allows us to investigate Trump's pre-
election approval relative to other candidates (e.g. Clinton or Ted Cruz). The data also
include a rich set of individual characteristics, including political affiliation, county of
residence, income (in 10 bins), gender, race, marital status, age, and education (in 6
bins). Table A.4 in the Appendix provides summary statistics.13

Twitter Usage. We construct a measure of county-level Twitter usage based on a
sample of 475 million geo-coded tweets collected by Kinder-Kurlanda et al. (2017). The
tweets were collected between 2014 and 2015 using the Twitter Streaming API, which
continuously returns a 1% sample of all Tweets as long as it is called. The individual
tweets from this dataset are already assigned to counties. Additionally, we collected
the underlying user profiles for each tweet in the database. This allows us to construct
a user-based measure by assigning users to the county from which they tweet most
frequently.14
     The resulting measure, which we use throughout the paper, is a proxy for the
number of Twitter users per county, based on 3.7 million individual users (around 7% of
the Twitter population). Figure 3a plots the number of Twitter users per capita across
counties. Each user profile further provides us with a short biography and the date that
  11
     At the time of writing, the CCES for the 2020 election was not yet available.
  12
     The Gallup Daily Tracker for the 2020 election is not available at the time of writing.
  13
     For some auxiliary estimations in the Online Appendix, we also collapse responses about presidential
approval of Trump on the county-level using weighted averages based on the number of survey
respondents in each county.
  14
     Data is available in the Gesis Datorium at https://datorium.gesis.org/xmlui/handle/10.7802/1166.



                                                   8
each user joined Twitter.15 We use the join dates to construct a time-varying proxy
of Twitter usage based on how many of the Twitter users had opened an account at
each point in time. To validate this measure, Appendix Figure A.1a shows that our
Twitter usage measure's evolution closely tracks the number of daily Twitter users from
Statista (2019). Our measure of county-level measure of Twitter usage also strongly
correlates with the number of Twitter users in a county based on the GfK Media Survey
(see Figure A.1b).

Twitter Data for the South by Southwest Festival. We collected data for our
instrument for Twitter usage, based on early adoption during the SXSW festival, through
the Twitter API. More specifically, we scraped the account data for 658,240 users who
followed the Twitter account of SXSW Conference & Festivals (@SXSW) at the time
of collection (January 2019). We assign these users to counties based on the location
people report in their user profile.16
       A user profile contains the month and year that they joined Twitter, which allows
us to determine the number of SXSW followers in each county that joined Twitter in a
particular month. The two key variables in our analysis are: i) the number of SXSW
followers that joined Twitter in the month of March 2007 and ii) the number of SXSW
followers that joined Twitter during 2006 (the year the platform was launched). We refer
to (ii) as the number of SXSW followers who joined before the March 2007 festival. We
also scraped the follower lists of SXSW followers who joined in March 2007, which allows
us to investigate the connections of Twitter users to the SXSW festival. Further, we
additionally collected tweets mentioning the festival, based on the term "SXSW," as well
as a proxy for overall Twitter activity based on the 100 common English words.17 We
use these measures to document the SXSW festival's impact on local Twitter adoption.

                                      [Figure 3 about here.]

  15
     Note that Kinder-Kurlanda et al. (2017) restrict the data to the sample of tweets that are geo-
located. In principle, users can opt out of allowing the platform to determine their location. However,
at the time the tweets were collected, the default option was to allow geo-location (i.e., users had to
take an action to disable location tagging). As a result, the number of geo-located tweets at this point
in time was far larger than today.
  16
     Of the 44,625 SXSW followers who joined between 2006 and 2008, we are able to geo-code 25,830
(58%).
  17
     We report the full list of words in Table A.7.




                                                   9
Data on Political Twitter Activity. We scraped the tweets and user profiles and
followers of the 901 Senators and House Representatives from the 110th to 115th (2007-
2019) Congress who have Twitter accounts. This includes 424 Democrats and 465
Republicans.18 In total, the data contain 4,300,579 tweets, which we use to analyze the
Twitter reach of Democratic and Republican Congress members. Appendix Table A.1
lists the 20 Congress members with the most Twitter followers.
       We complement this dataset with election-related tweets to shed light on the
overall partisan slant of Twitter activity during the 2012, 2016, and 2020 elections.
For each election, we obtained the universe of tweets mentioning the last name of a
Democrat and Republican presidential candidates.19
       To determine the likely political affiliation of Twitter users, we create two measures
of political slant. The first measure is based on the political accounts a user is following.
In particular, we check whether a user follows more Democrat or Republican Congress
members on Twitter. If they follow more Republican than Democrats, all their tweets
would be classified as Republican. In case a user either does not follow any Congress
members or an equal number of Congress members from either party, their tweets are
classified as neutral.20
       The second measure of political slant is based on the similarity of the text of
tweets to those sent by Republican or Democratic Congress members. We train a L2
regularized logistic regression model separately for each election based on 901 Congress
members Twitter accounts to classify whether a tweet contains language frequently used
by either Republican or Democratic politicians.21 We then use this classifier to predict
a partisan score between 0 and 1 for each of our election-related tweets. These scores
  18
      The remaining 12 politicians are either Independents or switched their party affiliation.
  19
      For the 2012 election, we use data collected by Diaz et al. (2016), comprising 24 million tweets
containing either "Obama" or "Romney" for the period from July 1, 2012 through November 7, 2012.
For 2016, we use the archive from Littman et al. (2016), which contains 280 million tweets, collected
between July 13, 2016, and November 10, 2016. The 2020 election tweets are based on the archive
from Chen et al. (2020), which covers the period from March 2020 to November 2020. To make these
datasets comparable, we restrict the 2016 election sample to tweets mentioning either "Clinton" or
"Trump" (112 million tweets). Similarly, we restrict the 2020 data set to the time period from July 1,
2020 through November 3, 2020 and tweets mentioning either "Biden" or "Trump" (339 million tweets).
   20
      The idea of using the Twitter network to determine a user's ideology is inspired by Barber´ a (2015).
   21
      We clean the text of the tweets by removing common words (stopwords) and by reducing the
words in each tweets to their morphological roots (lemmatizing). The input is based on unigrams,
bigrams, and trigrams from these tweets. We choose the optimal normalization strength using 10-fold
cross-validation. The resulting classifier achieves high out-of-sample F1-scores, e.g. 0.904 for the tweets
during the 2020 presidential election. We provide additional details regarding the machine learning
classifier in Online Appendix A.1.1, which also visualizes the most predictive terms identified by the
classifiers.


                                                    10
can be interpreted as the probability of a tweet with the same content being sent by
a Republican. As such, our approach is similar to how Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010)
measure newspaper slant. Both approaches lead to similar overall slant classifications
for the elections tweets in our data.

Additional County Characteristics We collect county-level demographic control
variables from the U.S. Census and the ACS. In particular, we use information on
population, population share by age group and ethnicity, poverty rates, and education
levels. We also obtained industry-level employment shares and unemployment rates
from the BLS. Additional controls on county media usage patterns are from Simply
Analytics. We also construct geographical controls such as the distance from Austin,
TX, where SXSW takes place every year; population density; and county size (in square
miles). For one set of results we also use donation data from OpenSecrets. Appendix
Table A.6 provides a description of the variables.


4      The 2007 South by Southwest Festival and Early
       Twitter Adoption
The empirical strategy behind our main results exploits a shock to early-stage Twitter
adoption connected to the 2007 SXSW festival, as in M¨    uller and Schwarz (2019). This
section discusses the key role of the festival in boosting the platform's popularity and
documents how it created a persistent effect on its spatial diffusion.22
      Founded in March 2006, Twitter was largely unknown before SXSW 2007. Twitter's
popularity increased dramatically after the festival, where Twitter strategically placed
screens in the conference hallways and allowed users to sign-up by simply sending a
text message to a predefined number. As a result, speakers and bloggers in attendance
broadcasted the platform to the outside world, and Twitter went on to win the South
by Southwest Interactive Web Award Prize.
      The importance of SXSW 2007 has also been stressed by the platform's founders.
As co-founder Evan Williams explained in a post on Quora (Quora, 2011):

       "We didn't actually launch Twitter at SXSW ­ SXSW just chose to blow it
       up. We launched it nine months before ­ to a whimper. By the time SXSW
  22
    SXSW is an annual conglomeration of parallel film, interactive media, and music festivals and
conferences organized jointly that take place in March in Austin, TX.

                                               11
       2007 rolled around, we were starting to grow finally and it seemed like all of
       our users (which were probably in the thousands) were going to Austin that
       year ... I don't know what was the most important factor, but networks are
       all about critical mass, so doubling down on the momentum seemed like a
       good idea. And something clicked."23

SXSW's immediate impact on Twitter's popularity in early 2007 can be seen in Figure 4a,
which plots our proxy for the daily number of tweets as well as the number of tweets
explicitly mentioning SXSW. The figure shows that Twitter's growth rate accelerated
during the festival, visible as the spike in SXSW-related tweets. The month-to-month
growth rate of Twitter quadrupled with the start of the SXSW festival.24 After SXSW
2007, Twitter experienced further rapid growth (Venture Beat, 2008). The platform
went from an average of 5,000 tweets a day in 2007 to 300,000 in 2008, and 2.5 million
in 2009 (Twitter, 2010). In 2019, users sent roughly 500 million tweets a day.

                                      [Figure 4 about here.]

      We exploit that the SXSW festival had persistent effects on Twitter's spatial
diffusion. This is likely the result of network effects that are key to the social media
experience, as a larger number of users makes it more interesting for potential new users
to join. Such a mechanism also applies at the local level. For example, a boost in the
number of neighbors, personal connections, and/or people who play a prominent role
in an area should also boost the value of joining the platform for those living there.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that users who joined during SXSW 2007 spread Twitter
to their counties of residence.
      We provide further support for this hypothesis by investigating whether the inflow
of early-stage adopters put these counties on a differential growth path of Twitter usage.
Figure 4b plots the estimates of  from the following panel event study regression at
the county (c) and week (t) level:

tweetsct =        SXSWcM arch2007 × 1(t =  ) +              SXSWcP re × 1(t =  ) + c + t + ct .
                                                        

  23
   Appendix Figure A.5 provides Williams' full post describing the role of SXSW 2007.
  24
   Our proxy for Twitter usage is created by scraping tweets that contain any of the 100 most common
English words listed in Table A.7. Our data contain any tweet that contains at least one of these words.
We should therefore obtain a large fraction of the English speaking tweets at that point in time.




                                                  12
where tweetsct is the log of (one plus) the number of tweets in county c on week t,
SXSWcM arch2007 is the logarithm of (one plus) the number of SXSW followers in county
c that joined Twitter on March 2007 and SXSWcP re is a similarly defined variable for
followers that joined Twitter before March 2007.  thus illustrates, conditional on
county and week fixed effects, the difference in the number of tweets sent from counties
with relatively larger numbers of SXSW followers that joined on March 2007. The
variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. The
whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the
state level. The sample includes the period between the third and fourteenth week of
2007.
      Figure 4b illustrates that home counties of SXSW followers who joined during the
festival in March 2007 saw a rapid, disproportionate increase in Twitter usage around
the time of SXSW. Importantly, however, this increase came only after the SXSW
festival, and we find no evidence for pre-existing trends. This is consistent with the idea
that SXSW was a catalyst for the spread of Twitter in the United States.
      Appendix Figure A.6a presents additional evidence on the long-term adoption
effect of the 2007 SXSW festival. It plots estimates from a similar regression as the one
in Figure 4b but in a county-quarter panel covering the period from Twitter's launch in
2006 to 2016. The dependent variable is substituted by the number of Twitter users per
capita in a county based on our baseline measure. The resulting S-shaped pattern in
the figure is consistent with models of technology adoption in the presence of network
effects. More importantly, we find that the amount of early adopters in a county still
matters for the amount of Twitter usage today.25


5      Empirical Framework
Our identification strategy leverages the 2007 SXSW festival as a shock to early Twitter
adoption. We show that, conditional on a set of controls (described in further detail
below), a county's number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter in March 2007
is uncorrelated with levels and trends in election outcomes before Twitter's launch
  25
    Additionally, Figure A.6b shows just how dominant Twitter users connected to the SXSW festival
were among early adopters. In 2007, we estimate that around 60% of Twitter users either followed the
SXSW festival or followed someone who followed SXSW and joined in March 2007. As the number of
Twitter users increased over time, the importance of SXSW followers in the platform declined. But
as Figure A.6a shows, the festival created persistent differences at the county level. The next section
outlines how we use the SXSW festival in our 2SLS estimates.


                                                  13
 and during its early years. It is also uncorrelated with a host of observable county
 characteristics. This feature of the data can be interpreted as idiosyncratic factors (e.g.,
who attended the 2007 SXSW, who decided to join Twitter at the time), giving us a
"natural experiment" or "exogenous shock" in Twitter adoption that allows to estimate
 its effect on election outcomes. This interpretation is, of course, not self-evident, and
we provide several pieces of evidence in its support.
        An important concern is that counties whose population are more interested in
 the SXSW festival (and its Twitter account) may be systematically different from other
 counties. To address this issue, our empirical strategy exploits variation in the exact
 timing of when Twitter users interested in SXSW joined the platform across counties.
 In particular, our regressions control for the number of SXSW followers who joined in
 the months before the festival. Intuitively, our empirical strategy compares a "treatment"
 group of counties with SXSW followers that joined in March 2007 (during the festival)
 against a "control" of counties with followers that joined before. While both groups
 of followers were interested in SXSW, we show that only the number of followers that
 joined on March 2007 are predictive of later Twitter adoption, consistent with the
 evidence that users that joined during the festival were key in the platform's diffusion.
 In contrast, counties with more users that joined before the festival do not have more
 additional Twitter users in subsequent years.26
        The "treatment" and "control" counties are similar along several characteristics.
Table A.5 compares the average characteristics of three types of counties relevant for
 our identification strategy: 1) the 47 counties with SXSW followers that joined Twitter
 both in March 2007 and the "pre-period;" 2) the 108 counties with SXSW followers that
 joined in March 2007 (but none in the "pre-period"'); and 3) the 20 counties with SXSW
 that joined in the "pre-period" (but none in March 2007). Differences in vote shares
 in the 1996 presidential election, demographics (e.g., race, age, education), and media
 consumption (e.g., share that watches Fox News) are quantitatively small or zero. This
 is particularly true for groups (2) and (3) -- which are key to the identification -- with
 t-tests indicating that differences between the two groups are not statistically different
 from zero.27 The geographical variation in the three groups of counties is shown in
  26
     An alternative approach is to compare the counties of users who signed up for Twitter during
SXSW 2007 with those of users who signed up during other festivals in the same year. We discuss the
results from such an exercise in the robustness section below.
  27                                                              ak-corrected t-statistics, which are
     Given the large number of county characteristics, we report Sid`
smaller than those generated by applying the Bonferroni correction.




                                                 14
 Figure 3b. As the results in Table A.5 suggest, the counties do not differ systematically
 in size and how distant they are from major American cities.
       Moreover, observable individual characteristics of SXSW followers who joined
Twitter in March 2007 and the "pre-period" are also similar. We validate this using data
 on Twitter user profiles we obtained from the platform. Table A.8 shows that followers
who joined in March 2007 have similar first names and profile descriptions compared
 to those that joined before: users in both groups tend to have common names (e.g.,
"Michael" or "Chris") and use words such as "founder" or "tech" to describe themselves
 in their profiles. The correlations of the frequency of first names and terms used in
 their bios between the two groups are 0.63 and 0.89, respectively. We also investigate
 differences in the political leanings of the two groups using the network-based methods
we outline in Section 3. In particular, we test whether the users in March 2007 follow
 more Democrats or Republicans than the users in the "pre-period". We find that the
 political leanings of the two groups are nearly identical. A t-test rejects differences in
 the average political slant with a p-value of 0.93.

Specification. Motivated by the evidence above, our main results are based on
estimating the following two equations:

         T witter usersc =  +  · SXSWcM arch2007 +  · SXSWcP re + Xc  + c              (1)

              yc =  +  · SXSWcM arch2007 +  · SXSWcP re + Xc  + c ,                    (2)

where c indexes counties, SXSWcM arch2007 is the logarithm of (one plus) the number of
SXSW followers in county c that joined Twitter on March 2007, and SXSWcP re is a
similarly defined variable for followers who joined Twitter before March 2007. Xc is a
vector of control variables. Note that the right-hand side of both equations is similar.
T witter usersc is the logarithm of the number of Twitter users in the county (during
2014-2015). yc are election outcomes (e.g., vote shares), which we estimate in both levels
and changes (e.g., yc can be the vote share in 2016 or the change in vote shares between
2000 and 2016).
      In a 2SLS framework, equations (1) and (2) are the first-stage and reduced form,
while the second stage is

                yc =  +  · T witter usersc +  · SXSWcP re + Xc  + c ,                  (3)



                                            15
where T witter usersc is predicted from the first stage regression in equation (1). We
weigh observations by turnout (total number of votes cast) in the 2000 presidential
election and cluster standard errors at the state level.28

Identification. Formally, the identification condition for the effect of Twitter users
() is that E (SXSWcM arch2007 · c ) = 0 holds. Intuitively, this states that, conditional on
the SXSWcP re and other controls (Xc ), the number of SXSW followers who joined in
March 2007 is uncorrelated with other determinants of political outcomes yc , implying
that it only affects political outcomes via Twitter usage (the "exclusion restriction").
       We provide five pieces of evidence in support of this condition. First, as discussed
above, including the SXSWcP re control implies that the identifying variation comes
from comparing counties with similar observable characteristics.
       Second, the coefficient of SXSWcP re is small and statistically insignificant in our
first stage regressions. This provides us with a "placebo" test based on checking if
it is also unrelated to political outcomes in the reduced form and 2SLS regressions.
Intuitively, we have two variables that are correlated with interest in the SXSW festival
among early Twitter adopters, but only one predicts Twitter users in later years, allowing
us to disentangle interest in the festival from its effect via more Twitter users.
       Third, estimating equations (2) and (3) for different time periods shows that
SXSWcM arch2007 does not correlate with both levels and trends in election outcomes
before Twitter's launch in 2006 and in its early years, when the platform had few users
and was unlikely to affect election outcomes. Intuitively, outcomes in "treatment" and
"control" counties behaved similarly before Twitter could plausibly affect elections.
       Fourth, we find an effect of SXSWcM arch2007 on Trump's vote share in 2016 and
2020 but not on House and Senate elections (neither in 2016 nor 2020 or other periods
between 2000 and 2018). This pattern is consistent with an effect of Twitter, since
there is more content on presidential candidates than on congressional elections in the
platform.
       Fifth, results based on survey data suggest the effects are concentrated among
moderate or independent voters, which is also the expected pattern from Twitter having
a causal effect due to voter persuasion.
       Stated differently, a violation of the identification condition would require an
omitted variable that correlates with SXSWcM arch2007 , T witter usersc , and yc but is
  28
    We consider spatial standard errors using the methods described in Colella et al. (2019) for
robustness.


                                              16
uncorrelated with: i) SXSWcP re , ii) levels and trends in election results before Twitter's
launch and rise to popularity, iii) the observable variables presented in Table A.5, and iv)
election results in congressional elections both during the Trump elections and before,
while also v) being correlated with vote choices of moderate voters. Our argument is
that the existence of such an omitted variable is implausible to an extent that allows us
to interpret  as the effect of Twitter users on election outcomes.
      Measurement error in county-level Twitter usage and SXSWcM arch2007 is also
unlikely to explain an effect in 2016 and 2020 presidential elections, but not in previous
presidential elections or any other congressional election. Moreover, SXSWcP re is
constructed similarly as SXSWcM arch2007 and should thus have similar measurement
error. However, SXSWcP re is uncorrelated with Twitter usage and election outcomes.
      Lastly, another possible concern is that the SXSW adoption shock led to differences
in the composition of Twitter users when compared to other U.S. counties. In particular,
one might be concerned that the SXSW festival lead to a more liberal Twitter population
in the treated counties. While this would not influence the causal interpretation of our
findings, it could make the local average treatment effect harder to interpret. Three
pieces of evidence suggest that this appears to be an unlikely concern. First, as we
show in Appendix Figure A.6b, Twitter's user base became less connected to the SXSW
festival over time and, in this process, likely reached people from diverse backgrounds.
Second, the findings of M¨  uller and Schwarz (2019) indicate that the SXSW adoption
shock was associated with an increase in hate crime with Trump's presidential run. This
suggests that the shock eventually reached even the right-wing fringes of the political
spectrum. Third, we can directly address this concern by comparing the profiles of
Twitter users in SXSW home counties with those in the rest of the country. The results
are presented in Appendix Table A.9. We find that the user profiles in SXSW counties
are highly similar to the general Twitter population. If the Twitter population in SXSW
counties was significantly more liberal, their Twitter biographies should also be different.
We find similar results when we look at which politicians users in the different counties
follow. If anything, Twitter users in the "pre-period" counties appear to have a slightly
more liberal Twitter network.




                                            17
6      Results
6.1     Main results
First-stage. Table 1 reports results from estimating equation (1) with different sets of
control variables (described in Appendix Table A.6). The results indicate that counties
with more SXSW followers who joined Twitter in March 2007 have higher numbers
of Twitter users during 2014-2015. Since the variables are in logs, the coefficients can
be interpreted as elasticities. A one standard deviation increase in SXSW followers in
March 2007 (0.32) is associated with around 16% more Twitter users. The results do
not seem to be sensitive to the set of included covariates. In contrast, the coefficients
for SXSW followers before the 2007 festival are statistically insignificant and small in
size: Twitter usage in 2014-2015 is not higher in areas with more SXSW followers who
joined Twitter before March 2007.
      Figure 5 presents the graphical representation of the estimates in column (5)
of Table 1. Specifically, we show a binned scatter plot of T witter usersc against
SXSWcM arch2007 after both variables are "residualized" by partialling out the control
variables. The figure is constructed by dividing the x-axis variable into 40 equal-sized
bins and plotting the average values of both variables in each bin.29

                                      [Table 1 about here.]


                                     [Figure 5 about here.]


Reduced Form and 2SLS Estimates. Table 2 shows the reduced form estimates
from equation (2) and both OLS and 2SLS estimates of equation (3), focusing on the
Republican vote share in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections. The specifications
across columns match those in Table 1. Panel B indicates that the number of SXSW
followers who joined Twitter in March 2007 is associated with a lower Republican vote
share. Panel C presents the 2SLS effects of Twitter usage on vote shares. The 2SLS
estimate in column (5) indicates that a 10% increase in the number of Twitter users
in a county lowers Trump's vote share by 0.21 p.p. (e.g., a reduction from a 46.1%
  29
    The fitted line is based on the unbinned data. Observations are weighted by turnout in the 2000
presidential election. This procedure guarantees the slope of the fitted line matches the estimate on
column (5) of Table 1.


                                                 18
vote share to 45.8%).30 The results for the 2020 presidential election shown in Table 2
column (6)-(10) are nearly identical.
      A first draft of this paper, using only data up to the 2016 election, was posted
online on October 2020. When updating it to include the November 2020 election
results, we made no revisions to the research design and regression specifications (e.g.,
sample selection, choice of controls, and variable definitions). In the case of Table 2,
columns (1)-(5) are exactly the same in this version and in the October 2020 version.
Since columns (6)-(10) replicate the same specifications ("right hand sides") using 2020
election outcomes, this can be interpreted as a "pre-registered" research design. We
followed the same approach throughout this draft: every figure or table presenting results
for the 2020 election exactly replicates the specifications used for previous elections in
our October 2020 draft.31
      Although the estimated effects are always negative and significant at the 1% level,
comparing columns shows that the effect sizes vary somewhat with the inclusion of
controls, especially demographic and socioeconomic ones. This sensitivity to controls is
perhaps expected given their explanatory power over vote shares. The results in other
papers that explore effects on vote shares in similar frameworks, such as DellaVigna and
Kaplan (2007), Martin and Yurukoglu (2017), and Autor et al. (2020), show a similar
sensitivity to controls. We also apply the Oster (2019) approach of using coefficient
stability to gauge the potential importance of unobservable variables in driving the
results. We compare our specifications with all controls (columns 5 and 10) to those
with the fewest controls (columns 1 and 6) and obtain an "Oster- " of approximately
seven for both 2016 and 2020. This suggests, in order for the true effect to be zero,
unobservable variables would have to be seven times as "important" as the (numerous)
controls added in columns (5) and (10) in driving selection into "treatment."32
      Figure 6a shows the graphical representation of the estimates in column (5) of
Panel B of Table 2. Similarly, Figure 6c visualizes the relationship underlying the
estimates in column (5) of Panel B of Table 2. Both figures are constructed similarly
to Figure 5 but using the 2016 Republican vote share as the y-axis variable. The OLS
  30
     The F-statistic of our estimated first-stage range from 70 to 120. This suggests that estimation
and inference concerns related to weak instruments are unlikely to apply in our case.
  31
     The October 2020 draft is available at Social Science Research Network (SSRN):
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3719998.
  32
     The R2 of regressions with the fewest controls (columns 1 and 6) is approximately 0.6, while it is
0.94 for the regressions with the most controls (columns 5 and 10). Intuitively, the observable controls
explain a large part of the variation in vote shares but only generating a relatively modest change in
coefficient sizes. This is what generates a large "Oster- ."


                                                  19
(non-instrumented) relationship between Twitter users and the Republican vote share
from Panel A of Table 2 are shown in Figure 6b and Figure 6d. Both are also negative
but slightly smaller in magnitude than the 2SLS estimates.

Magnitudes and Persuasion Rates. To interpret the magnitudes of our estimates,
we calculate a persuasion rate following DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). It can be
approximated as  · e(1t  -y )
                              , where  is the 2SLS estimate, y is average Republican vote
share, e is the average exposure of American adults to Twitter, and t is the share of
adults that turn out to vote. Using the estimate for  from columns (5) and (10) of
Table 2, the persuasion rate is 8.6% and 9.4% for 2016 and 2020, respectively. It implies
that, in 2016, one out of every twelve active Twitter users that voted for Clinton would
not have done so if they had not been exposed to the platform.33
      This rate is smaller than the estimated pro-Republican persuasion rate of Fox
News, which Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) estimate to range between 27% and 58%
(depending on the year).34 It is also smaller than the 19.5% pro-Democrat persuasion
rate that Gerber et al. (2009) estimate for the Washington Post. As a further comparison,
Gentzkow et al. (2011) estimate a persuasion rate of 12.9% for the effect of reading a
local newspaper in the 1869-1928 period on voter turnout. DellaVigna and Gentzkow
(2010) report that randomized get-out-the-vote canvassing experiments have estimated
persuasion rates in the 10-15% range.

Further Robustness and Additional Tests. The Online Appendix presents a
number of additional sensitivity checks. In Table A.10, we consider changes to the
baseline regression specification. In particular, we allow for unweighted regressions;
alternative functional forms of the pre-SXSW user variable; restrict the sample to the
sub-sample of counties where we observe either SXSW followers who joined in March
2007 or the pre-period; and allow for flexible spatial correlation in the standard errors.
  33
   The persuasion rate re-scales effect sizes by how many individuals are exposed to the platform and
how many are not already persuaded. For marginal changes in exposure, the formula is f = dy         t
                                                                                              de · 1-y
(DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010). Since our estimate  is the semi-elasticity dy                         t
                                                                            de ·e, we obtain f =  · e(1-y ) .
In 2016, y = 0.46, t = 0.55, while y = 0.47 and t = 0.62 in 2020. We assume e = 0.25 for both periods,
based on roughly a quarter of American adults being active Twitter users (Pew Research Center, 2019c).
This implicitly assumes that Twitter usage among voters is the same as the overall population. If voters
are over-represented among Twitter users, the persuasion rate would be smaller. On one hand, Twitter
users are younger (which is associated with lower turnout) but more educated (which is associated with
higher turnout) than the general population. Note also that we estimate county-level effects, which
may also capture local spillovers and social interaction effects.
  34
     DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) estimate a smaller persuasion rate of 11.6% for Fox News.


                                                    20
We also allow for an alternative approach to control for selection into the SXSW festival
by controlling for the number of users from each county that tweeted about other
festivals in 2007 (Burning Man, Coachella, and Lollapalooza) in column (6). Further,
Table A.12 replaces our baseline time-invariant measure of Twitter usage (making use of
all available user data) with a time-varying measure based on how many users were using
the platform in a given year. None of these adjustments make a substantial difference
in the magnitudes or statistical significance of the estimates.
       Figure A.10 provides additional robustness checks for our baseline results for the
2016 and 2020 presidential vote shares. Here, we plot the estimated  of our 2SLS
equation (3) while flexibly allowing the included control variables to vary. The resulting
"specification curves" suggest that our results are robust to how our regressions are
specified. The estimated coefficients are always negative, almost always statistically
significant at the 5% level, and in the overwhelming number of specifications considerably
more negative than our "baseline estimates", which is marked by the vertical line.
       Online Appendix Table A.16 reports results for additional outcome variables, all
of which support the idea that Twitter exerts a pro-Democrat effect. In column (1), we
use a probit IV model to investigate the likelihood of a county switching from Obama in
2008 to Trump in 2016. The coefficient suggests that a one standard deviation increase
in Twitter usage is associated with a 24% lower probability of a county electing Obama
in 2008 and Trump in 2016. Columns 2 and 3 look at changes in campaign donations to
Democrats and Republicans between 2000 and 2016. We find a positive and statistically
significant effect for donations to Democrats, and no effect for Republicans. Lastly,
columns 4 and 5 look at approval ratings for President Trump in 2017 based on data
from the Gallup Daily Poll. We find that exposure to social media is associated with a
decrease in Trump's popularity, and more so among Republicans.

                                  [Figure 6 about here.]


                                   [Table 2 about here.]


                                              P re
Placebo Test. The coefficients on SXSWC            in Table 2 are statistically insignificant
and substantially smaller than those on SXSWcM arch2007 . As discussed in Section 5,
this provides support for our identification condition (exclusion restriction). Suppose
that our instrument merely captured that counties with an interest in SXSW's Twitter

                                             21
account during the platform's early years also differ in (unobservable) characteristics that
                                                                                          P re
predict the 2016 election outcome. If this was the case, the coefficients on SXSWC
should be similar in size to those on SXSWcM arch2007 . Intuitively, we have two variables
that are correlated with interest in the SXSW festival, but only one predicts Twitter
users in later years, allowing us to disentangle interest in the festival (and its correlates)
from its effect via more Twitter users.

The 2007 SXSW Shock and Previous Election Outcomes Table 3 repeats
the analysis from column (5) of Table 2 using Republican vote share in the previous
presidential elections of 2000, 2004, 2008, and 2012 as the dependent variable. All
estimates for those years are substantially smaller than the ones for 2016 and 2020
and statistically insignificant. For 2000, 2004 and 2008, this can be interpreted as a
placebo or pre-trends test: conditional on the covariates, our instrument is uncorrelated
with outcomes before Twitter's launch (2000 and 2004) and when the platform had
few users (2008). We return to the comparison to 2012, during which Twitter use was
more widespread, in Section 6.3. In Appendix Figure A.7, we further show the reduced
form estimates for presidential election going back as far as 1924. We find that our
instrument is also uncorrelated with any of the earlier presidential election results. As
discussed in Section 5, this result lends additional support for our exclusion restriction.
If our instrument merely captured uncontrolled differences across counties, these should
also correlate with vote shares in previous elections.
      While these findings make it unlikely that our instrument is correlated with pro-
Democratic attitudes at the county level, a possible concern could be that we are picking
up "anti-populist" attitudes, which could have harmed Trump's electoral results. To
address this concern, we turn to the historical case study of Ross Perot's political
campaign in 1992 and 1996. Perot, a billionaire businessman, also ran as a "third-party
candidate" on a populist platform. However, when we replace the dependent variable
with the third party vote share in the 1992 and 1996 presidential election (see Appendix
Table A.13), we find no evidence that our instrument is associated with lower vote
shares for Ross Perot. This makes it unlikely we are capturing differences in "demand
for populism" across counties.35
  35
    In Appendix Table A.14, we also investigate the vote shares in the 2020 democratic primaries.
Here we find a positive association between Twitter exposure and the vote share of Bernie Sanders,
often described as a left-wing populist. This further speaks against the hypothesis of "anti-populist"
sentiment.



                                                 22
Effects on Vote Share Changes. We also consider specifications of equations (2)
and (3) using vote share changes instead of levels as the dependent variable. All our
estimates based on changes take differences relative to the base year 2000 (akin to the
approach in Autor et al. (2020)) and use the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10
of Table 2). Figure 7a plots the reduced form estimates for changes in the Republican
vote share in presidential elections.
      The results corroborate the previously presented evidence based on specification
in levels. Our instrument is essentially uncorrelated not only with levels but also
with changes (or trends ) in election outcomes during the 2000-2012 period. Given our
arguments above, this also lends support for our identification strategy. The reduced
form effects for 2016 and 2020 are similar to the one estimated using levels. For example,
the estimated effect () for 2016 using changes is -0.017, similar to the one estimated in
levels (-0.021).36

Effects on Turnout and Congressional Elections. Figure 7b, Figure 8a, and
Figure 8b replicate the exercise in Figure 7a using voter turnout and vote shares in
House and Senate elections as the outcomes. We do not find a statistically significant
association between our instrument and election turnout except for 2020. Before 2020,
the estimated point effects are usually small. For example, the upper bound on the 95%
confidence interval of the 2SLS estimate for the effect of turnout in the 2016 election
implies that a 10% increase in Twitter users raises turnout by 0.036 p.p. (Appendix
Table A.17).
      In the 2020 election, which saw the highest turnout rate in more than a century
(NPR, 2020c), we find that Twitter is associated with a larger fraction of the voting
age population casting their ballot. However, given the small and insignificant effect
on turnout in 2016, turnout alone is unlikely to explain the effect on Republican vote
shares. Why Twitter had an effect on 2020 turnout but not in the previous election
is not clear. One possible explanation could be that calls to turn out and vote were
widespread on the platform, partially because of an initiative by Twitter itself (Twitter,
2020). The 2020 elections were also not only unique in its high turnout, but also in the
prevalence of mail and early voting because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
      The coefficients for House and Senate races are more noisily estimated, particularly
for the smaller sample of Senate races (where only a third of seats is renewed every two
  36
       Appendix Table A.11 present the OLS and 2SLS estimates.



                                                23
years). Overall, there is little evidence suggesting an effect of Twitter on congressional
elections, including in 2016, the 2018 midterm election, and 2020. Finding an effect on
presidential vote shares but not in these "down-ballot" races is perhaps expected since
content on presidential candidates (and in particular on Trump in 2016 and 2020) is
more common on Twitter than content on congressional races.37

Discussion of Identification Condition. As discussed in more detail in Section 5,
there are five pieces of evidence supporting our identification condition: i) our empirical
strategy compares relatively similar counties (Section 5); ii) the placebo test based
on the coefficient on SXSWcP re ; iii) the instrument being uncorrelated with election
outcomes in the 1924-2012 period; and iv) evidence suggesting Twitter has not affected
House and Senate races; while at the same time v) the instrument being correlated with
vote choices of moderate voters in particular.
      Given this, a violation of the identification condition would require an omitted
variable that correlates with the instrument, Twitter usage, and Trump's vote share in
2016 and 2020 but is uncorrelated with: i) SXSWcP re , ii) levels and trends in election
results before Twitter's launch and rise to popularity, iii) the observable variables
presented in Table A.5, and iv) election results in congressional elections. At the same
time, such omitted variable would also v) be more strongly correlated with the vote
choices of moderates and independents than "partisans." Our argument that is the
existence of such omitted variable is unlikely.

                                      [Table 3 about here.]


                                      [Figure 7 about here.]


                                      [Figure 8 about here.]

  37
     Appendix Table A.18 presents the 2SLS estimates for House and Senate races. To accommodate
the Senate's six-year terms, we take changes relative to 2000, 1998, and 1996, instead of always using
2000 (as we do for other outcomes).




                                                 24
Towards an Average Treatment Effect As with any instrument, our 2SLS results
identify a local average treatment effect (LATE). In our setting, the "compliers" are
counties with higher Twitter usage as a result of the inflow of SXSW attendees. While
the negative treatment effect of Twitter usage for these counties is in itself an interesting
finding, the ATE for the US overall--and therefore the overall impact of Twitter on
elections--may differ. However, two pieces of evidence suggest that our estimates,
despite this concern, allow us to infer information about the ATE.
      A first indication that our estimates comes from comparing the OLS and 2SLS
results in Table 2. Both estimates are always negative and relatively similar in magnitude.
Second, we build on the approach suggested by Andrews and Oster (2019) and more
formally investigate the external validity bias of our estimates. For experimental settings,
Andrews and Oster (2019) suggest using the observable heterogeneity in estimated
treatment effects within the experimental sample to learn about the ATE in the overall
population. Similarly, we can use the heterogeneity of treatment effects within counties
that provide the variation that identify our results to approximate the ATE for the
United States as a whole. Using all included control variables from our main specification
for the prediction of heterogeneity of the treatment effect, the Andrews and Oster (2019)
approach suggests that the ATE should, if anything, be larger than the LATE we
estimate in our baseline results. This seems plausible as the more urban counties for
which we have variation in our instrument tend to be Democratic strongholds, and thus
likely have fewer independents and moderate Republicans, for which we find the largest
persuasion effects (in survey data). We provide additional details on our approach in
Appendix A.5.38


6.2     Effects Are Concentrated Among Moderate Voters
If social media indeed matters for election outcomes, we would expect there to be
heterogeneous effects across groups of voters. In particular, Bayesian updating suggest
that voters who do not hold strong priors about a particular party should be more likely
persuaded. We test this prediction using individuals' voting decision from the 2016
  38
    As our setting differs from the one discussed in Andrews and Oster (2019), some adjustments to
our baseline estimation were required. We estimate the treatment effect exclusively in the subset of
                                  M arch 2007           P re
counties for which either SXSWc               or SXSWc       are not equal to zero. Then, we define a
treatment indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with SXSW followers who joined in March 2007.




                                                 25
CCES. In particular, we estimate the following instrumental variable Probit regression:

                 yic =  +  · T witter usersc +  · SXSWcP re + Xic  + ic ,                          (4)

where yic is an indicator variable equal to 1 if an individual i living in county c voted
for Trump in the 2016 election and 0 for Clinton.39 The definition of the county-
level variables T witter usagec and SXSWcP re remains unchanged. Xic is now a vector
of individual-level control variables including age, gender, race, family income, and
education. We again instrument for county-level Twitter usage based on the SXSW
followers who joined in March 2007.
       Table 4 presents results from estimating equation (4). In Panel A, Column (1)
suggests county-level Twitter usage has a statistically significant negative effect on the
likelihood to vote for Trump. The marginal effect implies that a 10% increase in the
number of Twitter users in a county would lower Trump's vote share by 0.47 p.p..40
       Columns (2)-(6) report results estimated separately by voters' reported party
affiliation. The effect is strongest for voters who identify as independents, and thus likely
to not hold strong priors. We also find a negative coefficient for moderate Republicans,
which is statistically significant at the 10% level. The results suggest weaker or zero
effects for those with stronger political views, whether Republican or Democrat.
       These results on party affiliation further vary with age in a way that may be
suggestive of a role for social media. In particular, Panels B and C repeat the exercise
of splitting CCES respondents by their party affiliation, but further divide voters into
those below and above 40. Since Twitter users tend to be younger than the general
population (Section 2), one may expect a larger effects on vote outcomes among voters
below 40.
       Indeed, we find larger marginal effects for Log (T witter users) among younger
voters. For independents, the estimate for young voters is 20% larger than for older
voters (-0.071 compared to -0.059). Among moderate Republicans and Democrats,
the estimated coefficients are close to zero for voters aged 40+ but sizeable for younger
voters (although they are not statistically significant at conventional levels). Because
young voters are less likely to vote for Trump, this implies larger elasticities of Twitter
on vote outcomes for those below 40 relative to the baseline probabilities.
  39
    In unreported regressions, we do not find that votes for Jill Stein varied with Twitter usage.
  40
    This effect size is within the range of the county-level estimates presented in Table 2. Appendix
Table A.15 shows this baseline result is robust to using only individuals with validated turnout and/or
who stated that they originally intended to vote for Trump in the pre-election wave of the CCES.


                                                  26
      We present further support for Twitter having persuasion effects on moderates using
county-level data in Appendix Table A.19. We estimate our county-level specification
(equation 3) for the 2016 elections, but split counties based on how consistently they
voted for either the Republican or the Democratic party. Specifically, we define "swing
counties" as counties that were not consistently won by one party in the presidential
elections from 2000 to 2012. For the 2016 presidential elections, we find that Twitter
usage only negatively impacts the Republican vote share in "swing" counties. We find
no evidence for Republican or Democratic strongholds, where people likely have the
strongest priors. The patterns are similar in 2020. But here, we also find a small
effect on counties that usually vote Republican, which could suggest that the effect on
moderate Republicans we find in the CCES also apply to the county level.

                                   [Table 4 about here.]



6.3     Potential Mechanisms
The findings above suggest that Twitter had an effect in 2016 and 2020, but not during
 previous presidential elections. We address three potential explanations for this pattern:
 lack of familiarity with social media (a learning channel ), changes in social media's
"slant" (a content channel ), and Trump's role as an outsider candidate (a political shock
channel ).
       The first factor could be the reach of and familiarity with social media content. In
2008, social media was a relatively new type of technology. Only a quarter of American
 adults used any social media platform and only 10% of internet users posted political
 commentary on social media (Pew Research Center, 2009, 2011). Figure A.1a shows
 that Twitter, which was founded in 2006, only had around one million users during the
2008 elections, compared to 40 million in 2012, 67 million in 2016, and 69 million in
2020 (Statista, 2019, 2020). Twitter's limited reach and novelty might have initially
 restricted its impact on voters.
       The second possible explanation is that social media's content changed between
2008 and 2016. It is conceivable that, in line with changes in the slant of cable news (e.g.,
 Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017), the typical content to which Twitter users are exposed
 has become more left-leaning over time.
       A third reason is that Trump's political rise constituted a considerable shock to the
 U.S. political system. In this view, Twitter may not have partisan effects per se. Instead,

                                             27
the platform may have served as a conduit for spreading sentiments or information
about Trump.
      Two pieces of evidence presented above are consistent with the political shock
channel. First, if Twitter had little effect before 2016 because it was not widely used, its
effect on vote shares should systematically increase over time. We do not find evidence
supporting this idea in effects for presidential, House, and Senate elections (Figures 7
and 8). Instead, we find a discontinuous negative effect in the 2016 presidential election
that persists in 2020. Second, we do not find substantial effects for the 2016, 2018, and
2020 House and Senate elections. This implies that Twitter usage lowered Trump's vote
share without substantially affecting other Republican candidates on the same election
day.

Results from the 2016 Republican Primaries. We provide additional evidence
for a Trump-specific effect of Twitter exposure by investigating the 2016 county-level
Republican primaries results. The primaries allow us to focus on the favorability
of different candidates among Republican voters. The results from this exercise are
presented in Table 5. We find that Twitter usage is associated with a lower vote share
for Trump. We also find a positive effect on the vote share of John Kasich, the most
moderate of the major Republican candidates.41

                                     [Table 5 about here.]


Results from Gallup Approval Ratings. A similar pattern emerges when we use
data from the Gallup Daily Tracker, which contains approval ratings for three other
Republican presidential candidates who ran alongside Trump during the primaries (Ted
Cruz, Marco Rubio, and Kasich). Table 6 shows the results of running individual-level
IV probit regressions as in equation (4), where the dependent variable is an indicator
variable equal to one if the respondent approved of a specific candidate. As in Table 4,
we differentiate between respondents' political affiliation.42
      Table 6 confirms our main county-level result from general elections and primaries:
Twitter usage is associated lower approval of Trump, especially among independents
  41
     In Appendix Table A.14, we also investigate the voting behavior in the 2016 and 2020 Democratic
primaries. Twitter usage appears to be associated with a higher support for Bernie Sanders in 2020.
  42
     We pool people who identify as leaning Republicans or Democrats with independents, because--in
contrast to the CCES data--only a few individuals in the survey are classified as "leaners."


                                                28
(who are presumably more likely to be persuaded by social media content). We also find
lower approval of Cruz, who is substantially more right-wing than other presidential
primary candidates in recent years (FiveThirtyEight, 2015). We find no link between
Twitter use and approval of the more moderate Republican candidates, Rubio and
Kasich. For the Democrat candidates, we find an effect for Clinton's but not Sanders'
approval.43
     Taken together, these results are consistent with Twitter turning voters against
voting for Trump in particular and not against the Republican party more generally.
Our results may also explain the absence of an effect in the 2008 and 2012 elections:
Obama's opponents John McCain and Mitt Romney were widely considered to be
moderate Republicans (e.g., more similar to Kasich than Trump or Cruz).44

                                       [Table 6 about here.]


Slant of Election-Related Tweets. We provide further support for the hypothesis
that Trump's 2016 campaign and presidency triggered opposition on Twitter by analyzing
the content of more than 460 million tweets mentioning the last name of presidential
candidates during the 2012, 2016, and 2020 presidential campaigns.
      First, we classify the tweets' slant as Republican, Democrat, or neutral using two
approaches described in Section 3. In the first case, we classify the political affiliation of
Twitter users by counting the number of Democrat and Republican Congress members
they follow. If a user follows more Democrats than Republicans, they are classified as
Democrat, and vice-versa. Tweets sent by a user classified as Democrat are classified as
Democrat, and so forth.45 In the second case, we classify individual tweets (not users)
following an approach in the spirit of Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) and train a L2
  43
     Note that Appendix Table A.14 reports a significant positive effect for Sanders county-level primary
vote share in 2020, but not in 2016. As mentioned earlier, Gallup Daily Tracker data is not available for
2020 at the time of writing. Note also that Gallup collects data on candidate approval (as opposed to
vote choice) for the entire population (as opposed to Democratic primaries votes), which may explain
some differences between these results and the ones based on county-level primaries results.
  44
     As previously discussed, the number of Twitter users in 2008 was relatively small, but by 2012, it
was relatively close to its 2016 level (Figure A.1a).
  45
     Users who follow an equal number of Democrats and Republican or no Congress members are
classified as neutral. This approach is similar in spirit to Barber´ a (2015), who uses the network of
Twitter users to create a measure of ideology. Because we are only interested in a binary measure
of partisan slant and not the ideological distance of users, we do not estimate the full Bayesian ideal
point mode. The advantage of our simplified approach is that it is faster to compute and the resulting
measure is easier to interpret.


                                                   29
regularized logistic regression classifier to predict whether a tweet is more likely to have
a Democrat or Republican slant, depending on its content's similarity to tweets sent by
Congress members. If a tweet's content has higher similarity with those of Democratic
Congress members, it is classified as Democratic, and as Republican otherwise.46
      Figure 9 plots the amount of Twitter attention directed at the Republican and
Democratic presidential candidates in the 2012, 2016, and 2020 elections, as well as the
tweets' estimated slant based on users' following of Congress members. To account for
the attention and popularity of tweets, we base the graphs on the number of "likes" the
tweets mentioning the last name of candidates received. In Appendix Figure A.8, we
confirm that the results are similar using the number of tweets and when we base the
slant classification on the text of the tweets (Figure A.9).47
      Panel A shows the number of "likes" for tweets mentioning the Republican presi-
dential candidate (Romney and Trump), while Panel B provides similar evidence for the
Democrats (Obama, Clinton, and Biden). There are three noteworthy facts presented
in the figure. First, there was a sizable growth in the overall volume of Twitter content
mentioning presidential candidates. Second, the number of "likes" for tweets mentioning
Trump is larger than those mentioning his opponents (the difference is fourfold in 2016
and almost threefold in 2020). Note that a "like" for a tweet mentioning a candidate
can occur for tweets that are positive or negative about the candidate, so the overall
size of the bars are not informative about slant or sentiments of Twitter content.
      Third, Figure 9 also breaks down the share of tweets mentioning the candidates
by slant. The content sent by users classified as Democrats are more sizable than that
from those classified as Republicans. In particular, the amount of attention (proxied
via "likes") on Twitter content mentioning Trump posted by Democrats is almost twice
as large as the amount posted from Republicans (for both 2016 and 2020). On the
other hand, content on Biden was more likely to have a Democrat slant and content on
Clinton was almost equally likely to have a Democrat or Republican slant.
  46
      See Section 3 and Appendix A.1.1 in the Appendix for more details. In unreported robustness
checks, we confirm that these findings are robust using different slant cutoffs for classifying Republican
and Democratic tweets, such as only classifying tweets for which the class probabilities are above 75%
or 90%.
   47
      Twitter users can choose to "like" each tweet they see in their "timeline." A user can only "like" a
particular tweet once. "Likes" thus provide an useful metric since they capture the popularity and
attention that the content received. For example, if an account sent millions of Republican-slanted
tweets about Clinton, but such account had few followers and thus few users who can "like" the message,
it would not meaningfully affect measures based on "likes," but could potentially do so for measures
based on number of tweets.



                                                   30
      Overall, a potential interpretation of these results is as follows. Twitter users,
and users of other social media platforms, are more likely to be young, well-educated,
live in dense urban areas, and support the Democratic party (see discussion in Sec-
tion 2). Perhaps as a result, Democratic politicians are more popular on Twitter than
Republicans (Figure 1). In 2016 and 2020, Twitter became a vehicle for spreading
opinions, particularly from Democratic-slanted users, on Trump. This may, in turn,
have persuaded voters with weaker priors--independents and perhaps more moderate
Republicans--to vote against Trump in the presidential election.48

                                       [Figure 9 about here.]



7      Conclusion
Election officials around the globe are concerned about social media's increasing influence
on voting decisions (e.g. NPR, 2020a). At the time of writing, there is a heated debate
about whether platform providers should "moderate" election-related content in the
U.S. (e.g. Politico, 2020). Exploiting variation based on a shock to Twitter's initial rise
to popularity, our paper provides some of the first empirical evidence that social media
can affect election outcomes.
      We find that Twitter lowered the Republican party's vote share in the 2016 and
2020 presidential elections. While this finding runs counter to a popular narrative that
places social media at the heart of Trump's election win, it is consistent with a growing
body of evidence showing that social media users were less, not more likely to vote for
Trump in 2016 or hold polarized views (Boxell et al., 2017, 2018).
      We also provide support for the idea that the demographics of Twitter users may
account for the platform's partisan effects. People who use Twitter are 25 percentage
points more likely to identify as Democrats rather than Republican, and Democratic
politicians are more popular on Twitter than Republican ones. Our work suggests that
this environment not only reflects selection of like-minded individuals, but also affects
voting decisions, particularly for people with more moderate views.



  48
    Note that the 2012 election differed from 2016 and 2020 both in terms of having less twitter content
referring to it (as Figure A.9 indicates) and also for having a more moderate Republican candidate
(Romney) that may not have attracted as much Democrat-slanted content.


                                                  31
References
Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and A. Tahoun (2017, 08). The Power of the Street:
  Evidence from Egypt's Arab Spring. The Review of Financial Studies 31 (1), 1­42.

Allcott, H., L. Braghieri, S. Eichmeyer, and M. Gentzkow (2020, March). The Welfare
  Effects of Social Media. American Economic Review 110 (3), 629­76.

Allcott, H. and M. Gentzkow (2017, May). Social Media and Fake News in the 2016
  Election. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (2), 211­36.

Andrews, I. and E. Oster (2019). A simple approximation for evaluating external validity
 bias. Economics Letters 178 (C), 58­62.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. Hanson, K. Majlesi, et al. (2020). Importing political polar-
 ization? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic
 Review 110 (10), 3139­83.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013, October). The China Syndrome:
 Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American
 Economic Review 103 (6), 2121­2168.

Bail, C. A., L. P. Argyle, T. W. Brown, J. P. Bumpus, H. Chen, M. B. F. Hunzaker,
 J. Lee, M. Mann, F. Merhout, and A. Volfovsky (2018). Exposure to Opposing Views
  on Social Media Can Increase Political Polarization. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences 115 (37), 9216­9221.

Bakshy, E., S. Messing, and L. A. Adamic (2015). Exposure to Ideologically Diverse
  News and Opinion on Facebook. Science 348 (6239), 1130­1132.

Barber´
      a, P. (2014). How Social Media Reduces Mass Political Polarization. Evidence
  from Germany, Spain, and the US.

Barber´a, P. (2015). Birds of the same feather tweet together: Bayesian ideal point
  estimation using twitter data. Political analysis 23 (1), 76­91.

Beam, M. A., M. J. Hutchens, and J. D. Hmielowski (2018). Facebook News and
 (De)polarization: Reinforcing Spirals in the 2016 US Election. Information, Commu-
 nication & Society 21 (7), 940­958.

Bessi, A., F. Zollo, M. D. Vicario, A. Scala, G. Caldarelli, and W. Quattrociocchi (2015,
  08). Trend of Narratives in the Age of Misinformation. PLOS ONE 10 (8), 1­16.

                                           32
Bloom, N., J. Liang, J. Roberts, and Z. J. Ying (2015). Does working from home work?
  evidence from a chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (1),
  165­218.

Bond, R. M., C. J. Fariss, J. J. Jones, A. D. Kramer, C. Marlow, J. E. Settle, and
 J. H. Fowler (2012). A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence and Political
  Mobilization. Nature 489 (7415), 295.

Boxell, L., M. Gentzkow, and J. M. Shapiro (2017). Greater Internet Use Is Not
 Associated with Faster Growth in Political Polarization Among US Demographic
  Groups. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
 America , 201706588.

Boxell, L., M. Gentzkow, and J. M. Shapiro (2018, 07). A Note on Internet Use and the
  2016 U.S. Presidential Election Outcome. PLOS ONE 13 (7), 1­7.

Boxell, L., M. Gentzkow, and J. M. Shapiro (2019). Cross-Country Trends in Affective
  Polarization. Working Paper .

Bursztyn, L., G. Egorov, R. Enikolopov, and M. Petrova (2019, December). Social Media
  and Xenophobia: Evidence from Russia. Working Paper 26567, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Campante, F., R. Durante, and F. Sobbrio (2017, 12). Politics 2.0: The Multifaceted
  Effect of Broadband Internet on Political Participation. Journal of the European
 Economic Association 16 (4), 1094­1136.

Chen, E., A. Deb, and E. Ferrara (2020). # election2020: The first public twitter
 dataset on the 2020 us presidential election. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00600 .

Chen, Y. and D. Y. Yang (2019, June). The Impact of Media Censorship: 1984 or Brave
  New World? American Economic Review 109 (6), 2294­2332.

Colella, F., R. Lalive, S. O. Sakalli, and M. Thoenig (2019). Inference with Arbitrary
  Clustering. IZA Discussion Papers 12584, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA).

Conover, M. D., J. Ratkiewicz, M. Francisco, B. Gon¸calves, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini
 (2011). Political Polarization on Twitter. In Fifth International AAAI Conference on
 Weblogs and Social Media.




                                          33
Del Vicario, M., A. Bessi, F. Zollo, F. Petroni, A. Scala, G. Caldarelli, H. E. Stanley,
 and W. Quattrociocchi (2016). The Spreading of Misinformation Online. Proceedings
 of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (3), 554­559.

DellaVigna, S., R. Enikolopov, V. Mironova, M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2014,
 July). Cross-Border Media and Nationalism: Evidence from Serbian Radio in Croatia.
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (3), 103­32.

DellaVigna, S. and E. L. Ferrara (2015). Chapter 19 - Economic and Social Impacts
 of the Media. In S. P. Anderson, J. Waldfogel, and D. Str¨
                                                          omberg (Eds.), Handbook
 of Media Economics, Volume 1 of Handbook of Media Economics, pp. 723 ­ 768.
 North-Holland.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2010). Persuasion: Empirical Evidence. Annual
 Review of Economics 2 (1), 643­669.

DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007). The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3), 1187­1234.

Diaz, F., M. Gamon, J. M. Hofman, E. Kiciman, and D. Rothschild (2016). Online
  and Social Media Data as an Imperfect Continuous Panel Survey. PloS one 11 (1),
  e0145406.

Eady, G., J. Nagler, A. Guess, J. Zilinsky, and J. A. Tucker (2019). How Many People
  Live in Political Bubbles on Social Media? Evidence From Linked Survey and Twitter
  Data. SAGE Open 9 (1), 2158244019832705.

eMarketer (2019). US Time Spent with Social Media 2019, By Debra Aho Williamson.

Enikolopov, R., A. Makarin, and M. Petrova (2020). Social Media and Protest Partici-
  pation: Evidence from Russia. Econometrica 88 (4), 1479­1514.

Enikolopov, R. and M. Petrova (2015). Chapter 17 - Media Capture: Empirical
  Evidence. In S. P. Anderson, J. Waldfogel, and D. Str¨
                                                       omberg (Eds.), Handbook
 of Media Economics, Volume 1 of Handbook of Media Economics, pp. 687 ­ 700.
  North-Holland.

Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2011). Media and Political Persuasion:
  Evidence from Russia. The American Economic Review 101 (7), 3253­3285.




                                          34
Falck, O., R. Gold, and S. Heblich (2014, July). E-lections: Voting Behavior and the
  Internet. American Economic Review 104 (7), 2238­65.

Fergusson, L. and C. Molina (2021, April). Facebook Causes Protests. Documentos
  CEDE 018002, Universidad de los Andes - CEDE.

FiveThirtyEight (2015). Let's Be Serious About Ted Cruz From The Start: He's Too
  Extreme And Too Disliked To Win.

Flaxman, S., S. Goel, and J. M. Rao (2016, 03). Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and
  Online News Consumption. Public Opinion Quarterly 80 (S1), 298­320.

Gavazza, A., M. Nardotto, and T. Valletti (2019). Internet and Politics: Evidence
 From UK Local Elections and Local Government Policies. The Review of Economic
 Studies 86 (5), 2092­2135.

Gentzkow, M. (2006). Television and Voter Turnout. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics 121 (3), 931­972.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010). What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
  Daily Newspapers. Econometrica 78 (1), 35­71.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2011). Ideological Segregation Online and Offline.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1799­1839.

Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Sinkinson (2011, December). The Effect of
 Newspaper Entry and Exit on Electoral Politics. American Economic Review 101 (7),
 2980­3018.

Gerber, A. S., J. G. Gimpel, D. P. Green, and D. R. Shaw (2011). How Large and
 Long-lasting Are the Persuasive Effects of Televised Campaign Ads? Results from
 a Randomized Field Experiment. The American Political Science Review 105 (1),
 135­150.

Gerber, A. S. and D. P. Green (2000). The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and
  Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment. The American Political Science
 Review 94 (3), 653­663.

Gerber, A. S., D. Karlan, and D. Bergan (2009). Does the Media Matter? A Field
 Experiment Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political
 Opinions. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (2), 35­52.


                                         35
Guess, A. (2018). (Almost) Everything in Moderation: New Evidence in Americans'
 Online Media Diets.

Guriev, S., N. Melnikov, and E. Zhuravskaya (2020, 12). 3G Internet and Confidence in
 Government*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Halberstam, Y. and B. Knight (2016). Homophily, Group Size, and the Diffusion of
 Political Information in Social Networks: Evidence from Twitter. Journal of Public
 Economics 143, 73 ­ 88.

Hargittai, E. (2015). Is Bigger Always Better? Potential Biases of Big Data Derived
 from Social Network Sites. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
 Social Science 659, 63­76.

Howard, P. N., A. Duffy, D. Freelon, M. Hussain, W. Mari, and M. Maziad (2011).
 Opening Closed Regimes: What Was the Role of Social Media During the Arab
 Spring? Working Paper .

Huber, G. A. and K. Arceneaux (2007). Identifying the Persuasive Effects of Presidential
 Advertising. American Journal of Political Science 51 (4), 957­977.

Jones, J. J., R. M. Bond, E. Bakshy, D. Eckles, and J. H. Fowler (2017, 04). Social In-
  fluence and Political Mobilization: Further Evidence From a Randomized Experiment
  in the 2012 U.S. Presidential Election. PLOS ONE 12 (4), 1­9.

Kinder-Kurlanda, K., K. Weller, W. Zenk-M¨ oltgen, J. Pfeffer, and F. Morstatter (2017).
  Archiving Information from Geotagged Tweets to Promote Reproducibility and
  Comparability in Social Media Research. Big Data & Society 4 (2), 2053951717736336.

Larcinese, V. and L. Miner (2017, June). The Political Impact of the Internet on
  US Presidential Elections. STICERD - Economic Organisation and Public Policy
  Discussion Papers Series 63, Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics
  and Related Disciplines, LSE.

Lelkes, Y., G. Sood, and S. Iyengar (2017). The Hostile Audience: The Effect of
  Access to Broadband Internet on Partisan Affect. American Journal of Political
  Science 61 (1), 5­20.

Levy, R. (2021, March). Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization: Evidence
  from a Field Experiment. American Economic Review 111 (3), 831­70.



                                          36
Littman, J., L. Wrubel, and D. Kerchner (2016). 2016 United States Presidential
  Election Tweet Ids.

Manacorda, M. and A. Tesei (2016, May). Liberation Technology: Mobile Phones and
 Political Mobilization in Africa. CEPR Discussion Papers 11278, C.E.P.R. Discussion
 Papers.

Martin, G. J. and A. Yurukoglu (2017, September). Bias in Cable News: Persuasion
 and Polarization. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2565­2599.

Mosquera, R., M. Odunowo, T. McNamara, X. Guo, and R. Petrie (2020). The Economic
 Effects of Facebook. Experimental Economics 23 (2), 575­602.

M¨
 uller, K. and C. Schwarz (2019). From Hashtag to Hate Crime: Twitter and Anti-
 Minority Sentiment. Working Paper .

M¨
 uller, K. and C. Schwarz (2020). Fanning the Flames of Hate: Social Media and Hate
 Crime. Journal of the European Economic Association .

Napoli, P. M. (2014). Measuring Media Impact.             The Norman Lear Center.
 http://www.learcenter. org/pdf/measuringmedia.pdf .

Nelson, J. L. and J. G. Webster (2017). The Myth of Partisan Selective Exposure:
 A Portrait of the Online Political News Audience. Social Media + Society 3 (3),
 2056305117729314.

New York Times (2017). The Fake Americans Russia Created to Influence the Election,
  By Scott Shane.

NPR (2020a). Facebook Clamps Down On Posts, Ads That Could Undermine U.S.
 Presidential Election.

NPR (2020b). Facebook Keeps Data Secret, Letting Conservative Bias Claims Persist.

NPR (2020c). President-Elect Joe Biden Hits 80 Million Votes In Year Of Record
 Turnout.

Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (2), 187­204.

Pariser, E. (2011). The Filter Bubble: What The Internet Is Hiding From You. Penguin
  Books Limited.


                                          37
Pedregosa, F., G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
  P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau,
  M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in
  Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825­2830.

Pew Research Center (2009). The Internet's Role in Campaign 2008. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2011). Social Networking Sites and Our Lives. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2014). Political Polarization & Media Habits. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2015). Americans' Internet Access: 2000-2015. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2018). For Most Trump Voters, `Very Warm' Feelings for Him
  Endured. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2019a). About One-In-Five Adult Twitter Users in the U.S.
  Follow Trump. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2019b). National Politics on Twitter: Small Share of U.S. Adults
  Produce Majority of Tweets. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2019c). Share of U.S. Adults Using Social Media, Including
  Facebook, Is Mostly Unchanged Since 2018. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2019d). Sizing Up Twitter Users. Technical report.

Pew Research Center (2020). Democrats On Twitter More Liberal, Less Focused On
  Compromise Than Those Not On The Platform. Technical report.

Politico (2020). Biden Campaign Lashes Out at New York Post.

Quora (2011). What is the process involved in launching a start-up at SXSW?

Rotesi, T. (2019). The Impact of Twitter on Political Participation. Technical report.

Schmidt, A. L., F. Zollo, M. Del Vicario, A. Bessi, A. Scala, G. Caldarelli, H. E.
  Stanley, and W. Quattrociocchi (2017). Anatomy of News Consumption on Facebook.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (12), 3035­3039.

Spenkuch, J. L. and D. Toniatti (2018, 05). Political Advertising and Election Results.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (4), 1981­2036.

Statista (2019). Twitter: Number of Monthly Active U.S. Users 2010-2019.


                                          38
Statista (2020). Leading countries based on number of Twitter users as of October 2020.

Str¨
   omberg, D. (2015). Media and Politics. Annual Review of Economics 7 (1), 173­205.

Sunstein, C. R. (2017). # Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media.
  Princeton University Press.

The Guardian (2018). Revealed: 50 Million Facebook Profiles Harvested for Cambridge
 Analytica in Major Data Breach, by Carole Cadwalladr and Emma Graham-Harrison.

The Hill (2016). Stop Blaming Facebook for Trump's Election Win, By Keith N.
 Hampton and Eszter Hargittai.

The New Yorker (2016). Obama Reckons with a Trump Presidency, By David Remnick.

Twitter (2010). Measuring Tweets, by Kevin Weil.

Twitter (2020). Empowering US Voters on National Voter Registration Day, by Bridget
 Coyne.

UK Parliament (2019). Disinformation and `fake news': Final Report, By Digital,
 Culture, Media and Sport Committee.

Venture Beat (2008). Hitwise: Twitter Traffic Is, in Fact, Going up but Still Not Big,
  by Eric Eldon.

Wall Street Journal (2020). Twitter's Partisan Censors.

Weber, I., V. R. K. Garimella, and A. Batayneh (2013). Secular vs. Islamist Polarization
 in Egypt on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference
 on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, ASONAM '13, New York, NY,
 USA, pp. 290­297. Association for Computing Machinery.

Wired (2016). Here's How Facebook Actually Won Trump the Presidency, By Issie
 Lapowsky.

Zhuravskaya, E., M. Petrova, and R. Enikolopov (2020). Political Effects of the Internet
  and Social Media. Technical report.




                                          39
                            Figure 1: Twitter Reach by Party

              (a) Average # of tweets (per account)                  (b) Average # of followers (per account)

    5,000                                                  600,000

    4,000
                                                           400,000
    3,000

    2,000
                                                           200,000
    1,000

          0                                                      0
                 Democrat             Republican                          Democrat           Republican


               (c) Average # of likes (per tweet)                    (d) Average # of retweets (per tweet)

    800
                                                           400
    600
                                                           300

    400
                                                           200

    200                                                    100

      0                                                      0
                Democrat             Republican                         Democrat             Republican


Notes: This figure plots data on the Twitter reach of Congress members. The sample includes all
901 senators and House representatives who were in office between 2007 and 2019 for whom we
could identify a Twitter account. For each account, we plot the average number of tweets and
followers, and the average number of "likes" and retweets of their tweets. Appendix Figure A.2
replicates the figure using medians instead of averages. The data were collected from Twitter in
November 2019.




                                                      40
  Figure 2: Republican Vote Share in the 2016 Presidential Election




 1st Quintile
 2nd Quintile
 3rd Quintile
 4th Quintile
 5th Quintile


Notes: This map plots the geographical distribution of the Republican two-party vote share in the
2016 presidential election.




                                             41
                Figure 3: Twitter Usage and Identifying Variation
                                  (a) Twitter Usage per Capita




1st Quintile
2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th Quisntile
5th Quintile




                                         (b) Identifying Variation




SXSW followers March 2007
SXSW followers pre-period
SXSW followers March 2007 & pre-period
No SXSW followers


 Notes: This map plots the proxy for social media usage based on data from Twitter and the
 identifying variation of our instrument. Panel (a) plots quintiles of the number of Twitter
 users per capita. Panel (b) plots the three types of counties relevant for our identification
 strategy: 1) the 47 counties with SXSW followers that joined Twitter both in March 2007
 and the "pre-period" (light red); 2) the 108 counties with SXSW followers that joined in
 March 2007, but none in the "pre-period" (dark red); and 3) the 20 counties with SXSW
 that joined in the "pre-period," but none in March 2007 (blue).




                                                    42
Figure 4: South by Southwest (SXSW) 2007 and the Spread of Twitter
                                                     (a) Twitter Activity Around SXSW 2007

                     400                                                                                          40,000
                                                             SXSW tweets (left axis)    All tweets (right axis)



                     300                                                                                          30,000



                     200                                                                                          20,000



                     100                                                                                          10,000



                                                 0                                                                0
                                                 January        February       March      April            May




                                                      (b) SXSW and Local Twitter Adoption

                                                      0.15                                 SXSW festival starts
                Change in Twitter activity (in SD)




                                                      0.10


                                                      0.05


                                                      0.00


                                                     -0.05
                                                            w 0

                                                            w 1

                                                            w 2

                                                            we 3
                                                                 14
                                                                  3

                                                                  4

                                                                  5

                                                                  6

                                                                  7

                                                                  8

                                                            w 9
                                                                 1

                                                                 1

                                                                 1

                                                                 1
                                                        20 eek

                                                        20 eek

                                                        20 eek

                                                        20 eek

                                                        20 eek

                                                        20 eek

                                                                k
                                                       20 eek

                                                       20 eek

                                                       20 eek

                                                       20 eek

                                                              ek
                                                       20 wee
                                                             w

                                                             w

                                                             w

                                                             w

                                                             w

                                                             w
                                                       07

                                                          07

                                                          07

                                                          07

                                                          07

                                                          07

                                                          07
                                                         07

                                                         07

                                                         07

                                                         07

                                                         07
                                                     20




  Notes: Panel (a) plots the total number of tweets and the number of tweets containing the term
  "SXSW" over time, smoothed using a 7-day moving average. Panel (b) plots the estimates
                                                                              M arch2007
  of  from the panel event study regression tweetsct =               SXSWc               × 1(t =
                     P re
   ) +   SXSWc × 1(t =  ) + c + t + ct where tweetsct is the log of (one plus) the
                                                    M arch2007
  number of tweets in county c on week t, SXSWc                is the logarithm of (one plus) the
                                                                                              P re
  number of SXSW followers in county c that joined Twitter on March 2007 and SXSWc
  is a similarly defined variable for followers that joined Twitter before March 2007. We
  standardize the variables to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. The whiskers
  represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                                   43
Figure 5: First Stage ­ South by Southwest (SXSW) and Twitter Usage



                                       0.50
    Log(Twitter users), residualized




                                       0.25



                                       0.00



                                       -0.25



                                       -0.50


                                               -1.00         -0.50          0.00          0.50         1.00

                                                   Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007), residualized
   Notes: This figure presents a binned scatter plot of the relationship between Twitter users in
   2014-2015 and the number of SXSW followers who joined Twitter in March 2007. Variables
   are residualized by partialling out SXSW followers who joined before March 2007, population
   deciles, Census region fixed effects, as well as geographical, demographic, socioeconomic,
   China shock, and 1996 election control variables (see Online Appendix for control variable
   definitions). The figure is constructed by dividing the x-axis variable into 40 equal-sized bins
   and plotting the average values of both variables in each bin. The fitted line is estimated
   using the unbinned data.




                                                                     44
                             Figure 6: South by Southwest, Twitter, and the Republican Vote Share

                                                                                                         2016 Election
                                                      (a) Reduced Form                                                                                                                        (b) OLS
                                             0.02
                                                                                                                                                                      0.02
Republican vote share, 2016 (residualized)




                                                                                                                         Republican vote share, 2016 (residualized)
                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                      0.01


                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                      0.00

                                             -0.01

                                                                                                                                                                      -0.01

                                             -0.02

                                                                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                     -1.00         -0.50          0.00          0.50         1.00                                                             -1.50   -1.00        -0.50        0.00         0.50   1.00

                                                         Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007), residualized                                                                                    Log(Twitter users), residualized



                                                                                                         2020 Election
                                                      (c) Reduced Form                                                                                                                        (d) OLS
                                                                                                                                                                      0.04
Republican vote share, 2020 (residualized)




                                                                                                                         Republican vote share, 2020 (residualized)



                                             0.02



                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                                                      0.02


                                             0.00


                                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                                             -0.01



                                             -0.02

                                                                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                     -1.00         -0.50          0.00          0.50         1.00                                                             -1.50   -1.00        -0.50        0.00         0.50   1.00

                                                         Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007), residualized                                                                                    Log(Twitter users), residualized


                                             Notes: Panel (a) presents a binned scatter plot of the relationship between the Republican vote
                                             share in the 2016 presidential election and the number of SXSW followers who joined Twitter
                                             in March 2007. Variables are residualized with respect to SXSW followers who joined before
                                             March 2007, population deciles, Census region fixed effects, as well as geographical, demographic,
                                             socioeconomic, China shock, and 1996 election control variables. The figure is constructed by
                                             dividing the x-axis variable into 40 equal-sized bins and plotting the average values of both
                                             variables in each bin. The fitted line is estimated using the unbinned data. Panels (b) and (d)
                                             replicate the exercise using Twitter users in 2014-2015 as the x-axis variable. Panel (c) and (d)
                                             show results for the 2020 election.




                                                                                                                    45
     Figure 7: Twitter and Presidential Elections ­ Reduced Form
                                                                       (a) Changes in Republican Vote Share

                                                                   0.005


               Point estimate on Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)
                                                                   0.000




                                                                   -0.005




                                                                   -0.010




                                                                   -0.015

                                                                            2000-04   2000-08        2000-12   2000-16   2000-20



                                                                            (b) Change in Voter Turnout
               Point estimate on Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)




                                                                   0.015



                                                                   0.010



                                                                   0.005



                                                                   0.000



                                                                   -0.005



                                                                   -0.010
                                                                            2000-04   2000-08        2000-12   2000-16   2000-20



Notes: These figures plot reduced form estimates      ^ from county-level regressions as in equation
(2). They measure the effect of Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007), while controlling for Log(1
+ SXSW followers, Pre), on changes in the Republican vote share in presidential elections relative
to the year 2000 in Panel (a), and changes in the ratio of voter turnout to voting-age population
relative to 2000 in Panel (b). All regressions control for population deciles and Census region fixed
effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). Regressions are weighted
by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals based
on standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                                                46
Figure 8: Twitter and Congressional Election Results ­ Reduced Form
                                                                                             (a) House Elections

                                                       0.06
   Point estimate on Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)




                                                       0.04




                                                       0.02




                                                       0.00




                                                       -0.02
                                                               2000-02   2000-04   2000-06     2000-08   2000-10   2000-12   2000-14   2000-16   2000-18   2000-20




                                                                                         (b) Senate Elections

                                                       0.04
   Point estimate on Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)




                                                       0.02




                                                       0.00




                                                       -0.02




                                                       -0.04

                                                               1996-02   1998-04   2000-06     1996-08   1998-10   2000-12   1996-14   1998-16   2000-18   1996-20



Notes: These figures plot reduced form estimates       ^ from county-level regressions as in equation
(2). They measure the reduced form effect of Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007), while
controlling for Log(1 + SXSW followers, Pre), on the Republican vote share in House and Senate
elections since 2000. For House elections in Panel (a), the dependent variable is the change in the
Republican vote share since 2000. For Senate elections in Panel (b), the dependent variable is
the change in the Republican vote share from six, twelve, or eighteen years ago (to accommodate
senators' 6-year terms). All regressions control for population deciles and Census region fixed
effects and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). Regressions are weighted by
turnout in the 2000 presidential election. The whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals based
on standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                                                          47
   Figure 9: Twitter's Partisan Slant Across Presidential Elections
             (a) Tweets about Republican Presidential Candidates

                                                                                                      24%
                                                                                                      26%
                                             600
             Number of Likes (in millions)                                                            50%

                                             500


                                             400


                                             300


                                             200                               15%
                                                                               26%
                                             100       27%                     59%
                                                       11%
                                              0
                                                       62%
                                                   Election 2012          Election 2016            Election 2020

                                                       Democratic Slant         Republican Slant         Neutral Slant



             (b) Tweets about Democratic Presidential Candidates


                                             600
             Number of Likes (in millions)




                                             500


                                             400


                                             300                                                      18%
                                                                                                      37%
                                             200                                                      45%

                                                                               14%
                                             100       29%
                                                                               44%
                                                       23%
                                                                               42%
                                              0
                                                       48%
                                                   Election 2012          Election 2016            Election 2020

                                                       Democratic Slant         Republican Slant         Neutral Slant



Notes: These figures present the number of "likes" received by tweets that contain the last name
of the candidates in the 2012, 2016 and 2020 presidential elections, depending on whether the
tweet was classified as having a Republican, Democratic, or neutral slant. We classify the slant of
a tweet based on the Twitter network of the user who sent the tweet. If the user follows more
Democratic than Republican Congress members, they will be classified as a Democrat, and vice
versa. Users who follow an equal number of Democrats and Republican or no Congress members
are classified as neutral.


                                                                          48
           Table 1: South by Southwest 2007 and Twitter Usage

                                                       Dep. var.: Log(Twitter users)
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)        0.726***       0.683***   0.563***   0.524***   0.523***
                                         (0.087)        (0.079)    (0.055)    (0.048)    (0.048)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                 0.104          0.110      0.059      0.059      0.058
                                         (0.101)        (0.076)    (0.098)    (0.082)    (0.082)
 Population deciles                        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Census region FE                          Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Geographical controls                                   Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Demographic controls                                               Yes        Yes        Yes
 Socioeconomic controls                                             Yes        Yes        Yes
 China shock controls                                                          Yes        Yes
 1996 election control                                                                    Yes
 Observations                             3,065         3,065      3,064      3,064      3,064
 R2                                       0.92          0.93       0.95       0.95       0.95
 Mean of DV                                8.22          8.22       8.22       8.22       8.22
 p-value: March 2007 = Pre                 0.00          0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the number
of Twitter users (in natural logarithm). Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the number of
Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by
Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers who registered at
some point in 2006, defined similarly. The bottom row reports p-values from F-tests for the
equality of these coefficients. Regressions include the indicated control variables (see the Online
Appendix for their descriptions). Observations are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential
election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.




                                                  49
                                        Table 2: Twitter and the 2016/2020 Republican Vote Share

                                                      Dep. var.: Republican vote share in 2016                                Dep. var.: Republican vote share in 2020
                                               (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)                 (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)
      Panel A: OLS
      Log(Twitter users)                    -0.065***     -0.067***   -0.013***   -0.011***      -0.007**           -0.058***    -0.064***   -0.012***   -0.011***   -0.008***
                                             (0.009)       (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.003)        (0.003)            (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.003)
      Panel B: Reduced form
      Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)       -0.053***     -0.058***   -0.019***   -0.014***   -0.011***             -0.046***    -0.055***   -0.017***   -0.013***    -0.011**
                                             (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.004)               (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.005)
      Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                -0.021        -0.003      -0.000      -0.002      0.001                 -0.022       -0.005      -0.002      -0.004       -0.001
                                             (0.016)       (0.013)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.004)               (0.016)      (0.013)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.005)
      Panel C: 2SLS
      Log(Twitter users)                    -0.072***     -0.085***   -0.034***   -0.027***   -0.021***             -0.064***    -0.080***   -0.031**    -0.025***    -0.020**
                                             (0.016)       (0.018)     (0.010)     (0.008)     (0.008)               (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.011)     (0.009)      (0.009)




50
      Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                -0.014        0.007       0.002       -0.001      0.002                 -0.015       0.004       -0.000      -0.002       0.000
                                             (0.020)       (0.016)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.005)               (0.020)      (0.015)     (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.006)
      Population deciles                       Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes                 Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Census region FE                         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes                 Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Geographical controls                                  Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes                              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Demographic controls                                              Yes         Yes            Yes                                          Yes         Yes         Yes
      Socioeconomic controls                                            Yes         Yes            Yes                                          Yes         Yes         Yes
      China shock controls                                                          Yes            Yes                                                      Yes         Yes
      1996 election control                                                                        Yes                                                                  Yes
      Observations                            3,065         3,065      3,064        3,064         3,064               3,065        3,065       3,064       3,064       3,064
      Mean of DV                               0.46         0.46        0.46        0.46          0.46                0.47          0.47       0.47        0.47         0.47
      Robust F-stat.                          69.57         74.65      106.08      118.21        121.18               69.57        74.65      106.08      118.21       121.18
     Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the Republican vote share in the 2016 or 2020 presidential election. Log(SXSW followers,
     March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers, Pre is the
     number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in 2006, defined similarly. Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015. Regressions include the indicated
     control variables (see the Online Appendix for their descriptions). The first-stage regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B) are presented in Table 1, with the F-stat for the
     excluded instrument in the bottom row. Observations are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. ***
     p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
         Table 3: Twitter and the Republican Vote Share, 2000-2020

                                                   Dep. var.: Republican vote share in...
                                         2000      2004      2008      2012       2016        2020
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)
 Panel A: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)         -0.003    -0.005    -0.006    -0.003   -0.011***   -0.011**
                                        (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.005)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                0.001      0.001    -0.000    -0.002     0.001       -0.001
                                        (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.005)
 Panel B: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                      -0.005    -0.009    -0.011    -0.007   -0.021***   -0.020**
                                        (0.004)   (0.006)   (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.009)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                 0.001    0.001      0.000    -0.001     0.002       0.000
                                        (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.006)
 Observations                            3,064     3,064     3,064     3,064      3,064       3,064
 Mean of DV                              0.48      0.51       0.46     0.47       0.46        0.47
 Robust F-stat.                         121.18    121.18    121.18    121.18     121.18      121.18
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the Republican
vote share in presidential elections. Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users
(in logs, with 1 added inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW).
SXSW followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in 2006, defined
similarly. Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015. All regressions control for population
deciles, Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2).
The first-stage regression for 2SLS results (Panel B) are presented in column (5) of Table 1, with the
F-stat for the excluded instrument in the bottom row. Observations are weighted by turnout in the
2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                  51
           Table 4: Twitter and Individuals' Vote Decisions in 2016

                                                 Dep. var.: Voted for Trump in 2016
                                     Full         Strong      Mod.                   Mod.      Strong
                                    Sample         Dem.       Dem.       Indep.      Rep.       Rep.
                                      (1)             (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
 Panel A: Full Sample
 Log(Twitter users)                -0.129***       0.034      -0.062    -0.186***   -0.073*     0.029
                                    (0.048)       (0.061)    (0.081)     (0.069)    (0.044)    (0.065)
  Marginal effect                   [-0.047]      [0.002]    [-0.011]    [-0.064]   [-0.010]   [0.001]
 Observations                       94,523        27,572     20,447       9,142     18,863     17,304
 Mean of DV                         0.491         0.027      0.114        0.627      0.918     0.981
 Panel B: Age Group 18-39
 Log(Twitter users)                -0.146***       0.080      -0.171    -0.198**     -0.118     0.115
                                    (0.047)       (0.103)    (0.119)     (0.090)    (0.076)    (0.111)
  Marginal effect                   [-0.051]      [0.006]    [-0.026]    [-0.071]   [-0.024]   [0.009]
 Observations                       25,177         8,420      7,317       2,050      3,732      3,042
 Mean of DV                         0.376          0.043      0.089       0.466      0.859      0.956
 Panel C: Age Group 40+
 Log(Twitter users)                -0.122**        -0.028     0.013     -0.176**     -0.055     -0.035
                                    (0.052)       (0.069)    (0.079)     (0.074)    (0.050)    (0.068)
  Marginal effect                   [-0.045]      [-0.001]   [0.003]     [-0.059]   [-0.007]   [-0.001]
 Observations                       69,346        19,102     13,130       7,091     15,108     14,211
 Mean of DV                         0.535         0.020      0.128        0.679      0.934     0.987
Notes: This table presents results estimated using IV probit models, as in equation (4). The depen-
dent variable is a dummy for individuals in the CCES who voted for Trump in 2016. Log(Twitter
users) is instrumented using the (log) number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter in March 2007.
All regressions control for the (log) number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter at some point
in 2006, family income, gender, education levels, marital status, news interest, and age, as well as
county-level population deciles and Census region fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by survey
weights. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                 52
 Table 5: Twitter and Vote Shares in Republican Primaries 2016

                                        Dep. var.: Vote share in Republican Primary of...
                                        Trump       Cruz      Rubio     Bush       Kasich
                                          (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)
 Panel A: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)        -0.030**    0.004     0.016     -0.002     0.017**
                                         (0.012)   (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.001)     (0.008)
 Panel B: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                     -0.044**    0.005     0.024     -0.003     0.025**
                                         (0.017)   (0.013)   (0.015)   (0.002)     (0.011)
 Observations                            2,831      2,831     2,831     2,831       2,831
 Mean of DV                               0.48       0.23      0.09      0.01        0.15
 Robust F-stat.                          69.54      69.54     69.54     69.54       69.54
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the vote
share of the indicated candidate in the Republican party primaries in 2016. Log(SXSW
followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added inside) who
joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers, Pre is the
number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in 2006, defined similarly. Twitter
users are the number of users in 2014-2015. All regressions control for population deciles,
Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2).
The first-stage regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B) are analogous to the one presented in
Table 1, except for the different sample of counties for which primary results are available.
The F-stat for the excluded instrument is provided in the bottom row. Observations are
weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                             53
Table 6: Twitter and Candidate Approval during the 2016 Primaries

                                  Dep. var.: Approved of candidate during primaries
                          Trump         Cruz           Rubio      Kasich    Sanders   Clinton
                            (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
  Panel A: Republicans
  Log(Twitter users)    -0.108***      -0.086**         -0.051     0.018     0.031    0.148***
                         (0.030)        (0.035)        (0.060)    (0.050)   (0.039)    (0.041)
   Marginal effect       [-0.038]      [-0.029]        [-0.014]   [0.006]   [0.009]    [0.022]
  Observations            19,974        11,959          8,344     8,995     16,099     20,983
  Mean of DV              0.647          0.698          0.779     0.665     0.238      0.092
  Panel B: Independents and Leaners
  Log(Twitter users)     -0.065**       -0.006          -0.015     0.050     0.059    0.154***
                          (0.028)      (0.035)         (0.043)    (0.042)   (0.043)    (0.036)
   Marginal effect       [-0.021]      [-0.002]        [-0.006]   [0.019]   [0.021]    [0.054]
  Observations            22,852        12,135          8,080     8,280     17,356     23,813
  Mean of DV              0.329          0.392          0.516     0.581     0.595      0.380
  Panel C: Democrats
  Log(Twitter users)      -0.052       -0.116**         -0.036     0.076     0.004    0.081**
                         (0.051)        (0.054)        (0.056)    (0.051)   (0.050)   (0.038)
   Marginal effect       [-0.009]      [-0.030]        [-0.012]   [0.029]   [0.001]    [0.021]
  Observations            20,866        11,098          7,460     7,547     16,059     21,454
  Mean of DV              0.107          0.195          0.271     0.502     0.808      0.807
 This table presents results estimated using IV probit models, as in equation (4). The
 dependent variable is a dummy for individuals who approved the respective presidential
 candidate during the presidential primaries in 2015 and 2016. We restrict the sample to
 the period before Trump became the presumptive nominee in June 2016. Log(Twitter
 users) is instrumented using the number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter in March
 2007. All regressions control for the (log) number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter at
 some point in 2006, income, gender, education, and marital status, as well as county-level
 population deciles and Census region fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by survey
 weights. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
 p < 0.10.




                                                  54
A        Online Appendix
A.1.        Appendix 1: Additional Details on Data

  Table A.1: List of Congress Members with the Most Twitter Followers

 Rank     Name                          Twitter Handle         Party   Tweets     Followers      Likes    Retweets
   1.     Barack Obama                    barackobama           D       15,754    114,369,395    38,496      8,475
   2.     Hillary Rodham Clinton          hillaryclinton        D       11,491    27,026,749     22,413      6,780
   3.     Bernard Sanders                BernieSanders          D       17,667    11,436,732     19,324      3,625
   4.     Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez             AOC              D       10,087     6,596,922     30,668      8,634
   5.     Elizabeth Warren                 SenWarren            D        5,345     5,743,064      5,845      1,863
   6.     Joseph R. Biden Jr.                joebiden           D        4,228     4,507,744     11,789      2,472
   7.     Cory A. Booker                   CoryBooker           D       65,242     4,468,595      2,802       798
   8.     Mike Pence                       mike pence           R        8,069     4,397,219      2,768      4,176
   9.     Nancy Pelosi                   SpeakerPelosi          D       10,154     4,149,922     9,022       2,693
   10.    Marco Rubio                     MarcoRubio            R       12,789     4,098,788      2,642      1,608
   11.    Paul D. Ryan                    SpeakerRyan           R       14,755     3,646,397       781        260
   12.    Kamala D. Harris               KamalaHarris           D       13,119     3,476,952     10,366      2,229
   13.    John F. Kerry                     johnkerry           D        2,608     3,360,092       773        328
   14.    John McCain                   SenJohnMcCain           R       14,409     3,075,281      2,551       721
   15.    Rand Paul                         randpaul            R       13,642     2,700,813      3,926      1,491
   16.    Charles E. Schumer              SenSchumer            D       17,004     2,145,147      6,457      2,171
   17.    Adam B. Schiff                RepAdamSchiff           D        5,623     2,087,003     19,009      6,849
   18.    Ilhan Omar                        IlhanMN             D       14,678     1,947,411      6,644      2,649
   19.    Lindsey Graham               LindseyGrahamSC          R       10,872     1,535,623      5,698      1,616
   20.    Mike Pompeo                      SecPompeo            R        2,148     1,503,151      4,936      1,711
Notes: This table lists the 20 Congress members who were in office between 2007 and 2019 with the most Twitter follow-
ers at the time of data collection. Likes and retweets refer to the average number of interactions the Congress members
receive for their average tweet. The data were collected from Twitter in November 2019.




                                                           1
               Figure A.1: Validation of Twitter usage measure
                                                                     (a) Twitter Usage over Time

                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                      Statista (right axis)
           Number of Twitter users (in millions)   5


                                                                                                                                     60
                                                   4



                                                   3
                                                                                                                                     40


                                                   2

                                                                                                                                     20
                                                   1       Gesis (left axis)


                                                   0                                                                                 0
                                                            2007q1     2009q1   2011q1       2013q1    2015q1       2017q1    2019q1




                                                   (b) Twitter Usage by County (Gesis vs GfK)

                                                   12
           Log(# of households using Twitter)




                                                   10




                                                       8




                                                       6




                                                       4

                                                                 2              4               6               8               10

                                                                                    Log(Twitter users)


Notes: This graph shows two validation exercises for the Twitter usage measure in the Gesis
data (Kinder-Kurlanda et al., 2017). Panel (a) plots the number of Twitter users in the Gesis
data and the number of active monthly users reported by Statista based on Twitter's own
reporting. Panel (b) plots the percentiles of the number of Twitter users in the Gesis data at
the county-level against the number of users based on the GfK Media Survey.


                                                                                         2
                 Figure A.2: Twitter Reach by Party (Median)

               (a) Median # of tweets (per account)                 (b) Median # of followers (per account)

       4,000
                                                          25,000

       3,000                                              20,000

                                                          15,000
       2,000
                                                          10,000
       1,000
                                                           5,000

           0                                                    0
                  Democrat            Republican                         Democrat           Republican


               (c) Median # of likes (per tweet)                    (d) Median # of retweets (per tweet)

      30                                                  150


      20                                                  100


      10                                                  50


       0                                                    0
                Democrat             Republican                        Democrat            Republican


Notes: This figure plots data on the Twitter reach of Congress members. The sample includes all
901 senators and House representatives who were in office between 2007 and 2019 for whom we
could identify a Twitter account. For each account, we plot the median number of tweets and
followers, and the median number of "likes" and retweets of their tweets. The data were collected
from Twitter in November 2019.




                                                      3
                                              Figure A.3: News Reports About Social Media


                                         4000
                                                             Twitter
Number of news reports on social media




                                                             Facebook

                                         3000                                                  2016 Election



                                         2000                                2012 Election



                                         1000



                                           0
                                                1


                                                         1


                                                                  1


                                                                             1


                                                                                      1


                                                                                               1


                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                 1
                                            m


                                                     m


                                                                m


                                                                         m


                                                                                    m


                                                                                             m


                                                                                                      m


                                                                                                               m
                                          04


                                                    06


                                                              08


                                                                        10


                                                                                  12


                                                                                             14


                                                                                                    16


                                                                                                               18
                                         20


                                                    20


                                                             20


                                                                        20


                                                                                 20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                            20




                             Notes: This graph plots the number of times the terms "Twitter" and "Facebook"
                             are mentioned in USA Today, The Washington Post, The New York Post, and The
                             New York Times based on data from Nexis.




                                                                             4
                      Table A.2: Summary Statistics (County-Level)

                                                         Mean      Std. Dev.    Min.    Median      Max.        N
 Vote outcomes and Twitter data
 Republican two-party vote share (2016)                   0.46        0.17      0.08       0.45      0.95     3,065
 Change in Republican two-party vote share, 2000-2016     -0.02       0.10      -0.33     -0.03       0.45    3,065
 Republican two-party vote share (2020)                   0.47        0.17      0.09       0.45      0.96     3,065
 Change in Republican two-party vote share, 2000-2020     -0.01       0.10      -0.34     -0.02       0.48    3,065
 Log(Twitter users)                                       8.22        1.99      0.00       8.45      12.35    3,065
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)                           0.69       1.13       0.00     0.00        4.98    3,065
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                                 0.33        0.73      0.00       0.00      3.61     3,065
 Geographical controls
 Population density                                      1925.15    6342.94      0.10     508.30   69468.40   3,065
 Log(County area)                                          6.72       0.92       3.26      6.64       9.91    3,065
 Distance from Austin, TX (in miles)                     1731.21     653.61      5.04    1750.86   3098.88    3,065
 Distance from Chicago (in miles)                        1246.18    813.51       7.16    1103.75    3040.38   3,065
 Distance from NYC (in miles)                            1600.47    1255.14     6.48     1285.98   4191.67    3,065
 Distance from San Francisco (in miles)                  2841.16    1231.98     41.11    3157.16   4565.01    3,065
 Distance from Washington, DC (in miles)                 1448.51    1175.55      7.88    1047.13    3983.08   3,065
 Demographic controls
 % aged 20-24                                             0.07        0.02       0.01     0.06        0.27    3,065
 % aged 25-29                                             0.07        0.01       0.03     0.07        0.15    3,065
 % aged 30-34                                             0.07        0.01       0.03     0.06        0.12    3,065
 % aged 35-39                                             0.06        0.01       0.03     0.06        0.10    3,065
 % aged 40-44                                             0.06        0.01       0.02     0.06        0.10    3,065
 % aged 45-49                                             0.06        0.01       0.02     0.06        0.09    3,065
 % aged 50+                                               0.36        0.06      0.11      0.35       0.75     3,065
 Population growth, 2000-2016                             0.14        0.19      -0.43     0.10        1.32    3,065
 % white                                                  0.65        0.21      0.03      0.68       0.98     3,065
 % black                                                  0.12        0.12       0.00     0.08        0.85    3,065
 % native American                                        0.01        0.03       0.00     0.00        0.90    3,065
 % Asian                                                  0.05        0.06      0.00      0.03       0.37     3,065
 % Hispanic                                               0.15        0.15       0.01     0.09        0.96    3,065
 % unemployed                                             5.31        1.42      1.80      5.10       24.10    3,065
 Socioeconomic controls
 %   below poverty level                                  15.11       5.34       1.40     15.10      53.30    3,065
 %   employed in IT                                        0.02       0.02       0.00      0.02       0.21    3,065
 %   employed in construction/real estate                  0.07       0.03       0.00      0.07       1.00    3,065
 %   employed in manufacturing                             0.11       0.08       0.00      0.08       0.72    3,065
 %   adults with high school degree                       28.13       7.41       8.30     27.50      54.80    3,065
 %   adults with college degree                           20.98       3.66       8.70     20.90      35.60    3,065
 %   watching Fox News                                    0.26        0.01       0.23      0.26       0.30    3,064
 %   watching prime time TV                               0.43        0.01       0.40      0.43      0.47     3,064
 China shock controls
 Exposure to Chinese import competition                   2.63        2.02      -0.63      2.10      43.08    3,065
 Share of routine occupations                             31.87       2.36      22.23     32.14      36.66    3,065
 Average offshorability index                             -0.02       0.50      -1.64      0.09       1.24    3,065
 1996 election control
 Republican two-party vote share (1996)                   0.41        0.11       0.10     0.41       0.79     3,065
Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics for the main estimation sample, weighted by the turnout in the 2000
presidential elections.




                                                         5
      Table A.3: Summary Statistics (2016 CCES Individual-Level)

                                     Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.   Median      Max.      N
 Vote outcome
 Voted for Trump                      0.49        0.50      0.00      0.00     1.00    94,523
 Twitter data
 Log(Twitter users)                   8.31        1.92      0.69      8.45     12.35   94,523
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)      0.69        1.13      0.00      0.00     4.98    94,523
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)             0.32        0.71      0.00      0.00     3.61    94,523
 Individual control variables
 Log(Age)                             3.88        0.37      2.89      3.99     4.55    94,523
 Family income dummies                7.08        3.62      1.00      7.00     13.00   94,523
 Female dummy                         1.53        0.50      1.00      2.00     2.00    94,523
 Education dummies                    3.50        1.54      1.00      3.00     6.00    94,523
 Marital status dummies               2.34        1.71      1.00      1.00     5.00    94,523
 Interest in news dummies             1.59        0.92      1.00      1.00     7.00    94,523
Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics for the CCES estimation sample, weighted by
survey weights.



         Table A.4: Summary Statistics (Gallup Individual-Level)

                                     Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.   Median      Max.      N
 Candidate approval outcomes
 Approve   of   Trump?                0.34        0.48      0.00      0.00     1.00    64,764
 Approve   of   Kasich?               0.60        0.49      0.00      1.00     1.00     8,735
 Approve   of   Rubio?                0.50        0.50      0.00      1.00     1.00     6,201
 Approve   of   Cruz?                 0.41        0.49      0.00      0.00     1.00    11,504
 Approve   of   Sanders?              0.57        0.50      0.00      1.00     1.00    27,137
 Approve   of   Clinton?              0.43        0.50      0.00      0.00     1.00    36,367
 Twitter data
 Log(Twitter users)                   8.29        1.97      0.00      8.48     12.35   64,764
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)      0.72        1.15      0.00      0.00     4.98    64,764
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)             0.34        0.73      0.00      0.00     3.61    64,764
 Individual control variables
 Income dummies                       6.99        2.38      1.00      7.00     10.00   64,764
 Female dummy                         1.50        0.50      1.00      2.00      2.00   64,764
 Education dummies                    3.58        1.60      1.00      4.00     6.00    64,764
 Marital status dummies               1.98        0.94      1.00      2.00     5.00    64,764
 Age deciles                          4.45        2.68      1.00      4.00     10.00   64,764
Notes: This table presents descriptive statistics for the Gallup estimation sample, weighted by
survey weights.



                                              6
                            Table A.5: Instrument Balancedness

                                              March 2007      March 2007    Pre      Difference
                                               and Pre          only        only     in means               ak
                                                                                                           Sid`
                                                 (1)             (2)         (3)      (2) - (3) p-value   p-value
 Population density                             5192.27        1021.39     1998.35    -976.96     0.07*    0.91
 Log(County area)                                 6.30           6.63        6.54        0.09     0.73     1.00
 Distance from Austin, TX (in miles)            1775.99        1749.38     1626.64     122.74     0.48     1.00
 Distance from Chicago (in miles)               1439.45        1329.47     1214.42     115.05     0.53     1.00
 Distance from NYC (in miles)                   1685.31        1594.99     1510.05      84.94      0.78    1.00
 Distance from San Francisco (in miles)         2751.83        2900.11     2833.01      67.10      0.83    1.00
 Distance from Washington, DC (in miles)        1558.55        1450.23     1397.05     53.18      0.85     1.00
 % aged 20-24                                     0.07           0.08        0.08        0.00     0.92     1.00
 % aged 25-29                                     0.09           0.07        0.07       -0.00      0.51    1.00
 % aged 30-34                                     0.08           0.07        0.07       -0.00      0.58    1.00
 % aged 35-39                                     0.07           0.06        0.06       -0.00      0.82    1.00
 % aged 40-44                                     0.06           0.06        0.06        0.00     0.82     1.00
 % aged 45-49                                     0.07           0.06        0.06        0.00     0.89     1.00
 % aged 50+                                       0.32           0.35        0.35       -0.00      0.97    1.00
 Population growth, 2000-2016                     0.18           0.18        0.15        0.03     0.56     1.00
 % white                                          0.50           0.65        0.67       -0.02     0.62     1.00
 % black                                          0.18           0.12        0.08        0.04      0.20    1.00
 % native American                                0.01           0.01        0.02       -0.02    0.02**    0.45
 % Asian                                          0.10           0.05       0.05        -0.01     0.55     1.00
 % Hispanic                                       0.20           0.16        0.15       0.01      0.80     1.00
 % unemployed                                     4.86           5.05       4.51         0.54     0.07*    0.91
 % below poverty level                           15.71          15.82       13.69        2.14     0.17     1.00
 % employed in IT                                 0.04           0.02        0.02       -0.00     0.98     1.00
 % employed in construction/real estate           0.06           0.07        0.07       0.01      0.39     1.00
 % employed in manufacturing                      0.07           0.09        0.07        0.02      0.16    0.99
 % adults with high school degree                21.76          25.99       25.77        0.22      0.88    1.00
 % adults with college degree                    18.89          21.16       21.20       -0.04      0.97    1.00
 % watching Fox News                             0.25            0.26        0.26       -0.00      0.91    1.00
 % watching prime time TV                         0.42           0.43        0.43        0.00      0.91    1.00
 Exposure to Chinese import competition          2.55            2.46        2.79       -0.32      0.54    1.00
 Share of routine occupations                    32.47          31.38       31.25        0.13      0.82    1.00
 Average offshorability index                     0.37          -0.07       -0.05       -0.02     0.84     1.00
 Republican two-party vote share (1996)           0.36           0.42        0.42       -0.00     0.90     1.00
Notes: This table presents the averages for the main control variables separately for the three types of counties
relevant for our identification strategy: 1) the 47 counties with SXSW followers that joined Twitter both in March
2007 and the "pre-period"; 2) the 108 counties with SXSW followers that joined in March 2007 (but none in the
"pre-period"); and 3) the 20 counties with SXSW that joined in the "pre-period" (but none in March 2007). We
report p-values from a two-sided t-test for the equality of means between the counties with the key identifying
                       ak-corrected values to account for multiple hypothesis testing. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
variation, as well as Sid`
p < 0.1.




                                                          7
                                                     Table A.6: Description of Main Variables

    Variable                                Description                                                                                                Source
    Vote outcomes
    Republican vote share (2016/2020)       The vote share of the Republican party in the 2016 or 2020 presidential election.                  Dave Leip Election Atlas
    Republican vote share, 2000-2016/2020   Change in the vote share of the Republican party between the 2000 and 2016 (or 2020)               Dave Leip Election Atlas
                                            presidential elections.
    Twitter data
    Twitter users                           The number of Twitter users per county (in natural logarithm), based on tweets collected               Gesis Datorium
                                            using the Twitter streaming API in a 12 month period from June to November 2014 and
                                            June to November 2015.
    SXSW followers, March 2007              The number of Twitter users following the @SXSW account in each county that joined                   Twitter Search API
                                            Twitter in March 2007.




8
    SXSW followers, Pre                     The total number of Twitter users following the @SXSW account in each county that joined             Twitter Search API
                                            Twitter at any point in 2006.
    County-level control variables
    Geographical controls                   Include the distance (in miles) from the country centroid from Austin (TX), Chicago, NYC,         U.S. Census Tigerline File
                                            San Francisco, and Washington, DC, population density, and the logarithm of the land area
                                            for each county.
    Demographic controls                    Include the share of people in the age buckets 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 40-44, 45-49 and 50+, as
                                            well as the percentage change in county population between 2000 and 2016.
    Socioeconomic controls                  Include a county's poverty rate; unemployment rate; the share of the population employed       U.S. Census/BLS/SimplyAnalytics
                                            in construction/real estate, manufacturing, and information technology; the share of adults
                                            over 25 with at least a high school degree or some college education; as well as prime time
                                            TV viewership and the share of Fox News viewership.
    China shock controls                    Include the measure of import competition from China, routine tasks, and offshorability from
                                            Autor et al. (2013).
    Election control                        Contains the vote share of the Republican party in the 1996 presidential election.                 Dave Leip Election Atlas
Table A.7: Search Terms Used to Create a
Proxy for Total Tweets

     0    but       his   one  these would
     1      by     how   only   they  year
     2    can        if     or think  you
     3   come       in  other   this your
     4   could     into    our time
     5    day        it    out  two
     6      do      its   over   up
     7   even      just people   us
     8    first   know     say   use
     9     for     like    see want
     I   from     look     she  way
  about   get     make      so   we
   after  give      me   some   well
    all     go    most    take what
   also  good       my   than  when
   any   have      new   that which
    as      he      no   their  who
    at      he     not   them  with
   back   her      now   then  with
 because him        on   there work
Notes: This table lists the 100 most common En-
glish words that were used as search terms to gen-
erate a proxy of "total tweets" used in Figure 4b.




                        9
A.1.1    Additional Details on the Logistic Regression Classifier

We train a seperate machine learning classifier for each of the three election years in our
data using the Python sci-kit package (Pedregosa et al., 2011). These classifiers help
us to determine whether tweets are more likely to be sent by Democratic-leaning or
Republican-leaning users. The classification process starts with the preparation of the
underlying Twitter data. The inputs are the text of each of the 4,300,579 tweets from
U.S. Congress members. To focus on election-related tweets, we restrict the sample to
tweets that were sent either in the election year or in the year leading up to the election
(e.g. 2011 and 2012 for the 2012 election) and mention at least one of the presidential
candidates.
      The target variable y for the classifier is an indicator variable equal to one for
tweets sent by Republicans and zero otherwise. The feature matrix X for the classifier
are created by count-vectorizing the texts of the tweets. In other words, we transform
the text of the tweets into n × v matrix, where n is the number of tweets and v is
the number of unique 1,2-grams that occur in the tweets. In preparation for this step,
we removed common words (stopwords), links, and special characters from the tweets.
Additionally, we reduced the words in the tweets to their morphological roots using
a lemmatizer, which improves the performance of the classifier. As an example, the
lemmatizer changes words like "walking" and "walked" to "walk". Lastly, we reweight
the n-grams v of tweet i using term frequency­inverse document frequency (tf-idf):

                                                                  1+T
                         tf idf (fi,v ) = (1 + ln(fi,v ) · (ln(          ) + 1)             (A.1)
                                                                  1 + dv

where dv is the number of tweets n-gram v appears in. This reweighting reduces
the importance of words that appear frequently in many tweets, which help little to
discriminate between tweets. The tf-idf vectorizer also normalizes the feature matrix by
its L2-norm.
      The vector y and the matrix X then serve as the input for a L2 regularized logistic
regression classifier. The optimization of the classifier involves the minimization of the
following cost function49 :
                                n
                                                                   1
                      min C          log(exp(-yi (XiT w + c) + 1) + wT w                    (A.2)
                       w,c
                               i=1
                                                                   2
  49
    Note that this formulation of the cost function assumes that yi takes values -1; 1. We use this
formulation in line with the sci-kit documentation.


                                                  10
where w are the weights (coefficients) of the logistic regression, c is a constant (inter-
cept), and C is the inverse of the regularization strength. Larger values of C imply
weaker regularization. For C - , the classifier converges towards a normal logistic
regression. As is standard in most machine learning applications, we choose the optimal
regularization strength C using 10-fold cross-validation. This involves randomly splitting
the training data into ten equal slices. Nine of the ten slices are then used to train the
classifier, while the out-of-sample performance is evaluated against the remaining slice
using F1-scores.
       The final classifiers achieves an out-of-sample F1-score of 0.916 in 2012, of 0.843
in 2016 and of 0.904 in 2020. The classifiers, therefore, accurately predict the party
affiliation of Congress members. We then take these classifiers and apply it to the
universe of tweets sent during the 2012, 2016 and 2020 presidential election. For each
tweet in the election data, the classifiers provides us with a predicted class (either
Democrat or Republican) and a probability for this class label. To avoid that our
results are driven by tweets for which the classifier is "uncertain", we code tweets with
a predicted class probability below 60% as neutral. This adjustment has no bearing on
our findings. In spirit, this approach is similar to the work of Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2010). While they identify expressions that are more frequently used by Democrats
and Republicans by hand, we use a machine learning classifier to identify n-grams in
the tweets of Congress members that help us to differentiate between the two parties.
       We visualize the most predictive n-grams identified by the classifiers for each
election cycle in Figure A.4. Overall, the classifiers identifies words, hashtags, and
Twitter handles that are intuitively associated with a Republican slant for each election
year. Among the most predictive term are the hashtags "tcot" (Top Conservatives
on Twitter) and "maga" (Make America great again) and particularly in 2020 many
references to Donald Trump's Twitter account ("realdonaldtrump").




                                           11
Figure A.4: Most Predictive Terms Of "Republican" Tweets by Election
                                     (a) 2012 Election




                                     (b) 2016 Election




                                     (c) 2020 Election




 Notes: This word cloud plots the n-grams most predictive of tweets sounding like those of
 Republican Congress members, as identified by the logistic regression classifier for each election
 cycle. The size of the word represents the magnitude of the coefficients.
                                               12
A.2.   Appendix 2: Additional Details on the SXSW Festival

           Figure A.5: Screenshot Quote from Twitter Founder




   Notes: This screenshot shows the full post of Twitter co-founder Evan Williams posted on
   Quora on January 4, 2011 describing the role of the SXSW festival in the platform's rise to
   popularity (Quora, 2011).




                                              13
Figure A.6: Additional Evidence for the Impact of the SXSW Festival
               (a) Long-term Effects of the 2007 SXSW on Twit-
               ter Adoption



                  Diff-in-diff estimate of SXSW on Twitter usage
                                                                         0.006          SXSW festival starts




                                                                         0.004




                                                                         0.002




                                                                         0.000
                                                                               2006q2             2009q1                2012q1         2015q1




                                                                         (b) Connections to the SXSW festival

                                                                         0.6
                           Share of Twitter users with SXSW connection




                                                                         0.4




                                                                         0.2




                                                                         0.0
                                                                           2007q1            2009q1            2011q1       2013q1   2015q1

 Notes: The figures provide evidence on the long-term impact of the SXSW festival on Twitter
 usage across the United States. Panel (a) plots the  from the panel event study regression
                          M arch2007                             P re
 usersct =   SXSWc                    × 1(t =  )+   SXSWc             × 1(t =  )+ c + t + ct where
                                                                                         M arch2007
 usersct is the number of Twitter users per capita in county c on quarter t, SXSWc
 is the logarithm of (one plus) the number of SXSW followers in county c who joined Twitter
                             P re
 in March 2007 and SXSWc          is a similarly defined variable for followers who joined Twitter
 before March 2007. We standardize the variables to have a mean of zero and standard
 deviation of one. The whiskers represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors
 clustered by state, where 2006q4 serves as excluded period. While the confidence intervals for
 2006q2 and 2006q3 cannot be seen, they include zero. Panel (b) plots the share of Twitter
 who either follow SXSW or follow an user that follows SXSW.


                                                                                                           14
    Table A.8: Balancedness of SXSW Counties' User Characteristics

         First names (Corr. = 0.63)          Terms used in bio (Corr. = 0.89)
         Pre-period    March 2007            Pre-period       March 2007
          michael          michael              http                 http
           paul              john             founder                com
           mike             chris               com                 digital
           chris              jeff              tech               founder
            eric            matt              product              medium
          justin            brian                co                director
           ryan             david              digital               tech
           kevin             alex             director              music
            jeff            jason              design               social
           david            kevin              social             marketing
        Notes: This table presents the ranking of the most common first names and
        terms used in a Twitter user's "bio" among users who follow "South by South-
        west" on Twitter, depending on whether they joined during March 2007 or in
        the pre-period.




Table A.9: Are Twitter Users in Counties With SXSW Followers Different?


                 User first names                  Terms used in user bio
                  (Corr. = 0.97)                        (Corr. = 0.94)
           Other counties SXSW counties          Other counties SXSW counties
              michael           michael               love                co
               chris             david                 life             love
                john             chris                  co               life
               david              john               http              http
               sarah              alex              http co           http co
               mike              mike                 god              music
               emily             matt                   ig             lover
                ryan             sarah               music                ig
               matt              ryan              university             de
                alex            andrew                like              like
         Notes: This table compares the individual characteristics of Twitter users
         from counties with "South by Southwest" followers who joined in March
         2007 ("SXSW counties") to Twitter users from all other U.S. counties
         ("Other counties"). We plot the ranking of the most common first names
         and terms used in a Twitter user's "bio".




                                            15
A.3.     Appendix 3: Additional Robustness Checks

    Table A.10: Twitter and the Republican Vote Share ­ Robustness

                          No      Pre-period Pre-period  No zero               Spatial     Other
                       regression   control   control   SXSW user             standard    festival
                        weights   polynomial   deciles   counties               errors    controls
                          (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)                   (5)        (6)
 Panel A: Republican vote share in 2016
 Log(Twitter users)    -0.037***    -0.019***     -0.020***      -0.030**    -0.037***   -0.025***
                        (0.011)      (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.008)
 Observations            3,064         3,064           3,064       165         3,064        3,064
 Mean of DV              0.64          0.46            0.46       0.34          0.64        0.46
 Robust F-stat.          72.94        125.40          114.91      23.46        54.13       183.69
 Panel B: Republican vote share in 2020
 Log(Twitter users)     -0.036**     -0.018**      -0.019**      -0.033**    -0.036***   -0.026***
                         (0.014)      (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.016)     (0.012)     (0.010)
 Observations            3,064         3,064           3,064       165         3,064        3,064
 Mean of DV              0.65          0.47            0.47       0.35          0.65        0.47
 Robust F-stat.          72.94        125.40          114.91      23.46        54.13       183.69
Notes: This table presents 2SLS results estimated using equation (3). The dependent variable
is the vote share of the Republican party in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections in panel A
and B, respectively. Log(Twitter users) is instrumented using the number of users who started
following SXSW in March 2007 (in logs with 1 added inside). All regressions include the controls
from columns 5 and 10 in Table 2. All regressions except columns 1 and 5 are weighted by turnout
in the 2000 presidential election. Columns 2 and 3 control for a fifth-order polynomial or deciles of
SXSW followers who joined Twitter before the SXSW 2007 event. Column 4 drops all counties
that had no SXSW followers joining Twitter in March 2007 or in the period before. Column 5
uses spatial standard errors based on the method proposed in Colella et al. (2019), implemented in
Stata as acreg , using a 200 miles cutoff. Column 6 replaces SXSW followers, Pre with the number
of users who tweeted about the festivals Burning Man, Coachella, and Lollapalooza in the festival
month in 2007 (in logs with 1 added inside). In columns 1 to 4, standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                 16
Figure A.7: Twitter and the Republican Vote Share, 1924-1996 (Reduced
Form)


                       1924

                       1928

                       1932

                       1936

                       1940

                       1944

                       1948

                       1952

                       1956

                       1960

                       1964

                       1968

                       1972

                       1976

                       1980

                       1984

                       1988

                       1992

                       1996

                              -.04       -.02          0        .02        .04

                              Point estimate on Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)

   Notes: This figure plots reduced form estimates   ^ from county-level regressions as in equation
   (2). These estimates reflect the correlation of Log(1 + SXSW followers, March 2007) with
   the Republican vote share in presidential elections while controlling for Log(1 + SXSW
   followers, Pre). All regressions control for population deciles and Census region fixed effects,
   and the full set of controls except 1996 Election controls (same as columns 4 and 9 of Table 2).
   Regressions are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Whiskers represent
   95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by state.

                                                  17
Table A.11: Twitter and Changes in the Republican Vote Share, 2004-2020


                                             Dep. var.: Republican vote share between...
                                          2000-04    2000-08   2000-12    2000-16     2000-20
                                            (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)
    Panel A: Reduced form
    Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)         -0.002    -0.003     -0.001   -0.009**   -0.008**
                                           (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)
    Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                -0.000    -0.001     -0.002     0.000      -0.002
                                           (0.003)   (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)
    Panel B: 2SLS
    Log(Twitter users)                      -0.004    -0.006     -0.002   -0.017**   -0.015**
                                           (0.004)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.007)
    Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                 0.000    -0.001     -0.002     0.001      -0.001
                                           (0.003)   (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.005)
    Observations                            3,064     3,064     3,064      3,064       3,064
    Mean of DV                              0.03       -0.02     -0.01      -0.02      -0.01
    Robust F-stat.                         121.18     121.18    121.18     121.18     121.18
   Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the
   change in the vote share of the Republican party between 2000 and the indicated year.
   Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added
   inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers,
   Pre is the number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in 2006, defined similarly.
   Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015. All regressions control for population
   deciles, Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of
   Table 2). The first-stage regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B) are presented in Table 1,
   with the F-stat for the excluded instrument in the bottom row. Observations are weighted
   by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
   state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                18
Table A.12: Time-Varying Twitter Usage and Changes in Vote Shares

                                             Dep. var.: Republican vote share between...
                                         2000-04      2000-08    2000-12     2000-16    2000-20
                                           (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
 Panel A: First stage
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)        0.644***      0.644***   0.546***   0.523***    0.523***
                                         (0.055)       (0.055)    (0.047)    (0.048)     (0.048)
 Panel B: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)          -0.002       -0.003     -0.001    -0.009**    -0.008**
                                         (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.004)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                 -0.000       -0.001     -0.002      0.000       -0.002
                                         (0.003)      (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)
 Panel C: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                       -0.003       -0.005     -0.002    -0.017**    -0.015**
                                         (0.003)      (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.007)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                  0.000       -0.001     -0.002      0.001       -0.001
                                         (0.003)      (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.005)
 Observations                            3,064         3,064      3,064      3,064       3,064
 Mean of DV                               0.03          -0.02      -0.01      -0.02       -0.01
 Robust F-stat.                          135.88        135.88     134.88     121.18      121.18
 Twitter usage measured in                2008         2008       2012        2016        2016
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the change
in the vote share of the Republican party between 2000 and the indicated year (except for Panel
B, where the dependent variable is Twitter users. Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the
number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow
South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers who
registered at some point in 2006, defined similarly. Differently from other tables, Twitter users
varies over time, as opposed to being fixed to 2014-2015. All regressions control for population
deciles, Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table
2). Observations are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                 19
       Table A.13: Twitter and the Ross Perot Vote

                                       Dep. var.: Vote share Ross Perot in...
                                            1992                1996
                                           (1)     (2)       (3)        (4)
 Panel A: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)        0.000     -0.000    0.003      0.003
                                       (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)
 Panel B: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                     0.000     -0.001    0.006      0.007
                                       (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.006)
 Population deciles                        Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 Census region FE                          Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 Geographical controls                     Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 Demographic controls                      Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 Socioeconomic controls                    Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 China shock controls                      Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
 1996 election control                              Yes                 Yes
 Observations                           3,064      3,064    3,064      3,064
 Mean of DV                              0.10      0.10      0.20       0.20
 Robust F-stat.                         118.21    121.18    118.21     121.18
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable
is the third party vote share in the 1992 or 1996 presidential election. Log(SXSW
followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added in-
side) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW
followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers who registered at some point
in 2006, defined similarly. Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015.
The first-stage regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B) are presented in Table 1,
with the F-stat for the excluded instrument in the bottom row. Observations
are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                      20
         Table A.14: Twitter and Vote Shares in Democratic Primaries

                                                                 Dep. var.: Vote share in Democratic Primary of...
                                       Clinton     Sanders          Warren      Biden     Sanders     Buttigieg   Bloomberg   Klobuchar
                                        2016        2016             2020       2020       2020         2020         2020       2020
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)      (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
 Panel A: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)        0.005       -0.004            0.002     -0.009    0.017***      -0.003      0.001       -0.003
                                       (0.010)     (0.010)           (0.006)   (0.014)     (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.002)
 Panel B: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                     0.008       -0.006            0.003     -0.014    0.025**       -0.004      0.001       -0.004
                                       (0.014)     (0.014)           (0.009)   (0.021)    (0.010)      (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.002)
 Observations                           2,656          2,656         2,769      2,769      2,769        2,769       2,769       2,769
 Mean of DV                             0.55           0.43          0.06       0.56        0.24         0.02       0.06        0.01
 Robust F-stat.                         67.94          67.94         73.68      73.68      73.68        73.68       73.68       73.68
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the vote share of the indicated candidate in the
Democratic party primaries in 2016 or 2020. Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs, with 1 added
inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW). SXSW followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers
who registered at some point in 2006, defined similarly. Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015. All regressions control
for population deciles, Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). The first-stage
regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B) are analogous to the one presented in Table 1, except for the different sample of counties for
which primary results are available. The F-stat for the excluded instrument is provided in the bottom row. Observations are weighted
by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.




 Table A.15: Twitter and Vote Decisions in the 2016 CCES ­ Robustness

                                                               Dep. var.: Voted for Trump in 2016
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)                  (4)           (5)
                                                                                                    Intended      Intended
                                                                Verified         Vote                Trump          other
                                           Baseline              vote          intention              vote          vote
             Log(Twitter users)           -0.129***             -0.140**       -0.133**            -0.231***       -0.064*
                                           (0.048)               (0.056)        (0.052)             (0.082)        (0.034)
              Marginal effect              [-0.047]             [-0.051]       [-0.048]              [-0.005]      [-0.013]
             Observations                   94,523               28,413         46,418               14,723        24,354
             Mean of DV                     0.491                 0.495         0.455                0.991          0.137
           Notes: This table presents results estimated using IV probit models, as in equation
           (4). The dependent variable is a dummy for individuals in the CCES who voted
           for Trump in 2016. Log(Twitter users) is instrumented using the number of SXSW
           followers that joined Twitter in March 2007. All regressions control for the (log)
           number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter at some point in 2006, family income,
           gender, education levels, marital status, news interest, and age, as well as county-
           level population deciles and Census region fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by
           survey weights. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01,
           ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                     21
A.4.      Appendix 4: Further Results

                             Table A.16: Additional Outcomes

                        Switching prob.       Campaign don., 2000-16            Trump approval, 2017
                       Obama to Trump         Democrats     Republicans        Democrats    Republicans
                            (1)                  (2)           (3)                (4)          (5)
 Log(Twitter users)        -0.138***           0.866***         0.168           -0.011**      -0.037***
                            (0.048)             (0.185)        (0.235)           (0.005)       (0.009)
 Observations                3,065               2,250          2,446             2,727         2,920
 Mean of DV                  0.105               1.943          1.096             0.066         0.850
Notes: This table presents results from county-level regressions of equation (3). Column 1 shows results
from an IV probit regression where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 for the 217 counties for
which both Obama and Trump gained the majority of votes in 2008 and 2016, respectively. In columns 2
and 3, the dependent variable is the difference in the natural logarithm of campaign distribution to the
Democratic and Republican party, respectively, between 2000 and 2016. In columns 4 and 5, the dependent
variable is the share of respondents in the Gallup Daily Poll approving of Trump in 2017. Log(Twitter
users) is instrumented using the number of users who started following SXSW in March 2007. All regres-
sions control for population deciles and Census region fixed effects and geographical controls. Regressions
are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                   22
  Table A.17: Twitter and Changes in Voter Turnout, 2004-2020

                                             Votes cast/voting age pop.
                                        2000-04   2000-08    2000-12    2000-16    2000-20
                                          (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
 Panel A: Reduced form
 Log(SXSW followers, March 2007)         -0.000     -0.000     -0.001     0.001    0.007**
                                        (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.003)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                -0.000     0.000      -0.002    -0.001     -0.005
                                        (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)
 Panel B: 2SLS
 Log(Twitter users)                      -0.000     -0.000     -0.001     0.002    0.014**
                                        (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.006)
 Log(SXSW followers, Pre)                -0.000      0.000     -0.002    -0.001     -0.006
                                        (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)
 Observations                           3,063      3,063      3,063      3,063     3,063
 Mean of DV                             0.088       0.079     0.053       0.057    0.126
 Robust F-stat.                         121.23     121.23     121.23     121.23    121.23
Notes: This table presents county-level regressions where the dependent variable is the
change in the voter turnout (as a share of voting age population) between 2000 and the
indicated year. Log(SXSW followers, March 2007) is the number of Twitter users (in logs,
with 1 added inside) who joined in March 2007 and follow South by Southwest (SXSW).
SXSW followers, Pre is the number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in
2006, defined similarly. Twitter users are the number of users in 2014-2015. All regressions
control for population deciles, Census region fixed effects, and the full set of controls (as
in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). The first-stage regressions for 2SLS results (Panel B)
are presented in Table 1, with the F-stat for the excluded instrument in the bottom row.
Observations are weighted by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                            23
                       Table A.18: Twitter and Congressional Elections ­ 2SLS Estimates

      Panel A: House elections
                                                      Republican vote share in House election between...
                            2000-02    2000-04    2000-06    2000-08   2000-10    2000-12    2000-14   2000-16    2000-18    2000-20
                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)
      Log(Twitter users)      0.014     -0.003     0.027      0.032      0.019     0.023      0.039      0.006     0.028      0.023
                             (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.022)    (0.021)   (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.024)   (0.023)    (0.023)
      Observations           2,982       2,955    2,971      2,957      2,969      2,983      2,978     2,980       2,983    2,982
      Mean of DV              0.02       0.01      -0.04      -0.06      0.03       -0.01     0.02       0.00       -0.04     -0.01
      Robust F-stat.         109.63     110.42    109.20     109.49     109.83     109.68    110.07     109.87     109.68    109.53


      Panel B: Senate elections
                                                     Republican vote share in Senate election between...




24
                            1996-02    1998-04    2000-06    1996-08   1998-10    2000-12    1996-14   1998-16    2000-18    2000-20
                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)
      Log(Twitter users)      0.019     0.015      0.007      0.008      -0.011    0.021      -0.035     -0.013    -0.008     -0.019
                             (0.023)   (0.024)    (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.018)   (0.031)    (0.026)    (0.026)   (0.022)    (0.018)
      Observations            2,183     1,985      1,832      2,183     1,985      1,832      2,183      1,985     1,832      2,183
      Mean of DV              0.01      -0.03      -0.06      -0.05      0.01      -0.06       0.03      -0.07     -0.10      -0.00
      Robust F-stat.          79.24     85.91      72.85      79.24     85.91      72.85      79.24      85.91     72.85      79.24
     Notes: This table presents results estimated using 2SLS, as in equation (3). For House elections in Panel A, the dependent
     variable is the change in the Republican vote share since 2000. For Senate elections in Panel B, the dependent variable is
     the change in the Republican vote share from six, twelve, or eighteen years ago (to accommodate senators' 6-year terms).
     Log(Twitter users) is instrumented using the number of users who started following SXSW in March 2007 (in logs with 1 added
     inside). All regressions control for the (log) number of SXSW followers that joined Twitter at some point in 2006, population
     deciles and Census region fixed effects and the full set of controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). Regressions are weighted
     by turnout in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
     p < 0.1.
Table A.19: Twitter and the Republican Vote Share in Swing and Safe
Counties

                                      Swing         Republican   Democratic     Safe
                                     counties        counties     counties    counties
                                       (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)
       Panel A: Republican vote share 2000-2016
       Log(Twitter users)            -0.073***        -0.006       -0.008      -0.005
                                      (0.024)        (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.006)
       Log(SXSW followers, Pre)        0.013          -0.001       0.000       -0.002
                                      (0.015)        (0.014)      (0.008)     (0.005)
       Observations                    716            1,990         358        2,348
       Mean of DV                     -0.033          0.021        -0.040      -0.012
       Robust F-stat.                 14.70           11.97        105.57      99.87
       Panel B: Republican vote share 2000-2020
       Log(Twitter users)            -0.066***       -0.017**      -0.013      -0.008
                                      (0.019)         (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.006)
       Log(SXSW followers, Pre)        0.006           -0.005      -0.001      -0.003
                                      (0.012)         (0.013)     (0.009)     (0.006)
       Observations                    716            1,990         358        2,348
       Mean of DV                     -0.027          0.026        -0.026      -0.002
       Robust F-stat.                 14.70           11.97        105.57      99.87
      Notes: This table presents results estimated using 2SLS, as in equation (3). The
      dependent variable is the change in the vote share of the Republican party between
      the 2000 and 2016/2020 presidential elections in panels A and B, respectively.
      Swing counties are those that were not consistently won by either Republicans or
      Democrats between 2000 and 2012; Republican and Democratic counties are those
      who voted consistently. Log(Twitter users) is instrumented using the number of
      users who started following SXSW in March 2007. SXSW followers, Pre is the
      number of SXSW followers who registered at some point in 2006. All regressions
      control for population deciles and Census region fixed effects and the full set of
      controls (as in columns 5 and 10 of Table 2). Regressions are weighted by turnout
      in the 2000 presidential election. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
      state. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                               25
                                                  Figure A.8: Twitter's Partisan Slant (Tweet Measure)
(a) Tweets about Republican Presi-                                                                                (b) Tweets about Democratic Presi-
dential Candidates                                                                                                dential Candidates
                                                                                          34%
                                                                                          28%
                                  250                                                     37%                                                       250
 Number of Tweets (in millions)




                                                                                                                   Number of Tweets (in millions)
                                  200                                                                                                               200



                                  150                                                                                                               150

                                                                   24%                                                                                                                                      31%
                                  100                              27%                                                                              100                                                     27%
                                                                   49%                                                                                                                                      42%
                                                                                                                                                                                     22%
                                   50       35%                                                                                                      50       38%                    39%
                                            14%                                                                                                               36%                    39%
                                            51%                                                                                                               36%
                                    0                                                                                                                 0
                                        Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020                                                      Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020

                                            Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant                                                    Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant




                                  Notes: These figures present the number of tweets (as opposed to the number of "likes" as in
                                  Figure 9 received by tweets that contain the last name of the candidates in the 2012, 2016 and
                                  2020 presidential elections, depending on whether the tweet was classified as having a Republican
                                  (instead of Democratic) slant. We classify the slant of a tweet based on the Twitter network
                                  of the user who sent the tweet. If the user follows more Democratic than Republican Congress
                                  members, they will be classified as a Democrat, and vice versa. Users who follow an equal number
                                  of Democrats and Republican or no Congress members are classified as neutral.




                                                                                                             26
                                         Figure A.9: Twitter's Partisan Slant (Text-Based Classifier)
(a) Likes for Tweets about Republi-                                                                               (b) Likes for Tweets about Demo-
can Presidential Candidates                                                                                       cratic Presidential Candidates
                                                                                          11%
                                  600
                                                                                          38%                                                       600
                                                                                          51%
 Number of Likes (in millions)




                                                                                                                   Number of Likes (in millions)
                                  500                                                                                                               500


                                  400                                                                                                               400


                                  300                                                                                                               300                                                     10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                            47%
                                  200                                                                                                               200                                                     43%
                                                                   17%
                                                                   39%
                                                                                                                                                                                     13%
                                  100       9%                     44%                                                                              100       12%
                                                                                                                                                                                     65%
                                            12%                                                                                                               36%
                                                                                                                                                                                     22%
                                    0
                                            79%                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                              52%
                                        Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020                                                      Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020

                                            Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant                                                    Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant




(c) Tweets about Republican Presi-                                                                                (d) Tweets about Democratic Presi-
dential Candidates                                                                                                dential Candidates
                                                                                          12%
                                                                                          53%
                                  250                                                     35%                                                       250
 Number of Tweets (in millions)




                                                                                                                   Number of Tweets (in millions)




                                  200                                                                                                               200



                                  150                                                                                                               150

                                                                   15%                                                                                                                                       7%
                                  100                              30%                                                                              100                                                     47%
                                                                   55%                                                                                                                                      46%
                                                                                                                                                                                     11%
                                   50       9%                                                                                                       50       14%                    51%
                                            12%                                                                                                               40%                    38%
                                            78%                                                                                                               46%
                                    0                                                                                                                 0
                                        Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020                                                      Election 2012          Election 2016           Election 2020

                                            Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant                                                    Democratic Slant        Republican Slant         Neutral Slant




                                  Notes: These figures present the number of "likes" received by tweets, or the number of tweets,
                                  that contain the last name of the candidates in the 2012, 2016 and 2020 presidential elections,
                                  depending on whether the tweet was classified as having a Republican (instead of Democratic)
                                  slant. We classify the slant of a tweet based on similarity in the language to that of a congressional
                                  Republican or Democrat, using a L2 regularized logistic regression classifier using the tweets sent
                                  by Congress members. Optimal normalization strength is chosen using 10-fold cross-validation.
                                  Tweets with a predicted class probability below 60% are coded as neutral. See Appendix A.1.1 for
                                  details.




                                                                                                             27
                                                          Figure A.10: Specification Curve
                                                      (a) 2016 Presidential Election Results
                                       0
                                       -.02
Coefficient Twitter Usage (IV)

                                       -.04
                                       -.06
                                       -.08
                                       -.1




                                            TV
                                 Socioeconomic
                                  Demographic
                                   China_Shock
                                    Geographic
                                     Population
                                       Election
                                         Ethnic
                                 Census_Region
                                       -.12




                                     Population
                                 Census_Region
                                    Geographic
pad




                                  Demographic
                                         Ethnic
                                 Socioeconomic
                                            TV
                                   China_Shock
                                            TV
                                 Socioeconomic
                                  Demographic
                                   China_Shock
                                    Geographic
                                     Population
                                       Election
                                         Ethnic
                                 Census_Region




                                   Notes: These figures plot the 2SLS estimates and 95% confidence intervals from a re-
                                   gression of the Republican vote share in 2016 on Log (T witter users), instrumented with
                                   SXSW M arch 2007 . All regressions include population deciles, census region fixed effects, and
                                   SXSW P re . The combination of the other included control variables is shown at the bottom;
                                   filled circles mean a set of controls was included. The baseline specification with all controls
                                   is marked by the vertical line.




                                                                                28
                                                          Figure A.10: Specification Curve
                                                      (b) 2020 Presidential Election Results
                                       0
                                       -.02
Coefficient Twitter Usage (IV)

                                       -.04
                                       -.06
                                       -.08
                                       -.1




                                            TV
                                 Socioeconomic
                                  Demographic
                                   China_Shock
                                    Geographic
                                     Population
                                       Election
                                         Ethnic
                                 Census_Region

                                     Population
                                 Census_Region
                                    Geographic
pad




                                  Demographic
                                         Ethnic
                                 Socioeconomic
                                            TV
                                   China_Shock
                                            TV
                                 Socioeconomic
                                  Demographic
                                   China_Shock
                                    Geographic
                                     Population
                                       Election
                                         Ethnic
                                 Census_Region




                                   Notes: These figures plot the 2SLS estimates and 95% confidence intervals from a re-
                                   gression of the Republican vote share in 2020 on Log (T witter users), instrumented with
                                   SXSW M arch 2007 . All regressions include population deciles, census region fixed effects, and
                                   SXSW P re . The combination of the other included control variables is shown at the bottom;
                                   filled circles mean a set of controls was included. The baseline specification with all controls
                                   is marked by the vertical line.




                                                                                29
A.5.      Appendix 5: Additional Details on the Extrapolation for
          the Average Treatment Effect
Andrews and Oster (2019) show how selection into participating in an experiment can
 be used to make extrapolations regarding the external validity of an experiment. They
 illustrate their approach using the experiment from Bloom et al. (2015) within a Chinese
 call centre in which workers were asked to volunteer for a work-from-home program.
 50% of workers volunteered and were then randomly assigned to either treatment and
 control group. Given this, the measured treatment effect from the experimental sample
 might be different from the average treatment effect for the population as a whole, since
 the volunteers likely receive a higher utility from the work-from-home program.
        When a set of covariates X is observed for both the "experimental sample" and
"population," Andrews and Oster (2019) provide a procedure that uses effect heterogeneity
 based on X estimated within the experimental sample to extrapolate to the average
 treatment effect for the "population."
        We build on their procedure and argue that we can similarly use heterogeneity in
 the treatment effect within the counties that "identify" our results to extrapolate the
 treatment effect to all other counties in the US. Column (4) of Table A.10 show that we
 obtain similar estimates to our baseline when we only compare counties with SXSW
 followers that joined Twitter in March 2007 to counties with followers that joined in the
 pre-period, while excluding those counties in neither group. We can use this subsample
 of counties as the "experimental sample", and extrapolate effects to the "population" of
 all other counties.
        Since Andrews and Oster (2019) approach is designed for a binary treatment, we
 adjust our regression framework by defining a treatment indicator variable equal to
1 for counties with SXSW followers who joined in March 2007 and 0 for the counties
with followers that joined in the pre-period. We estimate the treatment effect for the
 subsample of counties that do not have zero SXSW followers in both periods using
 the regression specification yc =  +  · 1[SXSWcM arch2007 > 0] + c . The resulting
 treatment effect estimate is -0.075, which is similar Table 2 Panel B column (1).50 We
 then perform a linear prediction of this treatment effect based all observable variables
 in Table A.5 within this subsample. The resulting predicted treatment effect is -0.085.
  50
     Note that our regression specification does not include controls, as in the Andrews and Oster (2019)
approach. Moreover, partialling out the controls and applying the Frisch-Waugh theorem was not
feasible since the residualized treatment would no longer be binary.



                                                  30
Last, we extrapolate the treatment effect for the rest of US counties. Based on the
variation in observable characteristics we would predict an ATE of -0.218 for the US
overall.
      Note that this extrapolation is based on adjusting our reduced-form estimates
to use a binary indicator variable for treatment thus the coefficients are not directly
comparable to our baseline estimates. The approach further assumes quasi-random
treatment assignment with in the counties with SXSW variation. Taken this into account,
the extrapolation should therefore be viewed as suggestive, but confirming the notion
that the effect for all US counties would be larger since the more urban counties for
which we have variation in our instrument tend to be Democratic strongholds, and thus
likely have fewer independents and moderate Republicans, for which we find the largest
persuasion effects (in survey data).




                                          31
