                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SUBURBANIZATION IN THE UNITED STATES 1970-2010

                                        Stephen J. Redding

                                       Working Paper 28841
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28841


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




I am grateful to Princeton University for research support. This paper was invited for the 100th-
year anniversary of Economica, published by the London School of Economics. I am grateful to
the editors for the invitation to participate in this event. I would also like to thank Daniel Sturm
and participants at the conference for their helpful comments. The U.S. Census Bureau data on
commuting from the population census were made available through the NBER Research Project
on the Economics of Transportation in the 21st Century funded by a grant through the National
Science Foundation (NSF) from the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT): https://
www.nber.org/programs-projects/projects-and-centers/transportation-economics-21st-century/. I
would like to thank Nate Baum-Snow and Caitlin Gorback for their help with the data. I am also
grateful to thank Maximilian Schwarz for excellent research assistance. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Suburbanization in the United States 1970-2010
Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 28841
May 2021
JEL No. R12,R30,R40

                                         ABSTRACT

The second half of the twentieth century saw large-scale suburbanization in the United States,
with the median share of residents who work in the same county where they live falling from 87
to 71 percent between 1970 and 2000. We introduce a new methodology for discriminating
between the three leading explanations for this suburbanization (workplace attractiveness,
residence attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions). This methodology holds in the class
of spatial models that are characterized by a structural gravity equation for commuting. We show
that the increased openness of counties to commuting is mainly explained by reductions in
bilateral commuting frictions, consistent with the expansion of the interstate highway network
and the falling real cost of car ownership. We find that changes in workplace attractiveness and
residence attractiveness are more important in explaining the observed shift in employment by
workplace and employment by residence towards lower densities over time.


Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics &
School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
1        Introduction

One of the most striking features of the United States in the period since the Second World War was subur-

banization: the dispersion of population from central cities and an increase in commuting distances to work.

By the year 2019, the average one-way commute to work in the United States was 27.6 minutes, and a record

9.8 percent of commuters reported daily one-way commutes of at least one hour.1 Workers make this substan-

tial daily investment, to live and work in di erent locations, so as to balance their living costs and residential

amenities with the employment and income opportunities at their place of employment. The resulting sprawl

of suburban neighborhoods has been blamed for a number of ills, including environment degradation from

the destruction of open countryside; urban blight including increased crime and a decline in quality of public

schools in central cities; increased segregation by levels of human capital, race and ethnicity; and deteriorating

city nances as more of the tax base moves beyond city boundaries.

        Although this decentralization of both population and employment in the United States is a widely-accepted

feature of the post Second World War period, there remains considerable debate about the economic forces un-

derlying it, and there has is no commonly-accepted theoretical framework for assessing the relative contribu-

tions of these di erent forces. Our main contribution is to develop a methodology for discriminating between

the three leading explanations for this observed increase in commuting: (i) workplace forces including a dis-

persion of manufacturing from central cities; (ii) residence forces, including increased demand for residential

 oor space and changes in local amenities, such as crime and local public schools; (iii) bilateral commuting

costs, including the expansion of the inter-state highway network. Our methodology holds in an entire class of

spatial models that are characterized by a structural gravity for commuting, in which bilateral commuting ows

depend on bilateral commuting frictions, a workplace xed e ect and a residence xed e ect. The key idea

underlying our approach is to use the observed changes in commuting ows and the structure of the gravity

equation from this class of models to reveal the relative importance of these di erent explanations.

        We implement this methodology using population census data on bilateral commuting ows between U.S.

counties from 1970-2000. We document three large-scale changes in observed patterns of commuting in the

late-twentieth century United States. First, counties became substantially more open to commuting ows.

Between 1970 and 2000, the median share of residents who work in the same county where they live fell from

87 to 71 percent, and the fraction of counties with values for this share of less than 50 percent increased almost

fourfold from around 5 percent to about 18 percent.2 Second, there was a dispersion of both employment and
    1
        Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Travel Time to Work in the United States, American Community Survey (ACS) Reports, 2019.
    2
        In 1960, the median share of residents who work in the same county where they live stood even higher at 91 percent.




                                                                  1
population from central cities, with the distributions of both workplace and residence employment shifting

towards lower densities over this time period. Third, the shift in the distribution was larger for workforce

employment than for residence employment, with the result that the distribution of workplace employment

became substantially less spatially concentrated over time.

   We show how our structural gravity approach can be used to consistently estimate measures of workplace

attractiveness, residence attractive and bilateral commuting frictions. We are able to undertake this estimation

without making assumptions about the values of model parameters, such as the dispersion of idiosyncratic pref-

erences, because these parameters are already incorporated into our estimates of each of these components. We

also estimate these components without taking a stand on whether they are exogenous or endogenous, because

each of these components is separately identi ed by the log additive structure of the commuting gravity equa-

tion. We use these estimates to undertake counterfactuals in which we change one or more of these components

and solve for the new spatial equilibrium distribution of economic activity. We use these counterfactuals to

evaluate the relative importance of each component or mechanism in the model, as in the macroeconomics lit-

eratures on growth and business cycle accounting. Again we do not take a stand on whether these components

are exogenous or endogenous. Regardless of what form the underlying causal forces take, our counterfactu-

als isolate the relative importance of each component or mechanism in the model, as in the macroeconomics

literature on growth and business cycle accounting.

   We show that changes' in bilateral commuting frictions are the dominant force explaining the observed in-

crease in counties openness to commuting over time. Holding workplace and residence attractiveness constant

at their 2000 values and changing only bilateral commuting frictions to their 1970 values, the median share of

residents who work in the same county where they live rises from 71 to 85 percent, almost as large as the rise to

87 percent observed in the data. This pattern of results points towards the importance of reductions in bilateral

travel costs, associated for example with the falling real costs of car ownership and the continued expansion

of the interstate highway system over this time period.

   We show that this decline in bilateral commuting frictions is less important than changes in workplace

and residence attractiveness in explaining the observed shift in employment by workplace and employment by

residence towards lower densities over time. Holding bilateral commuting frictions and residence attractiveness

constant at their 2000 values and changing only workplace attractiveness to its 1970 values, the number of

counties with shares of employment by residence below the 10th percentile of the 2000 distribution falls from

307 to 193, larger than the fall to 204 observed in the data. Similarly, holding bilateral commuting frictions

and workplace attractiveness constant at their 2000 values and changing only residence attractiveness to its



                                                       2
1970 values, the number of counties with shares of employment by residence below the same threshold falls

from 307 to 246, compared to the fall to 204 observed in the data. In contrast, holding residence and workplace

attractiveness constant at their 2000 values and changing only bilateral commuting frictions to their 1970 values,

the number of counties with shares of residence employment below the same threshold actually increases to

487. These ndings for workplace and residence attractiveness are consistent with a role for forces such as the

relocation of manufacturing and changes in amenities in central cities in explaining the observed movement

of economic activity towards lower densities over time during our sample period.

   We focus on counties throughout our empirical analysis, because of the availability of publicly-available

data on the matrix of bilateral commuting ows between counties over a long historical time period. Counties

also have two other advantages from the point of view of our empirical analysis. First, county boundaries are

relatively stable from 1970 until 2000, whereas the boundaries of smaller spatial units, such as census tracts,

are subject to greater changes over time. Second, most counties have thousands of residents, and hence issues

of granularity from the realized values of variables departing from their expected values as result of sampling

variation are much less of a concern at the county level than for smaller spatial units. Finally, to the extent

that openness to commuting also increased at ner spatial scales within counties, our results are likely to be

conservative in understating the overall increase in openness to commuting over time.

   Our research is related to three separate lines of work that have proposed transport improvements, the

decline of manufacturing in central cities, and changes in amenities and local public goods in central cities as

potential explanations for the observed decentralization of economic activity. A rst line of research has used

quasi-experimental sources of variation to provide empirical evidence on the impact of transport improve-

ments, as reviewed in Redding and Turner (2015). One group of studies has used variation across cities and

regions, including Chandra and Thompson (2000), Michaels (2008), Duranton and Turner (2011, 2012), Faber

(2014), Duranton et al. (2014), Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), Donaldson (2018), and Baum-Snow et al. (2019).

A second group of studies has looked within cities, including McDonald and Osuji (1995), Gibbons and Machin

(2005), Baum-Snow and Kahn (2005), Billings (2011), Brooks and Lutz (2018) and Heblich et al. (2020). Par-

ticularly relevant is a third group of studies that have examined the impact of interstate highway rays from

central cities. A robust nding from this empirical literature is that these transport improvements lead to a

decentralization of economic activity, which is larger for population than employment, including Baum-Snow

(2007), Baum-Snow et al. (2017), Baum-Snow et al. (2019) and Baum-Snow (2019).

   A second strand of research has emphasized the decline of manufacturing employment in central cities

as a result of changes in production technology, transportation costs and international trade. Whereas in the



                                                        3
late-19th century, central cities in the United States contained major concentrations of manufacturing activity,

tradeable and non-tradeable services now account for the vast majority of employment. A number of stud-

ies have drawn attention to this transformation of urban areas and the spatial distribution of manufacturing

employment, including Brezis and Krugman (1997), Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004), Stevens and Holmes (2004),

Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2009), Michaels et al. (2019) and Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2021).

    A third group of studies have pointed towards changes in amenities, crime and public schools as important

drivers of the dispersion of population from central cities. Research on crime and public schools include Ben-

abou (1996), Benabou and Fernandez (1996), Glaeser and Sacerdote (1999), and Eckert and Kleineberg (2021).

A number of studies highlight increased segregation in terms of race, ethnicity and human capital, including

Platt Boustan (2000), Platt Boustan and Margo (2009), Fogli and Guerrieri (2019), and Chetty et al. (2020). As

our bilateral commuting data aggregates all types of workers together, we are unable to explore segregation by

worker characteristics, and focus instead on characterizing changes in the overall distribution of workers and

residents across locations. More recently, several studies have pointed to a reversal of post-war trends of sub-

urbanization, with gentri cation and increases in population density in central cities, including Guerrieri et al.

(2013), Couture and Handbury (2020) and Couture et al. (2020). This resurgence of central cities is, however,

concentrated in recent years after the end of our sample period in 2000.

    Besides these three main candidate explanations for suburbanization, our paper is related to three addi-

tional areas of research. First, it contributes to research on the internal structure of cities and the separation of

workplace and residence. Early theoretical research in this area assumed a monocentric city structure, includ-

ing Alonso (1964), Mills (1967) and Muth (1969). Subsequent theoretical research modelled non-monocentric

organizations of economic activity in linear cities or symmetric circular cities, as in Fujita and Ogawa (1982),

Fujita and Krugman (1995) and Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg (2002). More recent work has developed quantita-

tive urban models, which capture the rich asymmetric organizations of economic activity observed in the data,

including Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), Allen et al. (2017), Monte et al. (2018), Tsivanidis (2018), Owens III et al. (2020)

and Miyauchi et al. (2021), as recently reviewed in Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017).

    Second, our work connects with the wider theoretical and empirical literature on economic geography and

agglomeration, including Henderson (1974), Krugman (1991), Krugman and Venables (1995), Fujita et al. (1999),

Fujita and Thisse (2002), Davis and Weinstein (2002), Rossi-Hansberg (2005), Redding and Sturm (2008), Allen

and Arkolakis (2014), Kline and Moretti (2014), Redding (2016), Caliendo et al. (2018), Dingel and Tintelnot

(2020) and Kleinman et al. (2021), as reviewed in Duranton and Puga (2004), Rosenthal and Strange (2004),

Moretti (2011), Combes and Gobillon (2015) and Redding (2021).



                                                          4
      Finally, our ndings are related to a historical literature on suburbanization in the United States and other

countries, including Warner (1978), Hershberg (1981), Jackson (1987), Jacobs (1992), Fogelson (2003), Rae (2005),

Angel and Lamson-Hall (2014) and Lee (2020). We focus on the substantial suburbanization that occurred in the

last three decades of the twentieth century, during which the automobile was the dominant mode of transport.

But this suburbanization is a continuation of a longer-term trend from improvements in transport technology,

dating back to the railway era of the 19th century, as analyzed in Heblich et al. (2020).

      The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops our theoretical framework. Section

3 introduces our data. Section 4 presents reduced-form evidence. Section 5 reports our quantitative ndings.

Section 6 summarizes our conclusions.


2      Theoretical Framework

We consider an economy that consists of a discrete set of locations indexed by n, i  N , which will corre-

spond to counties in our empirical application below. Time is discrete and is indexed by t. The economy as a

whole is populated with an exogenous continuous measure of workers (Lt ), who are geographically mobile and

endowed with one unit of labor that is supplied inelastically. Workers simultaneously choose their preferred

residence n and workplace i given their idiosyncratic draws. With a continuous measure of workers, the law of

large numbers applies, and the expected values of variables for a given residence and workplace equal the re-

alized values. We allow locations to di er from one another in terms of their attractiveness for production and

residence, as determined by productivity, amenities and the supply of oor space, and transport connections,

where each of these location characteristics can evolve over time.

2.1     Workplace-Residence Choice

The preferences of a worker  who lives in location n and works in location i at time t depend on residence

attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ), bilateral commuting frictions (nit ), and an idiosyncratic

amenity draw that is speci c to each worker and residence-workplace pair (bni ( )):

                                                        bnit ( )
                                           Unit ( ) =            Rnt Wit .                                     (1)
                                                         nit

      This speci cation of the worker's choice of residence and workplace encompasses a large class of spatial

models. We use residence attractiveness (Rnt ) to capture any characteristic of a residential location that makes

it a more attractive place to live, including residential amenities, such as scenic views, local public goods such

as crime and schools, and the cost of housing. We use workplace attractiveness (Wit ) to capture anything about

a workplace that it makes it a more attractive place to work, including the wage, compensating di erentials

                                                         5
and access to surrounding consumption opportunities. We use bilateral commuting frictions (nit ) to capture

any feature of a bilateral commute that makes it more or less costly for the worker, including public transit

options, travel time, and congestion. For some individual pairs of locations (e.g. Manhattan and Los Angeles),

these bilateral commuting frictions may be su ciently large that the measure of commuters is negligible. The

idiosyncratic amenity (bnit ( )) captures all of the idiosyncratic factors that can lead individual workers to live

and work in di erent locations.

    In general, residential attractiveness, workplace attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions are all

endogenous. For example, the price of housing is included in residential attractiveness (Rnt ) and is determined

by the market clearing condition for housing in each location. Similarly, the wage is included in workplace

attractiveness (Wit ) and is the solution to the market clearing condition for labor in each location. Additionally,

both residential and workplace attractiveness can be in uenced by agglomeration economies in the density of

surrounding economic activity. Finally, bilateral commuting frictions (nit ) include congestion, which depends

on the spatial equilibrium distribution of economic activity across all locations. Despite the endogeneity of each

of these three terms, we show how they can be consistently estimated using only the observed data on bilateral

commuting ows and the structural gravity equation in this class of models. As in the literature estimating rm

and worker xed e ects using linked employee-employer datasets, each of these terms is separately identi ed

through the log additive structure of the gravity equation. Nevertheless, when we undertake counterfactuals

for changes in each of these terms below, it is important to keep in mind that they are endogenous, and hence

that these counterfactuals reveal the relative importance of di erent mechanisms in the model for the observed

variation in the data, and do not necessarily capture causal e ects of exogenous changes in these terms.

    As in a long line of research in transportation and spatial economics following McFadden (1974), we assume

that worker idiosyncratic preferences for each workplace-residence pair are drawn independently each period

from an extreme value distribution:
                                                              -
                                                  G(z ) = e-b ,

where we normalize the Fréchet scale parameter to one, because it enters the model isomorphically to residence

and workplace attractiveness; a smaller Fréchet shape parameter  implies greater heterogeneity in idiosyn-

cratic amenities, which in turn implies that worker location decisions are less sensitive to economic variables.

    A rst key implication of this extreme value speci cation for idiosyncratic preferences is that the uncon-

ditional probability a worker chooses to commute from residence n to workplace i follows a gravity equation:
                                       Lnit            (Rnt Wit /nit )
                                  nit = ¯ =                                ,                                     (2)
                                        Lt          rN   N (Rrt W t /r t )

where Lnit is the measure of commuters from residence n to workplace i.

                                                         6
    Therefore, the probability of commuting between residence n and workplace i depends on the characteris-

tics of that residence n, the attributes of that workplace i and bilateral commuting costs ("bilateral resistance").

Furthermore, this probability also depends on the characteristics of all residences r, all workplaces       and all

bilateral commuting costs ("multilateral resistance"). A large reduced-form literature nds that the gravity

equation provides a good approximation to observed commuting ows, as reviewed for example in Forthering-

ham and O'Kelly (1989) and McDonald and McMillen (2010).

    Summing across workplaces i in these bilateral commuting probabilities (2), we obtain what we term the

"residence probability," namely the probability that a worker lives in residence n (R         ¯
                                                                                    nt = Rnt /Lt ):


                                     N     Ln   t    Rnt              N   (Rnt W t /n t )
                          R
                          nt =        ¯t            = ¯ =                                   ,                    (3)
                                      L               Lt         rN       N (Rrt W t /r t )

where Rnt denotes the measure of residents in location n at time t. Rewriting these residence probabilities, they

depend on residential attractiveness (Rnt ) and a measure of residents' commuting market access (RM Ant ):

                                                         Rnt RM Ant
                                                R
                                                nt =                  ,                                          (4)
                                                        rN Rrt RM Art

where residents' commuting market access (RM Ant ) summarizes access to surrounding employment opportu-

nities and equals the weighted average of workplace attractiveness (Wit ) in each location, using the commuting

frictions (-
           nit ) as weights:
                                                                              1


                                         RM Ant =            (W t /n t )          .                              (5)
                                                        N

    Summing across residences n in these bilateral commuting probabilities (2), we obtain what we term the

"workplace probability," namely the probability that a worker is employed in workplace i (L         ¯
                                                                                          it = Lit /Lt ):



                                    rN     Lrit       Lit           rN    (Rrt Wit /rit )
                           L
                           it =       ¯t            = ¯ =                                   ,                    (6)
                                      L               Lt        rN        N (Rrt W t /r t )

where Lit denotes the measure of workers in location i at time t. Rewriting these workplace probabilities, they

depend on workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and a measure of workers' commuting market access (W M Ait ):

                                                        Wit W M Ait
                                             L
                                             it =                     ,                                          (7)
                                                        N W t W M A t

where workers' commuting market access (W M Ait ) summarizes access to surrounding residential opportuni-

ties and equals the weighted average of residential attractiveness (Rnt ) in each location, using the commuting

frictions (-
           nit ) as weights:
                                                                              1


                                         W M Ait =              (Rrt /rit )       .                              (8)
                                                        rN


                                                            7
   From the commuting probabilities (2), the residence probability (3) and the workplace probability (6), we

can compute two measures of the openness of a location to commuting ows, one by residence, and the other

by workplace. The residence-based measure is the share of residents who work where they live, which we term

the "conditional residence probability":

                                     nnt           (Wnt /nnt )         Wnt /nnt
                           R
                           nnt|n =       =                       =                  .                        (9)
                                     R
                                     nt            N (W t /n t )       RM Ant

This conditional residence probability (R
                                        nnt|n ) does not depend on residence attractiveness (Rnt ), because

it conditions on living in a given residence. Therefore, residence attractiveness (Rnt ) is the same across all

possible choices of workplaces conditional on living in that residence, and cancels from the numerator and

denominator of this conditional probability.

   The corresponding workplace-based measure is the share of workers who live where they work, which we

term the "conditional workplace probability":

                                     nnt           (Rnt /nnt )         Rnt /nnt
                           L
                           nnt|n =       =                       =                  .                       (10)
                                     L
                                     nt            N (Rrt /rnt )       W M Ant

This conditional workplace probability (L
                                        nnt|n ) does not depend on workplace attractiveness (Wit ), because it

conditions on working in a given workplace. Therefore, workplace attractiveness (Wit ) is the same across all

possible choices of residence conditional on working in that workplace, and cancels from the numerator and

denominator of this conditional probability.

   The residence probability (3), workplace probability (6) and conditional residence probability (9) play a

key role in our empirical analysis below. Using these relationships, we can decompose the observed shares of

residents who work where they live for each county (R                                                     R
                                                    nnt|n ), the share of people who live in each county (nt )

and the share of people who work in each county (L
                                                 nt ) into the contributions of residence attractiveness (Rnt ),

workplace attractiveness (Wnt ) and bilateral commuting frictions (nnt ).

   Finally, another key implication of our extreme value speci cation for idiosyncratic preferences is that

expected utility is equalized across all pairs of residences and workplaces:
                                                              1

                          ¯t =                                                 -1
                          U                 (Rrt W t /r t )       ,                     ,                   (11)
                                   rN N

where  (·) is the Gamma function.

   The intuition for this prediction for expected utility is that bilateral commutes with attractive economic

characteristics (high workplace and residence attractiveness and low commuting frictions) attract additional

commuters with lower idiosyncratic amenities, until expected utility (taking into account idiosyncratic ameni-

ties) is the same across all bilateral commutes.

                                                        8
        This speci cation of workers' commuting decisions in terms of residence attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace

attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (nit ) encompasses an entire class of spatial models that

are consistent with the structural commuting gravity equation (2). This class of models includes the classical

urban model with one good and no trade costs (as in Ahlfeldt et al. 2015); extensions of the classical urban model

with traded and non-traded goods (as in Heblich et al. 2020); economic geography versions of the Eaton and

Kortum (2002) model with multiple goods and trade costs (as in Redding 2016); economic geography versions

of the Armington model with goods di erentiated by origin and trade costs (as in Allen and Arkolakis 2014);

and new economic geography models with love of variety, increasing returns to scale and trade costs (as in

Helpman 1998, Redding and Sturm 2008 and Monte et al. (2018)). Each of the models in this class takes a

di erent stand on what determines residence attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral

commuting frictions (nit ). As our quantitative approach below uses only the structural gravity equation (2),

it holds throughout this class of models.


3        Data

Our data source is the population census of the U.S. Census Bureau for 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000. The de nition

of residence in the population census dates back to the 1790 Census Act and corresponds to "usual residence,"

as de ned as the place where a person lives and sleeps most of the time. The 1960 census was the rst to

ask place-of-work questions, including the name of the city or town where the work takes place, whether it is

inside or outside the city limits, the name of the county, and the name of the state. Beginning with the 1970

census, the place-of-work information was expanded to include the street address and ZIP code of the work

location. The de nition of workplace corresponds to the place of work in the previous week. We use publicly-

available tabulations from the U.S. Census Bureau of the number of bilateral commuters from each workplace

county to each residence county for every census decade from 1970 to 2000.3 We focus on the 48 contiguous

U.S. states plus Washington DC, excluding counties in the states of Alaska and Hawaii. We combine these

data with information of the geographical characteristics of counties, including geographical land area and the

latitude and longitude of their centroids. We use this information on latitude and longitude to compute the

geographical (Great Circle) distance between the centroids of counties. We use consistent de nitions of county

boundaries from 1970-2000, using 1990 counties as our base and the cross-walk developed in Eckert and Peters
    3
     These data on bilateral commuting ows were obtained through the NBER Research Project on the Economics of Transportation in
the 21st Century funded by a grant through the National Science Foundation (NSF) from the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT):
https://www.nber.org/programs-projects/projects-and-centers/transportation-economics-21st-century/. Although we have data on
the share of residents who work in the same county where they live from the 1960 population census, we do not have the full matrix
of bilateral commuting ows between counties for that year.




                                                                9
(2018). We restrict attention to a balanced panel of counties for which we can construct consistent de nitions

of county boundaries across all four years.


4    Reduced-form Evidence

In this section, we provide reduced-form evidence on the large-scale suburbanization that occurred during the

last three decades of the twentieth century. We begin by providing evidence on the evolution of the openness

of counties to commuting over time. In Figure 1, we display kernel density estimates of the distribution of

the share of residents who work in the same county where they live (R            R
                                                                    nnt|n = nnt /nt ) in 1970 and 2000.

At the beginning of our sample period, there is a large concentration of counties with own commuting shares

of above 80 percent, with the median own commuting share equal to 87 percent. By the end of our sample

period, there is marked shift in the distribution of counties towards lower own commuting shares of less than

80 percent, with the median own commuting share equal to 71 percent. This pattern is even more marked if

we compare the 2000 distribution to the data available on the share of residents who work where they live in

the 1960 census, in which the median own commuting share is 91 percent.

Figure 1: Distribution across Counties of the Share of Residents who Work in the Same County Where They
Live in 1970 and 2000 (Conditional Residence Probability, Rnnt|n )
                                          4
                    Probability density
                                          3
                                          2
                                          1
                                          0




                                              0            .2          .4           .6            .8         1
                                                  Share of residents who work in the same county where they live
                                                                            2000           1970


Notes: dashed and solid black lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of residents who
work in the same county where they live (R                 R
                                           nnt|n = nnt /nt ) across counties in 1970 and 2000, respectively; gray shading shows 95
percent point con dence intervals; data from the U.S. population census.




                                                                             10
   This nding of increased openness to commuting is robust across a wide range of speci cations. First, we

 nd a similar pattern using the alternative measure of the own commuting share of the share of workers who

live where they work (nit /L
                           it ), in which the median own commuting share falls from 90 percent in 1970 to

80 percent in 2000. Second, in our baseline speci cation in Figure 1, we focus on unweighted distributions

of own commuting shares across counties, as implied by our model, and because we are concerned with the

distribution of economic activities across space. Nevertheless, we nd a similar pattern of increasing openness

to commuting if we instead estimate kernel densities, weighting counties by their residence probabilities (R
                                                                                                           nt )

or workplace probabilities (L
                            it ). Therefore, the typical person at the end of our sample period lives in a county

that is more open to commuting than at the beginning of our sample period, with the residents-weighted

median county experiencing a fall in the own commuting share from 88 percent to 77 percent.

   We next turn to the evolution of the workplace employment distribution across counties over time. In

Figure 2, we display kernel density estimates of the distribution of the log workplace probability (L
                                                                                                    it ) in 1970

and 2000. We nd a clear shift in distribution of workplace probabilities towards lower values over time, with

a decline in the mass of the distribution at intermediate values, and an increase in the mass in the lower tail.

While the point estimates for the upper tail of the distribution of workplace probabilities in 2000 also typically

lie above those for 1970, the di erence is much smaller and within the 95 percent con dence intervals. In

our baseline speci cation, we focus on the workplace probability (L
                                                                  it ), as implied by our model. But we nd

a similar pattern using the distribution of workplace employment density per unit of geographical land area,

with a strong shift in workplace employment towards lower densities over time.




                                                       11
Figure 2: Distribution across Counties of the Share of People who Work in each County
(Workplace Probability, L nt )




                                           .4
                                           .3
                     Probability Density
                                           .2
                                           .1
                                           0




                                                -14   -12         -10         -8              -6              -4
                                                            Log Workplace Probability
                                                            Workplace 2000         Workplace 1970


Note: dashed and solid black lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of people who work
in each county (Lnt ) across counties in 1970 and 2000, respectively; gray shading shows 95 percent point con dence intervals; data
from the U.S. population census.



       Finally, we examine the evolution of the residence employment distribution across counties over time. In

Figure 3, we display kernel density estimates of the distribution of the log residence probability (R
                                                                                                    nt ) in 1970

and 2000. Again, we nd a shift in the distribution towards lower values over time, with a decline in the mass of

the distribution at intermediate values, and an increase in the mass in the lower tail. Although these changes in

the distribution of residence employment probabilities are statistically signi cant at conventional levels, they

are smaller in magnitude than those for the distribution of workplace employment probabilities.4 Therefore,

while the workplace employment distribution is more spatially concentrated than the residence employment

distribution in both 1970 and 2000, it displays a greater shift towards decentralization over time. Again, in our

baseline speci cation in Figure 3, we focus on the residence probability (R
                                                                          nt ), as implied by our model. But

we nd a similar pattern using the distribution of residence employment density per unit of geographical land

area, with a shift in residence employment towards lower densities over time.
   4
   In a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we reject the null hypothesis that the 1970 and 2000 distributions of residence probabilities are the
same at conventional levels of signi cance.




                                                                        12
Figure 3: Distribution across Counties of the Share of People who Live in each County
(Residence Probability, Rnt )




                                           .4
                                           .3
                     Probability Density
                                           .2
                                           .1
                                           0




                                                -14   -12         -10         -8              -6              -4
                                                            Log Residence Probability
                                                            Residence 2000         Residence 1970


Note: dashed and solid black lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of people who live in
each county (R nt ) across counties in 1970 and 2000, respectively; gray shading shows 95 percent point con dence intervals; data from
the U.S. population census.



5     Quantitative Results

In this section, we estimate our structural gravity equation for bilateral commuting ows in equation (2), and

recover estimates of residence attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ), and bilateral commuting

frictions (nit ). In Subsection 5.1, we provide evidence on the predictive power of the model's structural grav-

ity equation for the observed data. In Subsection 5.2, we construct our estimates of workplace and residence

attractiveness for each year. In Subsection 5.3, we undertake our counterfactuals to evaluate the relative contri-

butions of residence attractiveness, workplace attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions to the observed

changes in commuting patterns during our sample period.

5.1    Gravity Equation Estimation

The key insight underlying our approach is to use the observed bilateral commuting data and the log additive

structure of the gravity equation in this class of spatial models to reveal the relative importance of these three

sets of determinants of the spatial distribution of economic activity. From the unconditional commuting prob-

ability (2) and expected utility (11), the probability that a worker commutes from residence n to workplace i at

time t can be written as the following gravity equation:


                                                                        13
                                                nit = t Rnt Wit dist- 
                                                                    ni unit ,                                                (12)

where Rnt is a residence xed e ect; Wit is a workplace xed e ect; we have parameterized bilateral commut-

ing frictions between counties as a constant elasticity function of geographical (Great Circle) distance between

their centroids (distni ) and a stochastic error (unit ): -         -
                                                          nit = distni unit ; the elasticity on distance ( ) is a com-

posite of the elasticity of commuting ows with respect to commuting costs ( ) and the elasticity of commuting

costs with respect to distance (); the stochastic error (unit ) captures all components of bilateral commuting

frictions that are not captured by bilateral distance, such as transport infrastructure and public transit options;
    ¯t / )- is a constant that captures the common level of expected utility across all locations, where this
t  (U

constant is only separately identi ed from the xed e ects up to a normalization.

       We estimate the commuting gravity equation (12) for each year separately using the Pseudo Poisson Max-

imum Likelihood (PPML) estimator of Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006). This estimator yields theoretically

consistent estimates of the xed e ects, (as shown in Fally 2015) and allows for granularity and zeros in bi-

lateral commuting ows (as discussed in Dingel and Tintelnot 2020). Separate identi cation of the residence

(Rnt ) and workplace (Wit ) xed e ects requires in the language of graph theory that counties that are con-

nected through commuting networks, which is satis ed in almost all cases.5

       In Table 1, we report the estimation results, where each column corresponds to a di erent census year from

1970-2000. Consistent with the large reduced-form literature that has estimated commuting gravity equations,

we nd a negative and statistically signi cant relationship between bilateral commuting ows and bilateral

distance. This estimated coe cient captures both the direct e ect of distance on commuting ows and any

indirect e ect through the provision of less transport infrastructure for commutes of longer distances. Com-

paring Columns (1)-(4), we nd that the estimated coe cient on bilateral distance falls over time. This pattern

of results is consistent with the idea that the expansion of the interstate highway system and the fall in the real

cost of car ownership over our sample period reduced commuting costs over longer distances relative to those

over shorter distances.
   5
     We use the ppmlhdfe command for Poisson estimation with high-dimensional xed e ects from Correia et al. (2020). Of the 57,493
bilateral workplace-residence pairs, less than 200 singleton observations are dropped in each year.




                                                               14
                                          Table 1: Gravity in Commuting 1970-2000

                    PPML                               (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
                                                      nit              nit             nit             nit
                    distance                        -3.609           -3.315          -3.254          -3.201
                                                     (0.110)          (0.081)         (0.075)         (0.066)
                    Residence xed e ects               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
                    Workplace xed e ects               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
                    Observations                     54,298           54,228          54,280          54,395
                    Pseudo R2                         0.24              0.21           0.20            0.19
                    Year                              1970             1980            1990            2000
Note: Observations are a cross-section of residence-workplace pairs of counties in a given year; Columns (1), (2), (3) and (4) show
results for 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000, respectively; distance is the great circle distance (Haversine formula) between the centroids of
counties; all speci cations include residence xed e ects and workplace xed e ects; all speci cations estimated using the Poisson
Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimator; standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust; *** denotes signi cance
at the 1 percent level; ** denotes signi cance at the 5 percent level; * denotes signi cance at the 10 percent level; data from the U.S.
population census.



    To explore further the changes in commuting patterns over our sample period, we distinguish between the

extensive margin (the number of workplace-pairs with positive commuting ows) and the intensive margin

(the number of commuters conditional on positive commuting ows). Starting with the extensive margin, of

the 57,493 residence-workplace pairs in our sample, we nd that 88.2 percent have positive bilateral commuting

 ows in 2000, and 85.8 percent have more than ten commuters in that year. As the de nition of workplace in

the population census is based on the place of work in the previous week, while the de nition of residence is

based on the place where a person lives and sleeps most of the time, some of these positive observations could

re ect business trips. In Figure 4, we display the share of residence-workplace pairs with positive commuting

 ows in each year, expressed as a share of those with positive commuting ows in 2000, which implies that

2000 mechanically has a share of one. As apparent from the gure, we nd a more than 40 percent increase

in the number of residence-workplace pairs with positive commuting ows between 1970 and 2000, which

occurs gradually over the course of our sample period. Again this pattern of results is consistent with the

progressive expansion of the interstate highway system and fall in the real cost of car ownership over time

reducing commuting costs and raising the number of workplace-residence pairs with positive commuting costs.




                                                                  15
                                                                                    Figure 4: Extensive Margin of Commuting Gravity 1970-2000




                                                                               1
                    Share with positive flows (as a share of 2000 positives)
                                                                               .8
                                                                               .6
                                                                               .4
                                                                               .2
                                                                               0




                                                                                        1970            1980             1990            2000

Note: Share of residence-workplace pairs with positive bilateral commuting ows in each year, as a share of the number with positive
bilateral commuting ows in the year 2000 (therefore 2000 = 1); data from the U.S. population census.



    Turning now to the intensive margin, we take logs in the commuting gravity equation (12), which drops

any zeros from the sample. We next re-estimate this log linear commuting gravity equation using the two-way

 xed e ects estimator, and use the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem to explore the explanatory power of bilateral

distance relative to the workplace and residence xed e ects. First, we regress the log unconditional commuting

probability on the workplace and residence xed e ects, and generate the residual. Second, we regress the log

of bilateral distance on the workplace and residence xed e ects, and generate the residual. Third, we regress

the two residuals on one another, which allows us to focus on the conditional correlation between bilateral

commuting ows and distance, after conditioning on the workplace and residence xed e ects.

    In Figure 5, we display a scatter plot of the two residuals for the year 2000, as well as the linear regression

 t between them. We nd a strong negative and statistically signi cant relationship between residual log

commuting ows and residual log distance. We nd that residual log distance has substantial explanatory power

in this relationship, with an R-squared of 0.55. Consistent with our modelling of bilateral commuting ows as

a constant elasticity function of bilateral distance, we nd an approximately log linear relationship between

residual log commuting ows and residual log distance. At the very highest values of residual log distance, we

observe a slight attening of this relationship. Recall that the de nition of workplace in the population census

is based on the place of work in the previous week, while the de nition of residence is based on the place where



                                                                                                               16
a person lives and sleeps most of the time. Therefore, some of these measured commutes over long distances

could re ect business trips, which are likely to be less sensitive to bilateral distance. Although, for brevity, we

focus on results for the year 2000, we nd a similar pattern of results across the other years of our sample.

                                Figure 5: Intensive Margin of Commuting Gravity 2000




Note: Figure shows residual log commuting probabilities against residual log distance in 2000; residuals from ordinary least squares
(OLS) regressions of each variable on workplace and residence xed e ects; red line shows the linear t from the regression of the two
residuals on one another; data from the U.S. population census.


5.2    Estimating Workplace and Residence Attractiveness

We now construct our estimates of workplace and residence attractiveness using the model's predictions for

the unconditional commuting probability (2) and expected utility (11). Returning to the gravity equation (12),

we drop the term in bilateral distance and absorb all bilateral commuting frictions into the error term:


                                                                    -
                                                     nit = Rnt Wit Knit ,                                                      (13)

where the residence xed e ect (Rnt ) now captures all characteristics of a residence that a ect its commuting

 ows (including its average distance to other counties); the workplace xed e ect (Wit ) now captures all char-

acteristics of a workplace that a ect its commuting ows (including its average distance to other counties); the
             -
error term (Knit = t -
                     nit ) absorbs all bilateral commuting frictions (including bilateral variation in distance),

as well as the constant (t ), where this constant is again only separately identi ed from the xed e ects up to

a normalization.


                                                                17
      An advantage of this more parsimonious speci cation of the commuting gravity equation is that it allows

us to estimate residence and workplace xed e ects non-parameterically, without imposing any functional

form assumptions on how variables such as bilateral distance a ect commuting ows. We can estimate this

commuting gravity equation without knowledge of the Fréchet shape parameter , which determines the re-

sponsiveness of commuting decisions to economic variables in the model, because it is incorporated into our

estimates of workplace attractiveness (Wit ) from the workplace xed e ect, residence attractiveness (Rnt ) from
                                                             -
the residence xed e ect, and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ) from the error term. In this estimation, we

use only our assumptions of structural gravity, namely that bilateral commuting ows depend log additively

on residence attractiveness, workplace attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions. Again we estimate

the gravity equation (13) separately for each year of our sample period. We use the estimated residence xed

e ects from equation (13) as our measure of residential attractiveness (Rnt ) in each year; the estimated work-

place xed e ects from equation (13) as our measure of workplace attractiveness (Wit ) in each year; and the
                                                                                        -
estimated residual from equation (13) as our measure of bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ).

5.3     Counterfactuals

Using our estimates of the structural gravity equation in this class of spatial models, we now undertake coun-

terfactuals to evaluate the relative importance of changes in residential attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace at-
                                                        -
tractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ) in explaining the suburbanization observed during

our sample period. In Subsection 5.3.1, we introduce our approach for evaluating the contributions of these

three terms to the observed changes in the conditional residence probability (R
                                                                              nnt|n ), the residence probability

(R                                   L
 nt ) and the workplace probability (nt ). In Subsection 5.3.2, we implement this approach using our bilateral

commuting data for U.S. counties from 1970-2000.

5.3.1    Exact-hat Algebra Counterfactuals

We undertake our counterfactuals using an "exact hat algebra" approach similar to that used in the quantitative

international trade literature following Dekle et al. (2007). We start at the observed equilibrium in our baseline

year of T = 2000 at the end of our sample period, and undertake counterfactuals for changes in residential
                                                                                           -
attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ), going backwards

in time to an earlier year t < T . In particular, we use the property of this class of spatial models that the

counterfactual equilibrium conditions in any earlier year can be written in terms of the value of the endogenous

variables in our baseline year and the relative changes in variables between the two years.

      Using this property, we can write the conditional residence probability in an earlier year (R
                                                                                                  nnt|n ) in equation



                                                          18
(9) in terms of its value in our baseline year (R
                                                nnT |n ) and the change in workplace attractiveness (Wnt ) and
                            -
bilateral commuting costs (Knnt ):
                                                                            -
                                                                R
                                                                nnT |n Wnt Knnt
                               R
                               nnt|n   =   R      R
                                           nnT |n nnt|n   =                     -
                                                                                       ,                      (14)
                                                                N   R
                                                                    n T |n W t Kn t

where we use a hat above a variable to denote a relative change in that variable, such that Wnt = Wnt /WnT .

    Similarly, the residence probability in an earlier year (R
                                                             nt ) in equation (3) can be expressed in terms of its

value in our baseline year (R
                            nT ) and the change in residence attractiveness (Rnt ) and residents' commuting

market access (RM Ant ) as follows:

                                                           R
                                                           nT Rnt RM Ant
                                     R    R R
                                     nt = nT nt =                                  ,                          (15)
                                                             R
                                                          rN rT Rrt RM Art

where the change in residents' commuting market access (RM Ant ) depends on the conditional residence prob-

ability in our baseline year (R
                              n T |n ) and the changes in workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting

costs (Knit ):
                                                                      -
                                       RM Ant =           R
                                                          n T |n W t Kn t .                                   (16)
                                                     N

Finally, the workplace probability in an earlier year (L
                                                       it ) in equation (6) can be written in terms of its value

in our baseline year (L
                      iT ) and the changes in workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and workers' commuting market

access (W M Ait ):
                                                          L
                                                          iT Wit W M Ait
                                     L    L L
                                     it = iT it =                                  ,                          (17)
                                                          N    LT W tW M A     t

where the change in workers' commuting market access (W M Ait ) depends on the conditional workplace

probability in our baseline year (L
                                  iT ) and the changes in residence attractiveness (Rnt ) and bilateral commuting
        -
costs (Knit ):
                                                                       -
                                       W M Ait =           L
                                                           riT |n Rrt Krit .                                  (18)
                                                     rN

    Using the observed initial commuting probabilities in our baseline year of 2000 (R        R    L
                                                                                     nnT |n , nT , iT ) and our

estimates of changes in residence attractiveness, workplace attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions
              -
(Rnt , Wit , Knit ), we can implement the counterfactuals in equations (14)-(18). A number of points about this

procedure are worthy of remark. First, our estimates of residence attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness
                                           -
(Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ) in each year from equation (13) exactly rationalize the observed

commuting ows in each year. Therefore, if we start at the observed initial commuting probabilities in our

baseline year of T = 2000 (R        R    L
                           nnT |n , nT , iT ) and undertake a counterfactual simultaneously changing all three

components of residence attractiveness, workplace attractiveness and bilateral commuting frictions (Rnt , Wit ,

                                                          19
 -
Knit ), we necessarily exactly replicate the observed commuting probabilities in an earlier year t < T (R
                                                                                                        nnt|n ,

R    L
nt , it ). We use this property to examine the relative importance of each of these components separately

compared to changing them all simultaneously.

   Second, our counterfactuals use the observed commuting probabilities in our baseline year of T = 2000

(R        R    L
 nnT |n , nT , iT ) to control for the determinants of commuting patterns in that baseline year. One implication

of this approach is that if the observed commuting probabilities in our baseline year T = 2000 are equal to

zero, the counterfactual commuting probabilities in an earlier year t < T are necessarily also equal to zero.

An advantage of undertaking our counterfactuals backwards in time is that there are far fewer workplace-

residence pairs with positive ows that subsequently become zeros than those with zeros that subsequently

become positive ows, because of the more than 40 percent increase in the number of workplace-residence

pairs with positive commuting ows established above.

   Third, we use our counterfactuals to evaluate the relative importance of di erent mechanisms in the model,

by changing residential attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (WiT ) and bilateral commuting frictions
  -
(KniT ) individually, and comparing the predicted commuting probabilities in an earlier year (R       R    L
                                                                                              nnt|n , nt , it ) to

the observed values of these commuting probabilities in the data in that earlier year. While we use this exercise

to assess the relative importance of di erent mechanisms, it does not necessarily have a causal interpreta-
                                                                 -
tion. For example, the change in bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ) itself could be in uenced by the changes

in residence attractiveness (Rnt ) and workplace attractiveness (Wit ) that a ect the return to endogenous in-

vestments in transport infrastructure. Similarly, the changes in residence attractiveness (Rnt ) and workplace

attractiveness (Wit ) themselves could be a ected by investments in transport infrastructure that a ect the sur-

rounding concentration of economic activity, and hence agglomeration forces. Regardless of the direction in

which causality runs, or whether it runs in both directions simultaneously, our counterfactuals isolate the rel-

ative importance of these three mechanisms for the observed changes in commuting patterns in the data, as in

the literature on growth and business cycle accounting in macroeconomics.

   Fourth and nally, the counterfactual residence probability (R
                                                               nt ) in equation (15) and the counterfactual

workplace probability (L
                       nt ) in equation (17) depend on the changes in all three components of residence at-
                                                                                         -
tractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ), both directly and

through the terms in residents' and workers' commuting market access terms (RM Ant and W M Ait , respec-

tively). In contrast, the counterfactual conditional residence probability (R
                                                                            nnt|n ) in equation (14) only depends
                                                                                      -
on the changes in workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ), because the changes

in residence attractiveness (Rnt ) cancel from the numerator and denominator of this conditional probability,



                                                       20
as discussed in Section 2 above.

5.3.2   Counterfactual Predictions

We now use our estimates from the commuting gravity equation (13) to implement our three sets of counter-

factuals for changes in residential attractiveness (Rnt ), workplace attractiveness (Wit ) and bilateral commuting
            -
frictions (Knit ). We begin with the conditional residence probability (R
                                                                        nnt|n ), before turning to the residence

probabilities (R                                   L
               nt ) and the workplace probability (nt ).



Conditional Residence Probability (R
                                   nnt|n )         In Figure 6, we reproduce the observed distributions of the

share of residents who work in the same county where they live in 1970 (medium dashed black line) and 2000

(solid black line) from Figure 1 above. Alongside these observed distributions, we show the counterfactual

distribution from starting with the observed data in 2000 and only changing bilateral commuting frictions

(short dashed red line). We also display the corresponding counterfactual distribution from starting with the

observed data in 2000 and only changing workplace attractiveness (long dashed red line). As discussed above,

changes in residential attractiveness have no impact on these distributions, because conditional on living in a

residence, they do not a ect the relative attractiveness of di erent workplaces.

   As apparent from the gure, we nd that almost all of the observed increase in the openness of counties
                                                                                  -
to commuting over time is explained by changes in bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ). The counterfactual

distribution only changing bilateral commuting frictions closely replicates the sharp increase in the mass of

counties at high own commuting shares in the observed 1970 distribution relative to the observed 2000 distribu-

tion. We nd that changes in workplace attractiveness (Wit ) do make a contribution to the increased openness

of counties to commuting over time. The counterfactual distribution only changing workplace attractiveness

has less mass at intermediate values for the own commuting share from 0.4-0.6 and greater mass at higher

values for the own commuting share from 0.8-0.9. Nevertheless, the contribution from changing workplace

attractiveness is substantially smaller than that from changing bilateral commuting frictions.

   Taken together, this pattern of results is consistent with the view that the primary reason for the increased

openness of counties to commuting is reductions in the bilateral costs of commuting, including the expansion

of the interstate highway system and the decrease in the real cost of car ownership over time.




                                                       21
Figure 6: Shares of Residents who Work in the Same County Where They Live (Conditional Residence Proba-
bility, R
        nnt|n ), Actual Shares in 2000, and Actual and Counterfactual Shares in 1970




                                           4
                     Probability density
                                           3
                                           2
                                           1
                                           0




                                               0             .2            .4          .6           .8         1
                                                   Share of residents who work in the same county where they live
                                                                    2000                    1970
                                                                    Cftual Bilateral        Cftual Workplace


Note: lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of residents who work in the same county
where they live (R                   R
                   nnt|n = nnt /nt ); black (dark) solid line shows values for 2000; black (dark) dashed line shows results for 1970;
red (light) dashed line shows counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing the workplace xed e ects
to 2000 values; red (light) dotted lines shows counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing bilateral
commuting frictions; gray shading shows 95 percent point con dence intervals; data from the U.S. population census.



Workplace Probability (L
                       nt ) In Figure 7, we reproduce the observed distributions of the share of people

who work in each county in 1970 (medium dashed black line) and 2000 (solid black line) from Figure 2 above.

Alongside these observed distributions, we display three counterfactual distributions. First, we show the coun-

terfactual distribution starting from the observed data in 2000 and only changing bilateral commuting frictions

(short dashed red line). Second, we show the counterfactual distribution starting from the observed data in

2000 and only changing workplace attractiveness (long dashed red line). Third, we show the counterfactual

distribution starting from the observed data in 2000 and only changing residential attractiveness (dashed-dotted

blue line).

    We nd that the dominant explanation for the observed changes in the workplace probabilities is workplace

attractiveness (Wit ), which directly a ects the choice of workplace in equation (17). The counterfactual distri-

bution only changing workplace attractiveness closely replicates the sharp increase in the mass of counties at

intermediate log workplace probabilities (from -10 to ­9) and the decrease in the mass of counties at low log

workplace probabilities (below -11) in the observed 1970 distribution relative to the observed 2000 distribution.
                                                            -
    In contrast, changes in bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ) and residence attractiveness (RnT ) a ect the


                                                                                  22
choice of workplace in equation (17) through the travel-time weighted sum of residents' market access (RM Ant ).

Of these two other determinants of workplace probabilities, we nd that changes in residence attractiveness
                                                                                   -
(Rnt ) are somewhat more important than changes in bilateral commuting frictions (Knit ). The counterfactual

distribution only changing residence attractiveness generates more of an increase in the mass of counties at in-

termediate log workplace probabilities (from -10 to ­9), as found in moving from the observed 2000 distribution

to the observed 1970 distribution. By comparison, the counterfactual distribution only changing bilateral com-

muting frictions generates too much of an increase in the mass of counties at low log workplace probabilities

(below -11), relative to the observed changes in the data.

Figure 7: Distribution across Counties of the Share of People who Work in each County, Actual Shares in 2000,
Actual and Counterfactual Shares in 1970
                                            .4
                                            .3
                      Probability Density
                                            .2
                                            .1
                                            0




                                                 -14       -12              -10                 -8        -6                  -4
                                                                        Log Workplace Probability
                                                       Workplace 2000                  Workplace 1970          Cftual Bilateral
                                                       Cftual Workplace                Cftual Residence


Note: lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of people who work in each county (L          nt );
black (dark) solid line shows values for 2000; black (dark) dashed line shows results for 1970; red (light) dashed line shows counterfactual
results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing the workplace xed e ects to 2000 values; red (light) dotted lines shows
counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing bilateral commuting frictions; blue (intermediate) dot-dash
line shows counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing the residence xed e ects to 2000 values; gray
shading shows 95 percent point con dence intervals; data from the U.S. population census.



    This pattern of results in consistent with the view that changes in employment opportunities (such as the

reallocation of manufacturing away from central cities) are the most important factor in explaining the ob-

served shift in the distribution of workplace probabilities towards lower densities from 1970 to 2000. Changes

in residential amenities (such as crime and public schools) also play a role. In contrast, as shown in the pre-

vious section, reductions in bilateral commuting probabilities are more important in explaining the increased



                                                                                  23
openness of counties to commuting over time.


Residential Probability (R
                         nt )      In Figure 8, we reproduce the observed distributions of the share of people

who live in each county in 1970 (medium dashed black line) and 2000 (solid black line) from Figure 3 above.

Alongside these observed distributions, we again display three counterfactual distributions, starting from the

observed data in 2000 and changing in turn bilateral commuting frictions (short dashed red line), workplace

attractiveness (long dashed red line), and residential attractiveness (dashed-dotted blue line).

   We nd that changes in residential attractiveness (Rnt ) and workplace attractiveness (Wit ) are approxi-

mately as important as one another in explaining the observed changes in residence probabilities. Both the

counterfactual distribution only changing residence attractiveness and the counterfactual distribution only

changing workplace attractiveness show the same in increase in the mass of counties at intermediate log resi-

dence probabilities (from -10 to ­9) and the decrease in the mass of counties at low log residence probabilities

(below -11), as found in moving from the observed 1970 distribution to the observed 2000 distribution. In con-

trast, the counterfactual distribution only changing bilateral commuting frictions generates too much of an

increase in the mass of counties at low log residence probabilities (below -11).

   Combined with the results for workplace probabilities above, these ndings suggest that changes in em-

ployment opportunities (such as the reallocation of manufacturing away from central cities) and residential

amenities (such as crime and public schools) are important in explaining the overall shift of economic activity

towards lower densities from 1970 to 2000. Nevertheless, reductions in bilateral commuting frictions are key

to understanding the di erential movements in employment by workplace versus employment by residence,

and hence the increase in openness to commuting over time.




                                                       24
Figure 8: Distribution across Counties of the Share of People who Live in each County, Actual Shares in 2000,
Actual and Counterfactual Shares in 1970




                                           .4
                                           .3
                     Probability Density
                                           .2
                                           .1
                                           0




                                                -14       -12              -10                 -8        -6                  -4
                                                                       Log Residence Probability
                                                      Residence 2000                  Residence 1970          Cftual Bilateral
                                                      Cftual Workplace                Cftual Residence


Note: lines show kernel (epanechnikov) density estimates of the distribution of the share of people who live in each county (R nt ); black
(dark) solid line shows values for 2000; black (dark) dashed line shows results for 1970; red (light) dashed line shows counterfactual
results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing the workplace xed e ects to 2000 values; red (light) dotted lines shows
counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing bilateral commuting frictions; blue (intermediate) dot-dash
line shows counterfactual results starting at the observed values for 1970 and changing the residence xed e ects to 2000 values; gray
shading shows 95 percent point con dence intervals; data from the U.S. population census.



6     Conclusions

Suburbanization is one of the most striking features of the United States in the period since the Second World

War. Although this decentralization of population and employment is a widely-accepted feature of the econ-

omy, there remains considerable debate about the economic forces underlying it. One line of research empha-

sizes workplace forces (such as a dispersion of manufacturing from central cities), while a second group of

studies point towards residence factors (amenities such as crime and public schools), and a third body of work

stresses bilateral commuting costs (including the expansion of the interstate highway system and the falling

real cost of car ownership).

    We develop a new methodology for discriminating between these three leading explanations for the ob-

served changes in suburbanization. Our methodology holds in an entire class of spatial models that are charac-

terized by a structural gravity equation for commuting, in which bilateral commuting ows depend on bilateral

commuting frictions, a workplace xed e ect and a residence xed e ect. The key idea underlying our approach

is to use the observed changes in commuting ows and the structure of the gravity equation from this class of


                                                                                 25
models to reveal the relative importance of these di erent explanations.

     We implement this methodology using population census data on bilateral commuting ows between U.S.

counties from 1970-2000. We document three large-scale changes in observed patterns of commuting in the late-

twentieth century United States. First, counties became substantially more open to commuting ows. Between

1970 and 2000, the median share of residents who work in the same county where they live fell from 87 to 71

percent, and the fraction of counties with values for this share of less than 50 percent increased almost fourfold

from around 5 percent to about 18 percent. Second, there was a dispersion of both employment and population

from central cities, with the distributions of both workplace and residence employment shifting towards lower

densities over this time period. Third, this shift in distribution was larger for workforce employment than for

residence employment, with the result that the distribution of workplace employment become substantially

less spatially concentrated over time.

     We show that changes in bilateral commuting frictions are the dominant force explaining the observed

increase in county openness to commuting over time. Holding workplace and residence attractiveness constant

at their 2000 values and changing only bilateral commuting frictions to their 1970 values, the median share of

residents who work in the same county where they live rises from 71 to 85 percent, almost as large as the rise

to 87 percent observed in the data. In contrast, we nd that changes in residence attractiveness and workplace

attractiveness are more important in explaining the shift of employment by workplace and employment by

residence towards lower densities over time. This pattern of results is consistent with a role for factors such as

the relocation of manufacturing away from central cities and changes in urban amenities in explaining the shift

in economic activity towards lower densities. However, reductions in bilateral commuting frictions, through

for example the expansion of the interstate highway system and the falling real cost of car ownership, are

central to capturing the observed increase in openness to commuting over time.


References

A              , G., S. R       , D. S     ,     N. W      (2015): "The Economics of Density: Evidence from the

    Berlin Wall," Econometrica, 83, 2127­2189.

A       , T.        C. A          (2014): "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy," Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 129, 1085­1140.

A       , T., C. A          ,       X. L (2017): "Optimal City Structure," Yale University, mimeograph.

A         , W. (1964): Location and Land Use, Cambridge MA: Harvard.


                                                          26
A       , S.          P. L             H       (2014): "The Rise and Fall of Manhattan's Densities 1800-2010," Marron Institute

    of Urban Management Working Paper No. 18.

B       S          , N. (2007): "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 775­780.

B       S          , N. (2019): "Urban Transport Expansions and Changes in the Spatial Structure of US Cities: Impli-

    cations for Productivity and Welfare," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

B       S          , N., L. B              , J. H           , M. A. T                 ,     Q. Z      (2017): "Roads, Railroads and De-

    centralization of Chinese Cities," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99, 435­448.

B       S          , N., V. H                 , M. A. T           , Q. Z          ,       L. B      (2019): "Does Investment in National

    Highways Help or Hurt Hinterland City Growth?" Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.

B       S          , N.             M. E. K         (2005): "E ects of Urban Rail Transit Expansions: Evidence from Sixteen

    Cities, 1970-2000," Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban A aires: 2005, 1, 147­197.

B              , R. (1996): "Heterogeneity, Strati cation, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of Community

    Structure and School Finance," American Economic Review, 86, 584­609.

B              , R.          R. F                 (1996): "Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public Educa-

    tion," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 135­164.

B            , S. B. (2011): "Estimating the Value of a New Transit Option," Regional Science and Urban Economics,

    41, 525­536.

B       , E. S.           P. R. K                 (1997): "Technology and the Life Cycle of Cities," Journal of Economic Growth,

    2, 369­383.

B           , L.          B. L        (2018): "Vestiges of Transit: Urban Persistence at a Micro Scale," Review of Economics

    and Statistics, 101, 385­399.

C              , L., F. P            , E. R         H         ,            P. D. S         (2018): "The Impact of Regional and Sectoral

    Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 85, 2042­2096.

C              , A.          E. T                 (2000): "Does Public Infrastructure a ect Economic Activity? Evidence from

    the Rural Interstate Highway System," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30, 457­490.

C           , R., N. H                , M. R. J         ,   S. R. P            (2020): "Race and Economic Opportunity in the United

    States: An Intergenerational Perspective," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 711­783.

                                                                             27
C         , P. P.            L. G                 (2015): "The Empirics of Agglomeration Economies," in Handbook of Regional

    and Urban Economics, ed. by G. Duranton, J. V. Henderson, and W. C. Strange, Amsterdam: Elsevier North

    Holland, vol. 5A, chap. 5, 247­348.

C          , S., P. G                      ,        T. Z       (2020): "Fast Poisson Estimation with High-Dimensional Fixed

    E ects," Stata Journal, 20, 95­115.

C              , V., C. G                , J. H            ,    E. H        (2020): "ncome Growth and the Distributional E ects

    of Urban Spatial Sorting," University of California Bekeley.

C              , V.       J. H                    (2020): "Urban Revival in America," Journal of Urban Economics, 119.

D      , D. R.              D. E. W                   (2002): "Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography of Economic

    Activity," American Economic Review, 92, 1269­1289.

D       , R., J. E           ,          S. K           (2007): "Unbalanced Trade," American Economic Review, 97, 351­355.

D         , K.            E. R           H             (2009): "Spatial Growth and Industry Age," Journal of Economic Theory,

    144, 2477­2502.

D        , J. I.          F. T                    (2020): "Spatial Economics for Granular Settings," NBER Working Paper, 27287.

D                  , D. (2018): "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure," American

    Economic Review, 108, 899­934.

D                  , D.           R. H               (2016): "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A Market Access Ap-

    proach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 799­858.

D                , G., P. M                ,        M. A. T        (2014): "Roads and Trade: Evidence from the US," Review of

    Economic Studies, 81, 681­724.

D                , G.            D. P          (2004): "Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies," in Handbook of

    Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by J. V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 4, 2063­2117.

D                , G.            M. A. T              (2011): "The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evidence from US

    Cities," American Economic Review, 101, 2616­52.

------ (2012): "Urban Growth and Transportation," Review of Economic Studies, 79, 1407­1440.

E       , J.          S. K               (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 70, 1741­1779.

                                                                       28
E        , F.        T. K                 (2021): "Saving the American Dream? Education Policies in Spatial General

    Equilibrium," UCSD, mimeograph.

E        , F.       M. P            (2018): "A Crosswalk for US Spatial Data Since 1790," Yale University, mimeograph.

F      , B. (2014): "Integration and the Periphery: The Unintended E ects of New Highways in a Developing

    Country," Review of Economic Studies, 81, 1046­1070.

F      , T. (2015): "Structural Gravity and Fixed E ects," Journal of International Economics, 97, 76­85.

F             , R. M. (2003): Downtown: Its Rise and Fall, 1880-1950, New Haven CT: Yale University Press.

F      , A.       V. G                (2019): "The End of the American Dream? Inequality and Segregation in US Cities,"

    NBER Working Paper, 26143.

F                    , S.           M. O'K         (1989): Spatial Interaction Models: Formulations and Applications, Dor-

    drecht: Kluwer.

F       , M.         P. K               (1995): "When is the Economy Monocentric? Von Thünen and Chamberlain

    Uni ed," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25, 505­528.

F       , M., P. K              ,        A. J. V           (1999): The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and International

    Trade, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

F       , M.         H. O             (1982): "Multiple Equilibria and Structural Transformation of Non-monocentric

    Urban Con gurations," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 12, 161­196.

F       , M.        J. F. T          (2002): Economics of Agglomeration: Cities, Industrial Location and Regional Growth,

    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

G         , S.        S. M            (2005): "Valuing Rail Access Using Transport Innovations," Journal of Urban Eco-

    nomics, 57, 148­169.

G         , E. K.        B. S                (1999): "Why is There More Crime in Cities?" Journal of Political Economy,

    107, S225­S258.

G         , E. L.           J. E. K            (2004): "Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport Costs," Papers in

    Regional Science, 83, 197­228.




                                                                  29
G              , V., D. H               ,   E. H       (2013): "Endogenous Gentri cation and Housing Price Dynamics,"

    Journal of Public Economics, 100, 45­60.

H            , S., S. J. R          ,       D. M. S       (2020): "The Making of the Modern Metropolis: Evidence from

    London," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 2059­2133.

H             , E. (1998): "The Size of Regions," in Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied Analysis, ed.

    by D. Pines, E. Sadka, and I. Zilcha, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 33­54.

H                 , J. V. (1974): "The Sizes and Types of Cities," American Economic Review, 64, 640­56.

H               , T. (1981): Philadelphia: Work, Space, Family, and Group Experience in the Nineteenth Century, Ox-

    ford: Oxford University Press.

H              , R.          M. R              (2021): "Railroads, Market Access, and Aggregate Productivity Growth,"

    Chicago Booth School of Business, mimeograph.

J            , K. T. (1987): Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States, Oxford: Oxford University

    Press.

J       , J. (1992): The Death and Life of Great American Cities, New York: Vintage Books.

K              , B., E. L ,         S. R           (2021): "Su cient Statistics for Dynamic Spatial Economics," Princeton

    University, mimeograph.

K      , P.          E. M           (2014): "Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies, and the Big Push:

    100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 275­331.

K             , P. (1991): "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Journal of Political Economy, 99, 483­499.

K             , P.           A. V           (1995): "Globalization and the Inequality of Nations," Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 110, 857­880.

L , S. K. (2020): "Crabgrass Frontier Revisited in New York: Through the Lens of 21st-Century Data," Yale

    University, mimeograph.

L       , R. E.        E. R         H           (2002): "On the Internal Structure of Cities," Econometrica, 70, 1445­1476.

M D             , J.         D. M M          (2010): Urban Economics and Real Estate: Theory and Policy, Hoboken, NJ:

    John Wiley & Sons.

                                                                 30
M D            , J. F.          C. I. O         (1995): "The E ect of Anticipated Transportation Improvement on Residential

    Land Values," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25, 261­278.

M F            , D. (1974): "The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand," Journal of Public Economics, 3, 303­328.

M            , G. (2008): "The E ect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate Highway

    System," Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 683­701.

M            , G., F. R              ,       S. R               (2019): "Task Specialization in U.S. Cities from 1880-2000," Journal of

    the European Economic Association, 17, 754­798.

M      , E. S. (1967): "An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Centre," American Economic

    Review, 57, 197­210.

M            , Y., K. N                  ,          S. R           (2021): "Consumption Access and Agglomeration: Evidence from

    Smartphone Data," CEPR Discussion Paper, 6741-1613580728.

M        , F., S. R              ,           E. R          H             (2018): "Commuting, Migration and Local Employment Elas-

    ticities," American Economic Review, 108, 3855­3890.

M           , E. (2011): "Local Labor Markets," in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by D. Card and O. Ashenfelter,

    Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland, vol. 4b, 1238­1303.

M      , R. (1969): Cities and Housing, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

O        III, R., E. R               H               ,         P. D. S      (2020): "Rethinking Detroit," American Economic Journal,

    12, 258­305.

P       B             , L. (2000): "Was Postwar Suburbanization `White Flight'? Evidence from the Black Migration,"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 417­443.

P       B                , L.            R. A. M               (2009): "Job Decentralization and Residential Location," Brookings-

    Wharton Papers on Urban A airs, 1­31.

R    , D. W. (2005): City: Urbanism and Its End, New Haven: Yale University Press.

R           , S. J. (2016): "Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare," Journal of International Economics, 101,

    148­167.




                                                                             31
------ (2021): "Trade and Geography," in Handbook of International Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman,

    and K. Rogo , Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 5, forthcoming.

R            , S. J.        E. R        H           (2017): "Quantitative Spatial Models," Annual Review of Economics, 9,

    21­58.

R            , S. J.        D. M. S           (2008): "The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from German Division and Re-

    uni cation," American Economic Review, 98, 1766­1797.

R            , S. J.         M. A. T            (2015): "Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization of Economic

    Activity," in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by G. Duration, J. V. Henderson, and W. Strange,

    Amsterdam: Elsevier, chap. 20, 1339­1398.

R               , S. S.            W. C. S         (2004): "Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Eco-

    nomics," in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by J. V. Henderson and J. Thisse, Amsterdam:

    Elsevier, vol. 4.

R       H                , E. (2005): "A Spatial Theory of Trade," American Economic Review, 95, 1464­1491.

S           S         , J. M. C.       S. T           (2006): "The Log of Gravity," Review of Economics and Statistics, 88,

    641­658.

S           , J. J.         T. J. H           (2004): "Spatial Distribution of Economic Activities in North America," in

    Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by J. V. Henderson and J. Thisse, Amsterdam: Elsevier North

    Holland, vol. 4, chap. 63, 2797­2843.

T               , N. (2018): "The Aggregate And Distributional E ects Of Urban Transit Infrastructure: Evidence

    From Bogotá's TransMilenio," University of California, Berkeley, mimeograph.

W           , S. B. (1978): Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston, 1870-1900, Cambridge MA: Harvard

    University Press.




                                                                  32
