                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              LEARNING IN THE HOUSEHOLD

                                       John J. Conlon
                                       Malavika Mani
                                         Gautam Rao
                                      Matthew W. Ridley
                                       Frank Schilbach

                                      Working Paper 28844
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28844


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank workshop audiences at ASSA, Berkeley, Harvard, MIT, Northeastern, UNC, Warwick
and the Workshop on Subjective Beliefs for helpful comments and feedback. We also thank Nava
Ashraf, Ned Augenblick, Oriana Bandiera, Rafael Batista, Leonardo Bursztyn, Arun
Chandrasekhar, Katie Coffman, Stefano DellaVigna, Ben Golub, David Laibson, Shengwu Li,
Ulrike Malmendier, Sendhil Mullainathan, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Matthew Rabin, Chris Roth
and Dmitry Taubinsky for helpful suggestions and comments. We thank Sangeetha Ramanathan
and the entire team at the Behavioral Development Lab in Chennai for excellent research
assistance. We thank all our study participants for their time and patience. We thank the
Wellspring Philanthropic Fund for funding. We received IRB approval from MIT, protocol
#1810538700. The experiment was pre-registered on the AEA registry, number
AEARCTR-0004253. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John J. Conlon, Malavika Mani, Gautam Rao, Matthew W. Ridley, and Frank
Schilbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Learning in the Household
John J. Conlon, Malavika Mani, Gautam Rao, Matthew W. Ridley, and Frank Schilbach
NBER Working Paper No. 28844
May 2021
JEL No. D1,D8,D9,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

We study social learning between spouses using an experiment in Chennai, India. We vary
whether individuals discover information themselves or must instead learn what their spouse
discovered via a discussion. Women treat their 'own' and their husband's information the same. In
sharp contrast, men's beliefs respond less than half as much to information that was discovered by
their wife. This is not due to a lack of communication: husbands put less weight on their wife's
signals even when perfectly informed of them. In a second experiment, when paired with mixed-
and same-gender strangers, both men and women heavily discount their teammate's information
relative to their own. We conclude that people have a tendency to underweight others'
information relative to their own. The marital context creates a countervailing force for women,
resulting in a gender difference in learning (only) in the household.


John J. Conlon                                  Matthew W. Ridley
Harvard University                              MIT Department of Economics
1805 Cambridge St                               The Morris and Sophie Chang Building
Cambridge, MA 02138                             50 Memorial Drive Cambridge
johnconlon@g.harvard.edu                        Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                mridley@mit.edu
Malavika Mani
Columbia University                             Frank Schilbach
1028A International Affairs Building            MIT Department of Economics, E52-560
420 West 118th Street                           The Morris and Sophie Chang Building
New York, NY 10027                              77 Massachusetts Avenue
mm5819@columbia.edu                             Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                and NBER
Gautam Rao                                      fschilb@mit.edu
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M-30
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
grao@fas.harvard.edu
1    Introduction

     Household members frequently have access to independent information and have
many opportunities to share information with each other. The household could thus
be a significant venue of social learning in the economy. Recent work has shown that
strategic motives can obstruct the flow of information between spouses (Ashraf et al.,
2020). In many situations, however, spouses have common objectives: to wisely invest
their money, to consult a competent doctor, or to send their child to a good school.
Making good decisions in these cases requires spouses to pool information. Yet, we have
little understanding of how well spouses learn from each other, whether such learning
differs by gender, and what psychological mechanisms pose barriers to learning in the
household and beyond.
    We design experiments to measure how well spouses learn from each other when
incentives are aligned. We recruit 400 married couples and 500 strangers in Chennai,
India, to participate in a social-learning task. We test (i) whether people respond
similarly to information uncovered by themselves and by their spouse; (ii) how this
varies by gender; (iii) whether inefficient learning is due to a lack of communication or
because communicated information is used incorrectly; and (iv) whether spouses learn
differently from each other than mixed- and same-gender strangers working in teams.
    We randomize across experimental rounds whether participants learn information
entirely on their own or partially via their spouse. The goal in each round is to guess
the share of red balls in an urn. Before making their guesses, participants receive
independent, noisy signals in the form of two sets of draws from the urn. In the
Individual round, participants privately draw both sets of signals themselves and play
the game alone. Men and women are equally good at the task in this condition and
have similar levels of confidence. In the Discussion round, each spouse instead privately
draws only one set of signals. The couple then have a face-to-face discussion--giving
them a chance to pool information--after which each spouse makes a private guess. One
guess made in the experiment is randomly chosen to be paid off based on its accuracy,
and the payoff is split equally between the spouses.
    Our three empirical approaches--non-parametric, reduced-form, structural--impose
different assumptions but yield consistent results. We focus here on the reduced-form
approach, which simply asks how much the average guess changes in response to an
additional red (as opposed to white) draw--we call this the "weight" placed on signals.

                                           2
Information pooling implies equal weights on signals drawn oneself and by one's spouse,
since the order and number of draws are held constant by design.1
    We first compare guesses in the Individual and Discussion rounds, played in ran-
domized order. Husbands put 58 percent less weight (p<0.01) on information their
wives gathered--available to them via discussion--than on information they gathered
themselves. In contrast, wives barely discount their husband's information (by 7 per-
cent), and we cannot reject that wives treat their husband's information like their own
(p=0.61). The difference in husbands' and wives' discounting of each other's informa-
tion is statistically significant (p=0.02).
    The lower weight husbands place on their wives' information is not due of a lack
of communication from wives to husbands. In another experimental treatment--the
Draw-sharing round--husbands put less weight on their wife's information even when
it is directly conveyed to them by the experimenter (absent any discussion). In this
case, husbands discount information collected by their wives by a striking 98 percent
compared to information collected by themselves (p<0.01), while wives again treat
their spouses' information nearly identically to their own. Lack of communication
between spouses or husbands' mistrust of (say) wives' memory or ability thus cannot
explain husbands' behavior. Rather, husbands treat information their wives gathered
as innately less informative than information they gathered themselves. In contrast,
wives treat their own and their husbands' information equally.
    Husbands' discounting of their spouse's information is costly. When their wife ran-
domly receives more draws than them, husbands' guesses in the Discussion and Draw-
sharing rounds earn in expectation 9 percent (or 0.3 standard deviations) less than in
the Individual round (p=0.03). For comparison, an additional year of education is asso-
ciated with a 2 percent increase in expected earnings. Wives instead perform similarly
in both types of rounds.
    To examine whether the gender difference documented above extends beyond mar-
ried couples, we conduct a second experiment with 500 adults who played an identical
task in pairs of strangers. In both mixed- and same-gender pairs, men and women
both respond more strongly to their own information than to their teammate's. Thus,
the underweighting of others' information appears to be a more general phenomenon.
    1
      Of course, joint deliberation may also help people better process the information and thus change
the weight placed on each signal. Other experimental treatments, described below, remove the possi-
bility of joint deliberation.


                                                  3
Husbands treat their wives (information) as they treat strangers; wives instead put
more weight on their husband's information than on strangers' information. This dif-
ference between husbands and wives, and between spouses and pairs of strangers, is not
explained by differences in observable characteristics such as the players' relative age,
marital status, relative ability, or confidence.
    Our findings cannot be explained by factors such as confusion, risk aversion, social
signaling, reputational concerns or competitive behavior. Since the underweighting
of others' information occurs even when the information is perfectly communicated
by the experimenter, it also cannot be driven by differences in ability or confidence,
propensity to contribute information (Coffman, 2014), or reluctance to ask for or provide
information (Chandrasekhar et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2018). To establish the limits
of our findings, we conducted a smaller third experiment with pairs of strangers, using
variants of the Draw-sharing condition. We find significant evidence of underweighting
of others' information with (i) 50 percent higher stakes, and (ii) when participants
directly observe their teammate drawing their signals, in person.
    We discuss possible interpretations of the underweighting of others' information
even when perfectly communicated. First, it could be a form of egocentric bias (Ross
et al., 1977) or an ownership effect wherein people consider their own information to
be innately more valuable (Kahneman et al., 1991) or worthy of attention (Hartzmark
et al., 2021). Second, information from personal experience may be more vivid than
information conveyed by others (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; D'Acunto et al., 2021).
Third, participants may be misapplying an otherwise-reasonable heuristic, if one's own
information is usually far more precise and relevant than information provided by others.
   We cannot say exactly why wives and husbands behave differently, except that these
patterns are not due to gender differences per se (e.g. differences in self-confidence,
assertiveness, or competitiveness; see Niederle and Vesterlund 2011; Exley and Kessler
2021; Exley et al. 2020), since men and women treat strangers similarly. Instead, the
marital context itself appears to generate gender differences in behavior, for instance
due to norms of wives deferring to their husbands or repeated experiences of husbands
possessing better information.
    Our study contributes to a large literature on household decision-making, particu-
larly in developing countries. Standard models of household decision-making assume
that spouses have identical beliefs but may have differing preferences (see Pollak 2019


                                           4
for a review). Several recent papers have relaxed the assumption of perfect informa-
tion pooling, exploring situations where one spouse may have strategic reasons to hide
information from the other (e.g. Ashraf 2009; Ashraf et al. 2014; Lowe and Mckelway
2019). Others have measured information asymmetries (Afzal et al., 2018) and tested
whether information is transmitted within the household (e.g. Fehr et al. 2019; Ashraf
et al. 2020; Apedo-Amah et al. 2020). To our knowledge, ours is the first to study how
couples pool information when their incentives are fully aligned. Our results suggest a
gender asymmetry in learning in the household. If this holds more generally, we would
expect to find lower `pass-through' of information from wives to husbands than vice
versa, at least in contexts similar to those we study.
    Second, our study adds to the literature on the role of gender in group judgments and
decision-making.2 Existing evidence shows that women are less likely to contribute their
ideas, particularly in stereotypically-male tasks (Coffman, 2014; Cooper and Kagel,
2016) and in mixed-gender groups (Bordalo et al., 2019; Chen and Houser, 2017). When
women do contribute information, they are often perceived as less competent or worse
communicators, even conditional on ability (Beaman and Dillon, 2018; Coffman et
al., 2021a; Mengel et al., 2019). We show that--in a gender-neutral task--gender
differences in learning can emerge in the household context, even when there are no
gender differences outside it.
    Third, we contribute to the literature on social learning. Mobius et al. (2015)
describe two classes of barriers to social learning: diffusion (whether private information
reaches others) and aggregation (how individuals weigh information). We provide new
evidence for a potentially far-reaching bias in information aggregation which may hinder
social learning: individuals treat data gathered by others as much less informative than
data gathered themselves. Many lab studies of observational learning find that people
put more weight on private information than on what can rationally be inferred from the
actions of others (e.g. Weizsäcker 2010).3 Though these findings are consistent with our
   2
     There is a long literature in psychology and a smaller one in economics on how people respond to
advice (see Bonaccio and Dalal 2006 for a review) and on whether group or individual decision-making
tends to produce more accurate judgments (see, e.g., Cooper and Kagel 2005; Minson et al. 2018). A
related strand of this literature finds that group discussions and resulting judgments tend to focus on
shared rather than private information (Stasser and Titus, 1985; Gigone and Hastie, 1993). Another
shows that individuals put more weight on their own initial opinions than on those of their conversation
partner or advisors (e.g., Bonaccio and Dalal 2006; Minson et al. 2011; Liberman et al. 2012).
   3
     See Stone and Zafar (2014) for an example of similar underweighting of public information in the
context of sports rankings.



                                                   5
interpretation, they are also consistent with other (sometimes rational) explanations,
such as mistrust of others' ability (De Filippis et al., 2017), overconfidence (Angrisani et
al., 2018), attenuation bias from imperfect measurement of social networks (Mobius and
Rosenblat, 2014), altruism (March and Ziegelmeyer, 2020), base-rate neglect (Benjamin
et al., 2019), or other behavioral biases (Guarino and Jehiel, 2013). Our finding that
agents down-weight others' signals, not just their actions or beliefs, along with other
features of our experiment, rules out these and other explanations.4 Rather, people just
treat their own information differently.



2       Setting, Recruitment, and Study Sample

2.1     Setting, recruitment, and screening

    All experimental sessions were conducted in our lab in Chennai, India. The ses-
sions with couples took place between June and November 2019, and the sessions with
strangers were conducted between July and December 2019. We recruited participants
on a rolling basis, with about 2 to 5 pairs of people completing the experiment on a
given day. Recruitment stopped when we reached our pre-specified target of 400 couples
and 500 unrelated individuals who completed the experiment.
    Recruitment of couples. We recruited couples from low- to middle-income com-
munities within a reasonable travel time of the lab. Surveyors went door-to-door to
advertise an academic study on `how decisions are made in the household'. Poten-
tial participants were informed that they would spend 2-3 hours at the study office and
could expect to earn Rs. 300-560 ($4-7.75) per couple, plus a payment of Rs. 100 ($1.40)
to cover travel expenses. Participants were required to be `married couples' who could
come to the lab together.5 No more specific information was provided at this point.
    4
     Drehmann et al. (2005) include in their online experiment a treatment similar to Anderson and
Holt (1997) but where subjects can see previous decision-makers' signals (a or b) as well as their choice
of urns (A or B ). Using their data, we find (analyses not shown) that, even conditional on the total
number of a and b signals available to the agent (her signal and all previous players' signals), she
is much more likely to choose urn A if "her" signal was a than if "her" signal was b. These results,
while suggestive of and consistent with our finding of intrinsic under-weighting of "others" compared to
"own" ' information, cannot rule out that subjects put more weight on their own information because
they receive it last, as models of base-rate neglect would in fact predict.
   5
     In practice, by `married couples' we mean cohabiting couples who identified as married. Given the
cultural context, it was inappropriate to ask people to reveal other forms of romantic relationships. It



                                                   6
   In total, 419 couples came to our lab. 11 couples were screened out due to low under-
standing of the task, as evidenced by failure to answer basic comprehension questions
correctly. 8 couples dropped out mid-way through the experiment for other reasons.
This left us with the target sample of 400 couples.
     Recruitment of strangers. Our non-couples or `strangers' sample participated
in a separate round of experimental sessions, where they played in both mixed- and
same-gender pairs. We recruited individuals unknown to each other prior to our study
from the same neighborhoods as the couples sample. Recruiters followed the same
procedure as for the couples sample, with the exception that participants were recruited
individually. In total, 508 individuals (254 men and 254 women) were enrolled. Of
these, 4 men and 4 women were excluded before starting the experiment as they either
did not understand the task (as measured by comprehension questions) and/or lacked
sufficient numeracy. This left 500 individuals (250 men and 250 women) who form our
non-couple sample.


2.2     Descriptive statistics

    The first two columns of Table 1 describe the couples in our study. The average
husband is about 36 years old, has been married for 12 years, and has eight years of
education. The average wife is about four years younger, but has the same years of
education. There is substantial heterogeneity across individuals, as indicated by the
large standard deviations. Eighty-five percent of participants self-report that they are
literate (in Tamil, the local language), and 41 percent are numerate (as measured by
correctly answering "Can you tell me what 3 × 9 is?"). Husbands are somewhat more
numerate than wives and more likely to work outside the home, work more hours, and
earn more conditional on working. These gender differences in labor-force participation
are broadly in line with patterns in our study setting.
   Our secondary sample of strangers (Table 1, cols 3 and 4) is similar to the couples
on demographics except that they also include single adults of both genders (although
a majority are married). They have similar education levels, ages, literacy, numeracy
and labor-market participation as the couples.
is also uncommon in our study context for same-sex couples to publicly identify as such, and thus our
sample consists entirely of couples consisting of one man and one woman.




                                                 7
3       Experimental Design

    Figure 1(a) illustrates the overall structure of the experiment. Participants play
five rounds--with different treatments--of a balls-and-urns task building on a large
literature studying individual learning (Benjamin, 2019). The goal in each round is to
guess the number of red balls in an urn containing 20 red and white balls. Participants
are informed that the number of red balls is drawn uniformly from 4 to 16 in each
round. We explain this distribution with the help of the scale in Figure A.I(a).6
    In each round, participants receive independent signals about the composition of the
urn. Concretely, they privately draw balls from the urn with replacement. Depending
on the round, they either play the game entirely on their own or else can learn some
of the signals from their teammate. Comparing learning across these rounds allows us
to test for frictions in communication and information-processing which may interfere
with social learning.
    The number of draws in each set of signals is randomized--either 1, 5 or 9 draws--
creating variation in how informed each participant is.7 After receiving each set of
signals (or potentially learning them through a discussion with their teammate), par-
ticipants enter a private guess about the number of red balls in the urn. These guesses
are incentivized: the closer their guess to the truth, the more participants can expect to
be paid. The incentives of both teammates are aligned: one of the many guesses made
by either participant in the pair is randomly picked to be paid out, and the earnings are
split equally between the teammates (more details on incentives in section 3.2 below).


3.1     Experimental rounds

   Figure 1(b) shows the structure of each round. Participants first play, in randomized
order, an Individual round and a Discussion round.
   Individual round. The Individual round proceeds as follows. First, the participant
draws a set of balls from the urn, followed by a guess of how many red balls are in the
urn. Then, they draw a second set of balls from the urn and make a second (and final)
    6
     We avoided more extreme distributions--fewer than 4 or over 16 red balls out of 20--as these were
more likely to generate sets of signals with complete agreement between the teammates.
   7
     To be precise, we randomly choose the number of draws in the two sets of signals received in each
round with uniform probability from {(1, 1), (1, 5), (5, 1), (5, 5), (1, 9), (9, 1)}. We exclude cases with
more than 10 draws total.

                                                    8
guess. All drawing and guessing is done privately, without any opportunity to share
information. This round serves as a control condition--a benchmark against which we
compare the other conditions.
    Discussion round. The Discussion round differs from the Individual round in
that, for each participant, their teammate's draws--accessible through a discussion--
serve as their `second' set of draws. Each person first makes one set of draws followed
by a private guess, exactly as in the Individual round. Next, the couple are asked to
hold a face-to-face discussion and decide on a joint guess. After their discussion and
joint guess, each person makes one final, private guess. This final private guess will
be compared to the final private guess in the individual round. We will also briefly
examine the joint guess.
    Couples can take as long as they like for the unstructured, face-to-face discussion.
They are aware that they will enter a joint guess after the discussion and will then
each have a chance to make a private guess. Thus, they have an incentive to pool
information with their teammate. They also have an incentive to help their teammate
deliberate and make better guesses conditional on information, as in Cooper and Kagel
(2005, 2016). We record the audio of the discussion (with participants' consent) and
later analyze the transcripts, as reported in Table A.I. We also randomize whether the
experimenter is present for the discussion.
    Comparing the Individual and Discussion rounds. We compare each par-
ticipant's final private guesses in the Individual and Discussion rounds. By design,
participants have access to the exact same number of draws to inform their final pri-
vate guess in these two rounds, provided they pool information in the discussion.8 If a
person responds equally to the second set of draws in both rounds, we can conclude that
learning one's teammate's information through a discussion is just as good as receiving
the information oneself. If participants are instead less sensitive to information collected
by their teammate, this implies either a failure of communication or under-weighting
of information provided by one's teammate.
   8
     In order to allow a particularly sharp comparison between the Individual and Discussion rounds,
we ensure that exactly the same number of draws are available to each individual by the end of the both
rounds. For instance, suppose that the wife gets w draws first and h draws second in the Individual
round, for a total of w + h draws. We ensure that the husband in turn receives h and then w draws
in the Individual round. To make the Discussion round comparable, we ensure that the wife receives
w draws and the husband receives h draws, such that, if they pool information in their discussion,
each again has access to w + h draws to inform their final private guess. (h, w) are randomized across
couples. In the other rounds, (h, w) are randomized independently within-couple across rounds.


                                                  9
   To tell apart these channels, we implement additional treatments which shut down
communication frictions to various degrees. In rounds 3 through 5, we implement an-
other Discussion round and two Info-sharing rounds in randomized order, as described
below and illustrated in Figure 1(b).
    Draw-sharing round. This round is identical to the Discussion round except that,
after participants receive their first set of draws and enter their first guess, they are told
their teammate's draws (both number and composition) directly by the experimenter,
e.g. "Your spouse had five draws, of which three were red and two were white." They
then make an additional private guess which can incorporate both sets of draws before
moving on to the discussion, joint guess and final private guess.
    Comparing the guess made after the draw-sharing (but before discussion) with the
final guess in the Individual round allows us to directly test whether participants use in-
formation they gathered themselves in the same way as information collected by others
but perfectly shared with them. In each case, there is no possibility of joint deliber-
ation.9 A failure to do so may imply some sort of ownership effect over information
or greater vividness of one's `own information', or a general heuristic of perceiving in-
formation learned from others as being less reliable. Comparing the post-discussion
guess in the Draw-sharing round with the Discussion round holds fixed the possibility
of joint deliberation while testing whether communication frictions in discussion inhibit
information pooling.
    Guess-sharing round. The Guess-sharing round is the same as the Draw-sharing
round except that the experimenter informs each person of their spouse's private guess
(made based on their own draws only), rather than their spouse's draws. The experi-
menter also shares the number of draws this guess was based on, e.g. "Your spouse had
5 draws and, after seeing these draws, they guessed that the urn contains 12 red balls."
Thus, while in the Draw-sharing round we directly transmit the signal received by
one's spouse or teammate, in the Guess-sharing round we transmit the action (guess)
taken based on that signal. This round parallels more closely a large previous literature
which investigates social learning based on others' actions (Weizsäcker, 2010). When
observing actions, beliefs about others' competence might affect how these actions are
interpreted and how much is learned about the signals. With Draw-sharing, i.e. directly
sharing the signal, such beliefs should not be relevant.
   9
     Note that this comparison requires controlling for order effects, since the Individual round is always
in the first two rounds, while the Draw-sharing round falls in rounds 3-5.


                                                    10
   The patterns of results in the Guess-Sharing round are in general similar or more
extreme than those that we find in the Discussion and Draw-Sharing rounds. Be-
cause these patterns can be explained by rational mistrust of others' guessing, we leave
analysis of the Guess-Sharing round to Appendix A.1.
    Strangers experiment. One might reasonably expect married couples to be better
at pooling information than strangers paired in teams. On the other hand, social norms
regarding gender roles in marriage or past experiences of household decision-making
may distort learning. To learn (i) whether spouses pool information differently than
teams of comparable strangers; and (ii) whether any gender differences between spouses
are specific to the marital context, we repeat the experiment with pairs of strangers
with similar demographics, as described in Section 2. The pairs of strangers play the
same five rounds of the task as above, the order of which was similarly randomized.
However, participants play one of the two Discussion rounds--picked at random--in
same-gender pairs, and the other four rounds in mixed-gender pairs.10 This additionally
allows us to also learn if discussions work better in same-gender teams, and whether any
gender differences in learning persist in a same-gender environment or if mixed-gender
environments instead create gender differences in behavior as in Babcock et al. (2017).


3.2       Incentives to pool information and make accurate guesses

    We create incentives for participants to pool information and make accurate guesses.
Specifically, we reward one randomly-chosen guess from each pair for its accuracy. To
ensure that incentives are aligned within the pair, we divide the payoff equally between
the two participants irrespective of who made the guess. Each participant receives their
half in a separate envelope at the end of the experiment.11 Each person thus has an
incentive to make every guess from their team as accurate as possible. Neglecting to
ask your teammate for information or withholding information from your teammate
reduces your own expected payoff.
       The incentives provided are easy for participants to understand: a penalty per ball
  10
     To accomplish this, we recruited four participants--two men and two women--at a time. For all
but the same-gender Discussion round (and Individual round, which participants played alone), each
man was matched with the same woman. One of the two Discussion rounds was randomly chosen to
be the same-gender Discussion round, for which players were matched with the other person of the
same gender in their group.
  11
     Of course, married couples--but not strangers--might redistribute the earnings after leaving the
experiment. Even so, each spouse should be at least weakly better off by pooling information.

                                                 11
away from the truth. Formally, each guess is incentivized by a piece-wise linear loss
function. On top of their participation fee, each couple receives an amount in Rupees
(Rs.) equal to max{(210 - 30 × |g - r|), 0}, where g is the guess and r the true number
of red balls for the randomly-selected guess.12 These incentives are sizable. Rs. 210 is
about $3 and Rs. 30 is about $0.40, while average daily earnings per capita are about
Rs. 350 ($5). Further, as described in Section 5.4, randomizing higher stakes for half the
rounds in a follow-up experiment does not change our findings. The incentive scheme
was explained to participants using the illustration shown in Appendix Figure A.I(b).
    We can calculate what a risk-neutral Bayesian who maximizes expected earnings
would guess given a set of signals.13 However, our analysis does not assume that
participants are Bayesian or risk-neutral. Instead, we compare guesses made by the
same individual across rounds to determine if participants place equal weight on their
own and their teammate's information. Even if participants are risk averse or deviate
from Bayesian updating in the many ways documented in the literature (Benjamin,
2019), they should still respond similarly to their own and their teammate's signals,
since the order of receiving the signals, the number of draws and the prior are held
equal across rounds by the experiment.


3.3     Complexity and comprehension

    We designed the task with the intention to balance two goals. First, given relatively
low education and numeracy levels in our sample, it was meant to be easy to understand
and feasible for most participants. We therefore avoided eliciting probabilistic beliefs
or employing complex scoring rules. Similarly, we used a uniform distribution since it
was easy for participants to understand. We also provided training in the task before
the first round. Participants individually play two unincentivized practice rounds with
  12
      We do not interpret the guesses as subjective beliefs targeted by a scoring rule, but as actions
which participants have an incentive to tailor to the signals they receive. An alternative approach
would be to directly elicit feature of participants' posterior distribution using a proper scoring rule
(Palfrey and Wang, 2009). We avoided this due to the difficulty of explaining robust scoring rules to
even higher-education populations (Danz et al., 2020). That said, our incentive scheme is a proper
scoring rule for the median of the Bayesian posterior under risk neutrality, due to its absolute value
form. The exception is following rare extreme draws (mostly red or white) where the truncation of the
loss function at zero incentivizes shading the guess towards 50% red.
   13
      A risk-averse Bayesian would shade their guesses towards 50-50, thus appearing less sensitive to
signals. A noisy decision-maker would also appear less sensitive, since censoring of the number of red
balls at 4 and 16 causes noisy choices to look more conservative.



                                                  12
two guesses in each, and receive two `tips' on making good guesses.14 The vast majority
understood the tasks, as measured by excellent performance on comprehension checks
(Table A.II).
    In addition, the simple environment of our experiment does not require participants
to use others' actions to make (potentially complex) inferences about their information.
In the Individual round, participants simply receive all information themselves. In the
Discussion and Draw-Sharing round, they are either told their teammate's information
by the experimenter or can directly ask their teammate for it. This setup is in contrast to
studies where participants observe other participants' decisions and must both infer the
underlying signals as best they can and then make decisions based on those inferences
(Goeree et al., 2007; Reshidi, 2020; Chandrasekhar et al., 2020).
    Second, the task was designed to be sufficiently complex--as in many learning prob-
lems in the field--to create some ambiguity and wiggle room for biases and heuristics
to enter participants' decision-making. Making the task trivial--e.g. with just one or
two balls in the urn--would potentially eliminate all biases since there would be little
disagreement in the teammates' signals and the correct action would become obvious
to everyone. In such cases, even couples who often have difficulty communicating or
tend to ignore each other's information might appear to perfectly pool information.


3.4       Individual performance and beliefs about ability

   Before testing the key hypotheses, it is helpful to describe a few basic facts about
participants' performance in the Individual round.
    Actual performance. Figure 2(a) plots participants' actual average performance--
the expected earnings from their guesses--in the individual round against the number
of draws they received. Reassuringly, expected earnings increase with the number of
draws, implying that participants benefit from more signals. The figure also provides
two extreme benchmarks: a risk-neutral Bayesian who saw exactly the same signals, and
someone who randomly guesses uniformly between 4 and 16. Participants' performance
lies roughly halfway between the random guesser and the risk-neutral Bayesian.
       Gender differences in performance. Figure 2(a) and Table 1 show no significant
  14
     The first tip explains that it makes sense to guess there are more red than white balls if you
draw more red than white, and vice-versa. The second tip is that "the more balls you draw, the more
confident you can be in your guess".

                                                13
gender differences in performance. Men and women have nearly identical expected
earnings in the individual rounds (Rs. 122 vs. Rs. 120). In 48% of couples, the wife
outperforms the husband.
    Gender and beliefs about ability. After completing the experimental rounds, we
asked participants to privately predict their own and their teammate's average expected
earnings.15 Men and women are both--equally--overconfident about their own ability,
as reported in Figure 2(a) and Table 1. Men correctly believe that their wives are as
good as they are, but intriguingly women incorrectly predict that their husbands are
better than them. Women's inflated views of their husband's ability relative to their
own does not extend to other men: when asked about their male teammates in the
strangers experiment, or about men versus women `in general', women do not think
that men outperform women.
   Altogether, we interpret these facts as suggesting that our experimental task is not
particularly gendered. Men and women are equally good and, with the exception of
wives' beliefs about their husbands, largely believe that they are equally good. This is
worth noting, since a recent literature has shown that the gender stereotype of particular
tasks affects beliefs (Bordalo et al., 2019), belief-updating (Coffman et al., 2021b), and
contributions to problem-solving (Coffman, 2014; Coffman et al., 2021a).



4        Empirical Framework

    Our goal is to test (i) whether individuals respond similarly to signals drawn them-
selves versus by their spouse; (ii) how this varies by gender; (iii) whether failures to
learn are due to communication or information-processing frictions; and (iv) whether
spouses learn differently from each each other than strangers working in teams.
   We present three types of empirical analyses to answer these questions. First, we
present non-parametric results by simply plotting average guesses in different rounds
against a measure of the signals drawn (specifically, red draws minus white draws). This
has the advantage of imposing minimal structure but does not allow for straightforward
    15
    These predictions were incentivized. For each participant, either their prediction of their own earn-
ings or their prediction of their teammate's earnings was randomly picked to be paid off. Participants
earned Rs. 50 if their prediction was within Rs. 30 of the truth, and otherwise earned nothing. It was
not revealed to participants which guess was paid off. A participant's guesses were not revealed to
their teammate.


                                                   14
tests of the hypotheses. Second, we present reduced-form regressions which impose a
linear relationship between signals and guesses, allowing for formal tests. Finally, we
estimate a structural model of quasi-Bayesian belief updating, which incorporates the
full structure of the signals, and provides results which are interpretable as deviations
from a Bayesian benchmark.


4.1     Non-parametric approach

    The non-parametric approach seeks to show patterns in the data with minimal
assumptions. To do so, we relate participants' private guesses to the signals they
received in the different rounds. Recall that participants always receive their first set of
signals on their own. The variation in whether participants draw the signals themselves
or must learn them from their teammate applies only to the second set of signals. We
thus plot the average guess that participants make in their second private guess as a
function of the second set of signals. For simplicity, we summarize the information
content of the second set of signals by the net number of red draws (i.e., red minus
white). That is, if a participant saw 4 red draws and 1 white draw, we would classify
the signal as being 3 net red draws.16
    Figure 2(b) shows such a plot for the Individual round, which serves as the control
condition. It reveals that guesses relate sensibly to the signals: the higher the number
of net red draws, the higher the number of red balls that participants guess. For
comparison, the figure also provides the simulated average guesses of a risk-neutral
Bayesian provided with the exact same draws. The empirical and Bayesian curves lie
fairly close to each other, indicating that participants on average do a reasonable job.
The empirical curve is slightly flatter than the risk-neutral Bayesian, which could occur
for a number of reasons. Participants may simply be `conservative' in their updating
and under-react to signals in general, as often found in the literature (Benjamin, 2019).
Another possibility is that guesses are noisy, which--because possible guesses only
ranged from 4 to 16--leads the average participant to appear conservative.17 Finally,
risk aversion would also push participants towards appearing conservative by inducing
  16
      This simplification loses some information, e.g. it does not capture the total number of draws. A
signal with 1 net red could come from a single draw of a red ball or from 9 draws with 5 red and 4
blue. A Bayesian should react differently to these two signals. The structural model does not share
this weakness.
   17
      To see this, note that if the Bayesian guess is 14, there are mechanically more possible guesses
that are less extreme than Bayesian (i.e., toward 50-50) than that are more extreme.

                                                  15
them to shade their guesses towards 50-50 (10 red). We do not seek to fully disentangle
these explanations, as our focus is instead on testing whether guesses respond differently
to information depending on the round by contrasting behavior across rounds.


4.2     Reduced-form approach

    Next, we formally test whether participants respond more to information they gath-
ered themselves compared to information their teammate gathered. To accomplish this
in a reduced-form way, we impose a linear relationship between signals and the result-
ing guesses and test for differences in this relationship across treatments. We define
First Infoirt and Second Infoirt as the net number of red draws (i.e., red minus white
draws) in the first and second set of signals, respectively, for individual i in round
number r and treatment (i.e. round type) t. We then estimate using OLS:

             Guessirt =  + 1 · First Infoirt + 2 · Second Infoirt                                  (1)
                                                   + 3 · Tirt · Second Infoirt +      irt


where Guessirt is i's private guess--after having a chance to learn both sets of signals--
of the number of red balls in round number r and treatment t. 1 captures the "weight"
that participants put on their first set of draws, averaging across all treatments.18 2 is
the weight they put on their second set of signals in the Individual round, where they
gather these signals themselves.19 Tirt is a vector of indicators for whether a particular
guess corresponds to the Discussion, Draw-sharing (pre-discussion) or Draw-Sharing
(post-discussion) treatments.20  3 is a vector of coefficients capturing the additional
weight placed on the second set of signals in treatment t relative to the Individual round.
Finally, while suppressed above for ease of exposition, we also allow the weights on first
and second signals to vary arbitrarily by round number by including round-number
dummies interacted with First Info and Second Info. Standard errors are clustered at
the level of the team.
  18
     We average across all treatments for First Info since the treatment only applies to the second set
of signals. In a robustness check (Table A.X), we allow 1 to vary by treatment. This does not change
our conclusions.
  19
     Since the number of draws received in the first and second signals is the same on average, a
Bayesian playing alone should weight them equally on average, i.e. 1 = 2 .
  20
     Recall that the different types of rounds are played in randomized order as shown in Figure 1.
In this section, we treat the pre-discussion and post-discussion guesses in the Draw-Sharing round as
different treatments.


                                                  16
    The treatment effects are thus captured by  3 . With perfect information-pooling,
it should not matter whether the signals were drawn by oneself or by one's teammate,
i.e.  3 = 0. If instead an element of  3 <0, this implies that participants in the
corresponding treatment do not fully learn their teammate's information or under-
weight this information relative to their own.


4.3    Structural approach

    In our third empirical approach, we estimate a simple model of quasi-Bayesian up-
dating. The model accounts for the full information content of the signals and incorpo-
rates the censoring in our data. It also allows us to compare learning against a normative
benchmark: a risk-neutral Bayesian. To do so, we assume that, after observing the two
sets of draws/signals d1 and d2 (e.g., d1 might equal {Red, Red, White, Red, White}),
participants update their beliefs about the state of the world s (the number of red balls
in the urn) according to a modified version of Bayes' Rule:

                 P osterior(s|d1 , d2 )  P rior(s)  P (d1 |s)1  P (d2 |s)2               (2)

where P rior(s) is the participant's prior about the probability of state s, and P (di |s) is
the conditional probability of observing a set of draws di conditional on state s. Recall
that participants are told each state is equally likely, and there are 13 possible states
                                   1
s  {4, 5, ..., 16}, so P rior(s) = 13 . Next, 1 and 2 are the weights that the participant
puts on the first and second set of draws respectively. Note that when 1 = 2 = 1,
equation (2) reduces to Bayes' rule.
    We allow 1 and 2 to differ from the Bayesian benchmark in several ways. First,
participants can simply put more or less weight on each piece of information than a
rational agent with full information would, allowing for intrinsic over- or under-reaction
to either or both signals. Next, they can put more or less weight on signals depending
on the chronological order of the round, allowing for learning during the course of
the experiment. Finally, we allow them to place different weight on signals depending
on how they learned about them, e.g. placing greater weight on information they
gathered themselves. We choose a functional form to closely match the reduced-form




                                             17
specifications above:

                                          1rt = 1 + µ1r                                    (3)
                                          2rt = 2 + µ2r + 3 · Trt

The participant always draws the first set of signals themselves, so 1 is only allowed to
vary with the chronological order in which the round occurred. Thus 1 is the weight
participants place on the first set of draws in the first round, and µ1r captures how
this weight changes with round order. 2 captures the weight participants put on their
second signal in the Individual round, with µ2r again representing order effects. As
before, T is the vector of treatment indicators and the elements of 3 indicate the
additional weight participants put on the second set of signals in other treatments
relative to the Individual treatment. A negative value in the vector 3 indicates that
participants put less weight on the second set of draws in the corresponding treatment
compared to the individual round where they gather these signals themselves. As before,
the set of treatments is t  {Discussion, Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion), Draw-Sharing
(post-discussion)}.
    In addition to systematically biased updating, we allow for noisy choice. Doing so
allows us to account for heterogeneity in guesses conditional on signals (i.e., not everyone
with the same signals makes the same guess). We assume that agents are risk-neutral
but calculate the expected payoff of each possible guess with noise. In particular, we
can define Earnings(g, s) to be the earnings, given the experimental incentives, that
a participant would earn (more precisely, split with their spouse) if they made guess g
and the true state was s.21 We assume that the agent calculates the expected payoff
of each guess g using their (potentially biased) updating rule given by equation 2 plus
a random additive error term. That is, we assume the perceived expected payoff from
making guess g given signals d1 and d1 is given by

                                     16
                EP (g |d1 , d2 ) =         P osterior(s|d1 , d2 )Earnings(g, s) +    i,g
                                     s=4


   The agent then chooses the guess that maximizes this perceived expected payoff. For
simplicity, we assume i,g is iid Type 1 extreme value. The parameter  then governs
 21
      The incentives we employed imply that Earnings(g, s) = max{0, 210 - 30  |g - s|}.



                                                    18
the extent of noisy choice.22 We estimate the model by maximum likelihood.23



5        Results: Learning from own vs. others' information

5.1      Non-parametric results

    We first provide a qualitative illustration of our main findings by plotting partic-
ipants' guesses against the second set of signals in each treatment. Reassuringly, as
discussed in Section 4.1, the (average) number of red balls guessed by participants
increases in the number of "net red" draws in the Individual rounds, implying that par-
ticipants respond to information they receive. We will examine how this responsiveness
differs across treatments.
    Figure 3 depicts the relationship between participants' guesses and the "net red"
draws in their second set of signals in the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds, com-
paring each to the Individual round. For husbands (Panel A), the blue curve repre-
senting the Discussion round (top left) is distinctly flatter than the grey curve showing
the Individual round, indicating that husbands' beliefs are less sensitive to information
that their wives gathered compared to information they gathered themselves. As we
saw in Figure 2(b), participants' guesses even in the Individual round are themselves
less responsive (on average) to information than a Bayesian's would be. The even lower
sensitivity to signals in the Discussion round suggests that husbands learn less effec-
tively from discussing with their wives compared to learning on their own, which we
will later show is costly in terms of expected earnings.
   Strikingly, the curve is even flatter in the Draw-sharing round (top right), in which
wives' information is directly communicated to their husbands by the experimenter.
Despite having been given all decision-relevant information about their wives' draws
    22
     See Goeree et al. (2007) for an example of a similar model of noisy discrete choice in a balls-and-
urns decision problem.
  23
     In particular, given the assumptions above, the probability that an agent with signals d1 and d2
                                                         1   16
will choose guess g is P (i guesses g |d1 , d2 )  exp        s=4   P osterior(s|d1 , d2 )Earnings(g, s)   . We

then choose parameters that maximize the joint likelihood of observing all the choices in our data.
We calculate standard errors by bootstrapping the data, drawing couples (or groups of strangers) with
replacement from the data. Throughout, we report bootstrapped standard errors for legibility but
denote significance using bootstrapped confidence intervals (e.g., an estimate is significant at the 5%
level if the center 95% of bootstrapped estimates do not include zero).


                                                        19
directly, husbands react to this information much less than they do to information that
they collected themselves.24 This result suggests that the key friction is not commu-
nication (i.e. husbands never learning the information from their wives) but instead
husbands underweighting information uncovered by their wife, as discussed in Section
5.2 in more detail.
   In contrast, wives (panel B) do not appear to put less weight on information that
their husbands discovered compared to information they gathered themselves. For
wives, both the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds look similar to the Individual
round. This implies that women react to their husbands' information as they do to
their own when it is directly shared with them in the Draw-sharing rounds. And they
are able to effectively learn that information from their husbands in the Discussion
rounds.
    Figure A.II shows the equivalent figures for men and women in the strangers sample.
Both men and women in this sample appear to respond less to information that comes
from their teammate, particularly in the Draw-sharing round. The finding above that
women--unlike men--equally weight their own and their spouse's information thus
does not appear to be due to gender differences in information-processing in general.
Instead, it is specific to the marital context: men treat their wives' (information) like
strangers, while women give their husbands' (information) greater weight than they do
to strangers.25 We discuss interpretations of these findings in the following sections.


5.2     Couples experiment

    To formally test for differences across treatments and gender, we turn to our reduced-
form and structural estimates, which yield overall similar results. Figure 4 plots the
average "weights" husbands and wives place on the second set of signals, by treatment,
using estimates from equation 1. Panel A shows that--in their final private guesses
after the discussion--husbands put significantly less weight on the second set of signals
  24
     Note that this graph depicts the second private guess--after being informed of one's teammate's
draws but before having a chance to discuss with them. This provides a clean comparison with the
individual round: the only difference is drawing the signals oneself versus being informed of the signals
one's teammate drew.
  25
     The Discussion round results in Figure A.II pool data from both the same-gender and mixed-
gender Discussion rounds, but the Draw-Sharing rounds in the strangers sample, in which both men
and women respond substantially less to their teammate's information, were always done in opposite-
gender pairs.


                                                   20
in the Discussion round compared to the Individual round (p<0.01). This implies they
respond less to information collected by their wives compared to their `own' information.
Either they do not learn their wives' signals in the first place (communication frictions),
or they discount them relative to their own signals upon learning them (information-
processing frictions).
    Panel A also shows that husbands put close to zero weight on their wife's information
in the Draw-sharing round, right after it is directly shared with them (third bar). By
design, this behavior cannot be explained by failure to communicate information or by
mistrust of the spouse's memory or motives. Adding a face-to-face discussion with their
wife after being informed of her draws somewhat increases husbands' weight on their
wife's signals (fourth bar), but the weight remains identical to the Discussion round,
and significantly below the weight on their own signals (p<0.01). Thus, eliminating
communication frictions does not increase the weight husbands put on their wife's
information. Husbands' underweighting of their wife's information must therefore be
due to differences in how they process information discovered by their wife relative to
their own information.
    Wives, in stark contrast to husbands, do not under-weight their spouse's information
relative to their own. Panel B shows that wives place nearly identical weights on
their own information in the Individual round and their husbands' information in the
Discussion round (p=0.61), and the Draw-sharing round, both pre-discussion (p=0.94)
and post-discussion (p=0.35). Thus, wives are able to learn their husband's signals in
the discussion and place equal weight on them and their own signals.
    The corresponding regression estimates are presented in Table 2 (cols 1 to 3). 3,1
captures the treatment effect of the Discussion treatment. The estimate pooling hus-
bands and wives shows a clear result (col 1): participants put 38 percent (-0.20/0.53)
less weight on information collected by their spouse in the Discussion round relative
to information they collected themselves in the Individual round (p<0.01). This effect
is primarily driven by husbands (col 2), who put 58 percent less weight on information
gathered by their wives compared to information they gathered. In contrast, the effect
for wives (col 3) is relatively small at 7 percent and statistically insignificant. Hus-
bands and wives thus place a very different `discount' on information collected by their
spouses: the 3,1 coefficients in columns 2 and 3 are significantly different from each
other (p=0.02).



                                            21
    The 3,2 and 3,3 terms in Table 2 capture the differential weights participants put
on their spouse's information in the Draw-sharing round. Husbands and wives (pooled)
put 53 percent (-0.28/0.53) less weight on their spouse's draws in the pre-discussion
Draw-Sharing guess compared to in the Individual round (p<0.01). Again, this effect
is almost entirely driven by husbands who put a striking 98 percent (-0.53/0.54) less
weight on their wife's information compared to their own (p<0.01). This difference
is less pronounced and not statistically significant after the discussion when pooling
both spouses' guesses (25 percent, p=0.14) but still sizable and highly significant for
husbands (65 percent, p<0.01). In contrast, women treat their second set of own
information essentially the same as their spouses' information.
    The structural estimates mirror the reduced-form results (cols 4-6 of Table 2). Hus-
bands and wives (pooled) put 53% less weight (-0.73/1.37, p<0.01) on their spouse's
signals in the Discussion round. As before, this effect is driven primarily by husbands
who put 78% less weight (p<0.01). Wives put 25% less weight on their spouse's signals,
though this difference is not statistically significant (p=0.39).26
    Comparing husbands and wives. The very different behavior of husbands and
wives does not appear to be explained by differences in observable characteristics other
than gender (Table A.III). Pooling both spouses' guesses from the Discussion and Draw-
Sharing rounds, we first confirm that wives place significantly higher weight on their
spouse's information than husbands do (0.47 vs. 0.31, col 1). We then test whether this
additional weight shrinks when controlling for a rich set of observables. Controlling
for relative age, perceptions of who the household decision-maker is, perceived and
actual guessing ability, and comprehension--by including interactions of these controls
with the signals--does not reduce the gap between wives' and husbands' weights on
their spouse's information (cols 2 through 7). Instead, wives' higher weights on their
spouse's information may be driven by gender differences in learning (e.g. women may
not under-weight others' information in general) or by something specific to gender
norms in marriage in our study context (e.g. "women should defer to their husbands").27
  26
     Of course, the parameters of this quasi-Bayesian model have a different scale and interpretation
than the reduced-form results discussed above. But perfect information pooling implies 3,1 = 0 in
both cases. Appendix A.3 shows that the reduced-form and structural estimates are consistent with
each other: data simulated using the structural model produces the same reduced-form results as the
empirical data.
  27
     The final column of Table A.III shows that the experimenter being present ("Public Discussion")
does not significantly affect either the wife's or the husband's weight on their spouse's information.
Note that the guesses considered so far are always made privately, so this variation may be expected


                                                 22
    Earnings implications. A direct measure of performance in the experiment is the
expected earnings from guesses. Figure 5 plots average expected earnings from guesses
as a function of the number of draws in the second set of signals. It compares earnings
in the Individual round with pooled earnings from the treatment Discussion and Draw-
sharing (both pre- and post-discussion) rounds. Panel A shows that husbands' earnings
decline relative to the Individual round as the number of draws received by their wife
increases. When their wife only receives one draw, underweighting her information is
not significantly costly. When she has 5 draws--on average, as many as he does--his
earnings decline by Rs. 5.7 (p=0.12). When she is better informed than him, having
received 9 draws, his earnings decline by Rs. 11 (9 percent or 0.3 standard deviations,
p=0.03). In contrast, and consistent with the finding that wives do not under-weight
their husband's information, Panel B shows that women earn the same on average
regardless of whether they receive all draws themselves or instead must rely on some
draws from their husband. Even when their husband receives 9 draws, we cannot reject
that women do just as well as in the Individual round (p=0.75).
    Turning to regressions in Table 3, husbands earn significantly less in the Discussion
and Draw-sharing rounds than in the Individual round (column 2), while the differences
for wives are small in magnitude and not significant (column 3). The next three columns
ask how these differences depend on the number of draws (i.e., on the informativeness
of signals). We see, as expected, that for both sets of signals more draws significantly
increase expected earnings (about Rs. 2.5 per extra draw). However, husbands earn
significantly less for each additional draw their wife makes in the Draw-Sharing round,
both pre- and post-discussion. As expected given the patterns in Figure 5, we see no
significant differences in earnings per draw across treatments for wives.
    Summary. We find that spouses pool information in an asymmetric way. Wives
learn their husband's information in discussions and weight it equally with their own.
In contrast, husbands put much less weight on their wife's information, even when it
is perfectly shared with them, and appear to treat data their wives generated as less
informative. Husbands' guesses thus earn less when part of the information is gathered
by their spouse, particularly when the spouse is relatively well-informed. We next
investigate whether these results are specific to married couples or if under-weighting
and gender differences in social learning emerge more generally in teams.
to have more bite in joint guesses, which we discuss in Section 5.5.




                                                  23
5.3     Strangers experiment

    Panel C of Figure 4 plots the weights that men place on the second set of signals
when playing with strangers. Men's behavior in this experiment is strikingly similar
to that of husbands towards their wives (Panel A). Compared to their own signals,
men put significantly less weight on the signals drawn by their teammate. We find this
pattern in the Discussion round (p<0.01) and in the Draw-sharing round both pre-
and post-discussion (p<0.01 and p=0.04, respectively). This suggests that men treat
strangers' information just as they treat their wife's: they substantially discount it,
even when it is directly communicated to them.
    Panel D tells a slightly different story for women playing with strangers. Recall
that wives did not discount their husbands' information in any round. In contrast, we
find evidence that women do discount their teammate's information in the experiment
with strangers. In the Discussion round, played once each with male and female team-
mates, we find suggestive evidence that women discount their teammate's information
(p=0.12). In the Draw-sharing round, which women play only with male teammates,
women significantly discount their teammate's information pre-discussion (p=0.02) and
suggestively post-discussion (p=0.10). Pooling across the three treatments, there is
clear evidence of women discounting their teammate's information (p<0.01). Prima
facie, this suggests that women do not treat others as they treat their husbands, in
terms of social learning. It is not that women generally weight their own and others'
information equally, but they do when the `other' is their spouse.
    Turning to the regressions (Table 4), the second set of draws get less than half as
much weight when accessible only via discussion with a stranger (col 1). This effect is
more pronounced for men (col 2) compared to women (col 3) but this gender difference is
not statistically significant (p=0.22). The point estimates imply that men discount their
teammate's information by 70 percent (p<0.01) while women discount their teammate's
information by 33 percent (p=0.12). In the structural estimates (cols 4 to 6), which
account for noisy choice as well as the sample size of the draws, the estimated average
discounting of teammate's information is even more pronounced (73 percent), with
slightly more pronounced discounting for men (76 percent) than for women (68 percent),
both highly statistically significant (p<0.01).28
  28
    One reason the structural estimates generally provide sharper results than the reduced form is that
the structural model properly accounts for the number of draws (i.e. the sample size) each teammate
gets. Empirically, it is precisely when a participant's teammate receives most of the draws that the gap


                                                  24
    Similarly, in the Draw-sharing rounds, strangers on average put 84 percent less
weight on their teammate's information in the pre-discussion guess (col 1). The esti-
mates are statistically significant for men and women in both the reduced-form and
structural estimates (cols 2 to 6). Having a face-to-face discussion mitigates this ef-
fect. While still sizable in magnitude (47%), the estimate for women is only marginally
significant post-discussion in the reduced-form estimates (p=0.10). In the structural es-
timates, the post-discussion effect is sizeable and significant for both men and women.
    For the Discussion round, we can compare behavior in same- and mixed-gender
pairs. We find no evidence of systematic differences in discounting of their teammate's
information in same- compared to mixed-gender pairs (Table A.IV).
    Earnings implications. Figure 5 Panels C and D show earnings by male and
female strangers across treatments. Broadly similar to husbands playing with their
wives, strangers earn less in the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds compared to the
Individual round, when their teammate receives as many or more draws than them.
Turning to regressions, Table A.V shows that men and women both generate lower
expected earnings when part of the information is collected by their teammate (col
1), though only men's pre-discussion guesses in the Draw-sharing round is statistically
significant (cols 2 and 3). Strangers also earn significantly less per additional second-
signal draw in the Discussion and the pre-discussion Draw-sharing rounds compared
to the Individual round (col 4).
    Comparing couples and strangers. To formally test for gender differences be-
tween couples and pairs of strangers, we pool the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds
of both samples and estimate how the weights placed on one's teammate's info vary
by sample (couples vs. strangers) and by gender (Table A.VI). While women place a
significantly higher weight than men on their teammate's information overall (0.41 vs.
0.28 for men, col 1), this effect is driven more by women playing with their husbands
rather than women in general (col 2).29 Meanwhile, the difference between husbands
playing with a stranger and husbands playing with their wife is smaller and insignificant
(0.24 vs. 0.31 playing with their spouse, col 2).
   The differences between women playing with their husbands and others cannot easily
between the Individual and Draw-sharing round is largest. The structural model better incorporates
this pattern in the data.
  29
     Relative to men playing with strangers, women playing with strangers also place somewhat more
weight on their teammate's information, although this difference is not significant (col 2).


                                               25
be explained by differences in observable characteristics. In Table A.VII, we again pool
the two samples and consider the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds. We then run a
series of regressions in which we control for interactions between teammate's signals and
various demographic variables, measures of ability and beliefs, and household decision-
maker measures. None of these additional interaction terms affect the significance or
magnitude of being a woman in a couple. That is, observable characteristics such
as age or beliefs about ability cannot explain why women weight only their spouse's
information (and not others') more than men do.


5.4    Interpretation, confounds, and robustness

    To recap, our experiments uncover two main results. First, participants put less
weight on information that their teammate discovered, even if this information is per-
fectly communicated to them. Second, the exception to this pattern is that wives weight
their husband's information equally to their own.
   Interpretation. One interpretation of the first result is that people perceive infor-
mation they uncovered themselves as "theirs" and put more weight on it by virtue of
ownership. This broadly relates to the literature on ownership effects and the endow-
ment effect (e.g. Kahneman et al., 1991; Hartzmark et al., 2021) and also to `egocentric
bias', whereby individuals think that their own views are more commonly held than
they actually are (Ross et al., 1977).
    A related possibility is that the own information in our experiment was simply
more vivid and salient. For instance, the act of physically drawing the balls one-by-
one might be more compelling than learning the same information through discussion
or a dry message from the experimenter. This may be a general feature of learning
from experience versus learning from others, related to the economics literature on
experience effects (e.g. Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; D'Acunto et al., 2021). A third
round of our experiment, conducted with strangers and presented in Appendix A.2,
sheds some light on this hypothesis. In one treatment, participants directly observe
their teammate drawing balls from the urn while sitting next to them in the same booth.
Strikingly, people underweight their teammate's information relative to their own even
in this treatment (p=0.03), although the weight placed on teammates' information is
somewhat higher than in the draw-sharing round (p=0.10). This is consistent with at
least some role for vividness, but still leaves a substantial gap relative to uncovering

                                           26
information oneself.
    A final interpretation is that participants are using a reasonable heuristic from their
everyday lives. People may think that information they directly acquire--seen with
their own eyes--tends to be less noisy or more pertinent than information shared by
others. Thus, it may be appropriate to put more weight on one's own information in
many real-world situations. Participants may then extend this heuristic to situations,
such as our experiment, where it does not apply. But is the extent of underweighting
of others' information seen in our experiment quantitatively sensible? Our structural
estimates suggest that husbands underweight their wife's information relative to their
own by 78 percent in the Discussion round and almost entirely in the Draw-sharing
round pre-discussion. Wives' information would thus need to be at most a quarter as
`informative' as husbands' own in typical situations to justify the observed degree of
underweighting.
    Our interpretation of the second result is that women weighting their husband's
information equally is directly tied to the marital context. One possibility is that a
social norm of deferring to one's husband--but not to one's wife--may counteract the
general tendency to underweight others' information. Note that any such norm would
have to be an internalized one, since the guesses we focus on so far are all private
guesses. Another possibility is that women follow a reasonable heuristic that their
husbands (compared to strangers) possess information that is particularly relevant to
them. Of course, this raises the question of why husbands do not display the same
heuristic towards their wives.
    Confounds. The experimental design attempts to render several alternative ex-
planations and confounds irrelevant. For example, participants' beliefs about their
teammate's ability to engage in Bayesian updating should not matter. As long as one's
teammate remembers the draws they saw mere minutes ago, one should be able to
learn their information and weight it appropriately.30 In the Draw-sharing round, of
course, one need not even rely on one's teammate to remember their signals. Unlike
in many information cascade experiments, agents do not need to infer others' signals
by interpreting their actions (e.g. Goeree et al. 2007 and De Filippis et al. 2017), since
they can simply ask for (or receive) their teammate's signals. Nor do participants have
  30
    In any case, recall that men correctly believed that their wives are as good as them at the task,
as we reported in Section 3.4. Thus, beliefs about relative competence cannot explain why husbands
do not weight their wives' information equally.


                                                 27
incentives to follow their own info in order to altruistically signal it to later agents
(March and Ziegelmeyer, 2020). Instead, they have simple, economically-meaningful
incentives to share information in each direction, since one guess by either teammate is
randomly picked to be paid out, and the earnings are divided equally between them.
    Risk aversion. Risk aversion cannot explain our main results. Risk-averse partic-
ipants have a slight incentive to shade their answer towards the median of the dis-
tribution (10 red balls), given our incentive structure. Women are often found to be
more risk averse than men on average (Eckel and Grossman, 2008), and so one might
expect women to update less than men in our experiment. However, men and women
play very similarly in the Individual rounds--recall Figure 2(b)--and, importantly, our
research design rests on comparing guesses across treatments. Gender differences in
risk aversion should show up in the degree of belief updating in the Individual rounds
rather than in differences in belief updating across the Individual and other rounds.
    Trust in the experimenter. One concern with the Draw-sharing round is that par-
ticipants may mistrust the experimenter (relative to their teammate) and thus may
rationally place lower weight on information given by the experimenter. However, par-
ticipants could verify the experimenter's message in the face-to-face discussion with
their teammate, such that any deception would be easily unveiled. No concerns along
these lines were expressed in debriefing or emerged in the transcripts of the unstruc-
tured discussion between the teammates. Finally, as described above, significant un-
derweighting of teammate's information occurs even when participants directly observe
them making the draws (Appendix A.2).
    Reputational concerns vis-à-vis teammates. One may worry that participants' guesses
may be influenced by possible repercussions from their spouse for not using their in-
formation adequately, or for deviating from the jointly chosen guesses. To address this
concern, we did not reveal any post-discussion private guesses, even if they were selected
for payment. This ensures that people remain incentivized to guess what they truly
think and not, for instance, agree with their spouse to avoid future retribution.31 Nor do
any such concerns seem plausible in the case of the strangers sample, since participants
did not know each other and would not expect to have any future interactions.
   Competition. Despite the aligned monetary incentives, participants may enjoy mak-
ing better guesses than their teammate. Moreover, gender differences in preferences
 31
      Pre-discussion guesses were only revealed if selected for payment.


                                                   28
for competition are well-established in the literature (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011).
However, while such a force might lead to withholding of information (or even decep-
tion) in discussions, it should not affect the Draw-Sharing results. In that round, even
if a participant's desire to guess accurately is motivated by a sense of competitiveness
with their teammate, the best way to guess accurately is to use all information at
hand--including what their teammate drew. To generate our results with a utility-
based explanation, one would have to assume that participants (except wives) derive
utility specifically from making guesses consistent with their own signals only, which is
close to our suggested mechanism of egocentric bias or ownership effects.
   Increasing stakes. Participants face significant stakes in our experiment. The third
experiment described in Appendix A.2 shows that further increasing the stakes by
50 percent in randomly-selected rounds led to almost identical (in fact, insignificantly
lower) weight placed on teammate's information (Figure A.VI). The stakes in the higher-
stakes condition ($4.50) are close to the daily per capita income ($5) in the study sample.
Of course, major household decisions with substantially larger stakes might well lead
to better information pooling.
    Robustness to design variations. The third experiment also tested other ex-
perimental variations which might eliminate underweighting of others' information and
establish the limits of our findings. As reported in Figure A.V, we find significant un-
derweighting of teammate's information in all of the following conditions: (i) observing
one's teammate drawing their signals in person (p=0.03); (ii) a modified Draw-sharing
round where the participant is informed of their teammate's draws ball-by-ball instead
of in summary form (p<0.01); and (iii) not entering a first guess before receiving one's
partner's information (p=0.02). The only condition in which underweighting is not
significant is when the participant received their teammate's information before receiv-
ing their own draws (p=0.20), but this is partly because of lower power, as only half
the participants could be in this condition. None of these treatments are statistically
significantly different from the Draw-sharing round. Nonetheless, we treat these results
with caution, since the experiment was forced to stop in March 2020 at 146 pairs of
strangers--well short of the target of 400 pairs--due to Covid-19 restrictions, and thus
statistical power is somewhat limited.




                                            29
5.5    Individual vs. joint decisions

    The private guesses discussed so far shed light on the extent to which people learn
from each other, and whether information flows freely within households and teams.
Our experiment also allows us to study how people make joint decisions --in the form
of joint guesses--which may ameliorate or exacerbate the biases documented above.
    We first examine how the joint guess weights the information each participant un-
covered. Perhaps surprisingly given the above results, couples' joint guesses put very
similar weights on husbands' and wives' information (Figure A.IIIa). Couples put
slightly more weight on wives' information compared to husbands' information in the
Discussion round but do the opposite in the Draw-sharing round, though neither differ-
ence is statistically significant (p=0.54 and p=0.42, respectively). The weights on men
and women among strangers look very similar to the weights among spouses (Figure
A.IIIb). One interpretation of these patterns is that group decisions can mitigate bi-
ases in decision-making that occur in individual choices. While the teammates may not
agree on the best guess--as evidenced by the fact that only half of participants make
the same private final guess as the joint guess--a process of bargaining and compromise
might ensure equal weights in the joint guess.
    Table A.VIII shows the corresponding regressions and reports heterogeneity by rel-
ative ability, beliefs about ability, and by a proxy for household decision-making power.
Consistent with Figure A.IIIa, wives' and husbands' information receives very similar
weight in the joint guess (col 1). The joint decision weights more heavily the signals
of the spouse who is better at the task. This is true for objective measures of per-
formance (col 2) as well as for the subjective beliefs of the couple (col 3). Finally,
the signals drawn by the households' "primary household decision-maker" (as reported
by husbands) also receive significantly more weight (col 4). While all these patterns
seem intuitive--higher ability and greater household bargaining weights lead to greater
weight on one's information--it is worth emphasizing that they should not matter. As
long as participants can recall their draws, such that their information can be pooled
with their spouse's, joint decisions should not weight their information differently.
   The relevance of ability, perceived ability and household decision-maker status in
determining the weights on information in the joint guess hint that the process of
deciding on the joint guess in the Discussion round does not always involve sharing the
underlying signals. If only initial guesses are shared, it may be rational to weight more

                                           30
heavily those with higher ability.32 Indeed, using transcripts of the recorded discussions,
we find evidence along these lines (Table A.I). Forty percent of husbands and wives each
share their first guess with their spouse in the discussion, while only about 30 percent
share the exact composition of draws.
    Given that husbands' and wives' information receive equal weight in joint guesses,
joint decisions earn significantly more than individual guesses made by both husbands
and wives in the same round, though the effect is larger for husbands (Table A.IX,
cols 1 to 3). Guesses naturally yield higher expected earnings when they are based
on more draws (cols 4 to 6). However, additional draws by the wife are more than
twice as valuable in joint decisions compared to in husbands' final private guesses (col
5, p<0.01). We do not see significant differences for wives, since they already weight
their husband's information equally. Joint guesses, by giving equal weight to wives'
information, appear to improve decision-making for husbands who would otherwise
neglect this information.



6         Conclusion

    We designed a simple two-person social-learning task to study whether married cou-
ples efficiently pool their private information through a face-to-face discussion, when
they have incentives to do so. We have three main findings. First, husbands substan-
tially underweight their wife's information relative to their own, while wives equally
weight their own and their husband's information. Second, this underweighting of oth-
ers' information is not due to communication frictions, but instead occurs even when
information is noiselessly communicated. Husbands treat information generated by
their wives as being intrinsically less informative than information generated them-
selves through their own experiences. Third, both men and women underweight others'
information when they are paired with strangers of either gender. This implies a general
tendency to underweight others' information relative to one's `own' information, with
a counteracting tendency for women to weight their husband's information highly.
         Our paper implies that--even absent strategic motives--households may not pool
    32
    Draw-sharing appears to mitigate these heterogeneity patterns (cols 7 to 10). While we find
that the information of spouses who perform better in the Individual round gets more weight in
joint decisions (p=0.01, column 6), there are no clear pattern of heterogeneity by spouses' perceived
performance (col 7) or by the gender of the main household decision-maker (col 8).


                                                 31
information. Moreover, they may fail to learn from each other in an asymmetric way,
even in gender-neutral domains. If these findings prove to be true more generally, then
a policy-maker who wants to ensure that both spouses in a household acquire some
knowledge should not assume that informing or training one spouse will suffice. More-
over, information provided to women may be particularly discounted, as in BenYishay
et al. (2020).
    Beyond the household, the systematic underweighting of others' information we
document could be a powerful and previously underappreciated barrier to social learn-
ing. Existing evidence already shows that, when faced with complex social learning
problems, people deviate from Bayesian inference by, e.g. overweighting private signals
relative to public information (Weizsäcker, 2010), neglecting selection (Enke, 2020), ne-
glecting correlation in signals (Eyster et al., 2015; Enke and Zimmermann, 2019), and
averaging beliefs as in DeGroot learning (Chandrasekhar et al., 2020). Moreover, social
image and stigma can cause people to avoid seeking information from others in the
first place (Chandrasekhar et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2018). We show that, even in a
relatively simple setup with perfectly observed signals, people strongly underweight in-
formation learned from others relative to their own information. This could play a role
in any number of settings where social learning is possible, from technology adoption
to learning about health behaviors and investment opportunities.
     Our study has numerous shortcomings which point to useful avenues for future
research. First, it would be valuable to collect more data on differences in economically-
important beliefs within the household, as in e.g. Fehr et al. (2019) and D'Acunto et al.
(2021). Second, it will be important to study information pooling within the household
using more natural field experiments and with higher stakes, as in Ashraf et al. (2020).
Third, we studied a relatively ungendered domain in which men and women had similar
ability and similar beliefs about own ability. Given the well-documented importance
of gender stereotypes in beliefs and learning (e.g. Coffman et al. 2021a,b), it would be
interesting to study if individuals weight their spouse's information more highly when
it is in a domain congruent with the spouse's gender. Finally, we studied learning in a
context where participants unearthed new information by themselves, as in learning by
experience. It will be important to learn if people also weight information they learned
from others more highly than information their spouse in turn learned from others. We
hope that future research will make make progress in all these directions.



                                           32
References
Afzal, Uzma, Giovanna d'Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, and Farah Said, "Intra-
 household consumption allocation and demand for agency: a triple experimental
 investigation," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Anderson, Lisa R and Charles A Holt, "Information Cascades in the Laboratory,"
 American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (5), 847­862.
Angrisani, Marco, Antonio Guarino, Philippe Jehiel, and Toru Kitagawa, "In-
 formation redundancy neglect versus overconfidence: a social learning experiment,"
 Technical Report, cemmap working paper 2018.
Apedo-Amah, Marie, Habiba Djebbari, and Roberta Ziparo, "Gender, infor-
 mation and the efficiency of household production decisions: An experiment in rural
 Togo," 2020.
Ashraf, Nava, "Spousal Control and Intra­Household Decision Making: An Experi-
 mental Study in the Philippines," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1245­77.
  , Erica Field, and Jean Lee, "Household Bargaining and Excess Fertility: An
  Experimental Study in Zambia," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (7), 2210­
  37.
  , Erica M Field, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Ziparo, "Maternal Mortality
  Risk and Spousal Differences in the Demand for Children," NBER Working Paper
  Number 28220, 2020.
Babcock, Linda, Maria P. Recalde, Lise Vesterlund, and Laurie Weingart,
 "Gender Differences in Accepting and Receiving Requests for Tasks with Low Pro-
 motability," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 714­47.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Emily Breza, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, and Benjamin
 Golub, "When Less is More: Experimental Evidence on Information Delivery During
 India's Demonetization," NBER Working Paper Number 24679, 2018.
Beaman, Lori and Andrew Dillon, "Diffusion of agricultural information within
 social networks: Evidence on gender inequalities from Mali," Journal of Development
 Economics, 2018, 133, 147­161.
Benjamin, Dan, Aaron Bodoh-Creed, and Matthew Rabin, "Base-Rate Neglect:
 Foundations and Implications," Working Paper, 2019.
Benjamin, Daniel J., "Chapter 2 - Errors in Probabilistic Reasoning and Judgment
 Biases," Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, 2019,
 2, 69­186.
BenYishay, Ariel, Maria Jones, Florence Kondylis, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mo-
 barak, "Gender gaps in technology diffusion," Journal of Development Economics,


                                        33
  2020, 143 (August 2019).
Bonaccio, Silvia and Reeshad S. Dalal, "Advice taking and decision-making: An
 integrative literature review, and implications for the organizational sciences," Orga-
 nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 2006, 101 (2), 127­151.
Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer,
 "Beliefs about Gender," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (3), 739­73.
Chandrasekhar, Arun G, Benjamin Golub, and He Yang, "Signaling, Shame,
 and Silence in Social Learning," NBER Working Paper Number 25169, 2018.
Chandrasekhar, Arun G., Horacio Larreguy, and Juan Pablo Xandri, "Testing
 Models of Social Learning on Networks: Evidence From Two Experiments," Econo-
 metrica, 2020, 88 (1), 1­32.
Chen, Jingnan and Daniel Houser, "Gender Composition, Stereotype and the Con-
 tribution of Ideas," Working Paper, 2017.
Coffman, Katherine Baldiga, "Evidence on Self-Stereotyping and the Contribution
 of Ideas," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1625­1660.
Coffman, Katherine, Clio Bryant Flikkema, and Olga Shurchkov, "Gender
 Stereotypes in Deliberation and Team Decisions," Working Paper, 2021.
  , Manuela Collis, and Leena Kulkarni, "Stereotypes and Belief Updating," Work-
  ing Paper, 2021.
Cooper, David J and John H Kagel, "Are two heads better than one? Team
 versus individual play in signaling games," American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3),
 477­509.
   and , "A failure to communicate: an experimental investigation of the effects of
  advice on strategic play," European Economic Review, 2016, 82, 24­45.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael We-
 ber, "Exposure to Grocery Prices and Inflation Expectations," Journal of Political
 Economy, 2021, 129 (5).
Danz, David, Lise Vesterlund, and Alistair J Wilson, "Belief Elicitation: Lim-
 iting Truth Telling with Information on Incentives," NBER Working Paper Number
 27327, 2020.
De Filippis, Roberta, Antonio Guarino, Jehiel Philippe, and Toru Kitagawa,
 "Updating Ambiguous Beliefs in a Social Learning Experiment," Working Paper,
 2017.
Drehmann, Mathias, Jörg Oechssler, and Andreas Roider, "Herding and Con-
 trarian Behavior in Financial Markets: An Internet Experiment," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2005, 95 (5), 1403­1426.


                                          34
Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, "Chapter 113: Men, Women and
  Risk Aversion: Experimental Evidence," Handbook of Experimental Economics, 2008,
  1, 1061­1073.
Enke, Benjamin, "What you see is all there is," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2020, 135 (3), 1363­1398.
   and Florian Zimmermann, "Correlation neglect in belief formation," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 313­332.
Exley, Christine L and Judd B Kessler, "The Gender Gap in Self-Promotion,"
 NBER Working Paper Number 26345, 2021.
Exley, Christine L., Muriel Niederle, and Lise Vesterlund, "Knowing When to
 Ask: The Cost of Leaning In," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (3), 816­854.
Eyster, Erik, Matthew Rabin, and Georg Weizsacker, "An experiment on social
 mislearning," Available at SSRN 2704746, 2015.
Fehr, Dietmar, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, "Your Place
  in the World: The Demand for National and Global Redistribution," Technical Re-
  port, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Gigone, Daniel and Reid Hastie, "The common knowledge effect: Information
 sharing and group judgment.," Journal of Personality and social Psychology, 1993,
 65 (5), 959.
Goeree, Jacob K., Thomas R. Palfrey, Brian W. Rogers, and Richard D.
 McKelvey, "Self-Correcting Information Cascades," The Review of Economic Stud-
 ies, 2007, 74 (3), 733­762.
Guarino, Antonio and Philippe Jehiel, "Social Learning with Coarse Inference,"
 American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2013, 5 (1), 147­74.
Hartzmark, Samuel M, Samuel Hirshman, and Alex Imas, "Ownership, Learn-
 ing, and Beliefs," Working Paper, 2021.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch, and Richard H Thaler, "Anomalies: The
 Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias," Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives, 1991, 5 (1), 193­206.
Liberman, Varda, Julia A. Minson, Christopher J. Bryan, and Lee Ross,
  "Naïve realism and capturing the "wisdom of dyads"," Journal of Experimental Social
  Psychology, 2012, 48 (2), 507­512.
Lowe, Matt and Madeline Mckelway, "Bargaining Breakdown: Intra-Household
  Decision-Making and Female Labor Supply," Working Paper, 2019.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
 Experiences Affect Risk Taking?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126


                                         35
  (1), 373­416.
March, Christoph and Anthony Ziegelmeyer, "Altruistic Observational Learn-
 ing," Journal of Economic Theory, 2020, 190, 105­123.
Mengel, Friederike, Jan Sauermann, and Ulf Zölitz, "Gender Bias in Teaching
 Evaluations," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2019, 17 (2), 535­566.
Minson, Julia A., Jennifer S. Mueller, and Richard P. Larrick, "The Contin-
 gent Wisdom of Dyads: When Discussion Enhances vs. Undermines the Accuracy of
 Collaborative Judgments," Management Science, 2018, 64 (9), 4177­4192.
  , Varda Liberman, and Lee Ross, "Two to tango: Effects of collaboration and
  disagreement on dyadic judgment," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2011,
  37 (10), 1325­1338.
Mobius, Markus and Tanya Rosenblat, "Social Learning in Economics," Annual
 Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 827­847.
  , Tuan Phan, and Adam Szeidl, "Treasure Hunt: Social Learning in the Field,"
  NBER Working Paper Number 21014, 2015.
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, "Gender and Competition," Annual Review
 of Economics, 2011, 3, 601­630.
Palfrey, Thomas R. and Stephanie W. Wang, "On Eliciting Beliefs in Stategic
 Games," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2009, 71 (2), 98­109.
Pollak, Robert A., "How Bargaining in Marriage Drives Marriage Market Equilib-
 rium," Journal of Labor Economics, 2019, 37 (1), 297­321.
Reshidi, Pëllumb, "An Experiment on Social Learning with Information Sequencing,"
 Working Paper, 2020.
Ross, Lee, David Greene, and Pamela House, "The "false consensus effect": An
 egocentric bias in social perception and attribution processes," Journal of Experi-
 mental Social Psychology, 1977, 13 (3), 279­301.
Stasser, Garold and William Titus, "Pooling of unshared information in group deci-
  sion making: Biased information sampling during discussion.," Journal of personality
  and social psychology, 1985, 48 (6), 1467.
Stone, Daniel F. and Basit Zafar, "Do we follow others when we should outside
  the lab? Evidence from the AP Top 25," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2014, 49,
  73­102.
Weizsäcker, Georg, "Do We Follow Others When We Should? A Simple Test of
 Rational Expectations," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2340­60.




                                         36
                                  Figure 1: Experimental Design
                                   Panel A: Overall Design

                                             Individual Round
                                                                                     Random Order
                                             Discussion Round

                                             Discussion Round

                                            Draw-Sharing Round                       Random Order
                   Info-Sharing
                      Rounds
                                            Guess-Sharing Round


   Panel B: Structure of Individual, Discussion, and Info-Sharing Rounds

                          INDIVIDUAL                            DISCUSSION                             INFO-SHARING
                            ROUND                                 ROUND                                   ROUNDS
                     Husband      Wife                   Husband           Wife                     Husband         Wife

                       h draws    w draws                 h draws         w draws                    h draws       w draws

     FIRST SET
      OF INFO
                       Private    Private                   Private        Private                   Private        Private
                        guess      guess                     guess          guess                     guess          guess


                                                                                                     Learn          Learn
                                                                                                    partner's      partner's
                                                                                                      info           info


    SECOND SET                                                  Discussion and                       Private        Private
                      w draws     h draws
      OF INFO                                                     joint guess                         guess          guess



                                                                                                         Discussion and
                                                                                                           joint guess



      FINAL            Private    Private                   Private        Private                   Private        Private
     GUESSES            guess      guess                     guess          guess                     guess          guess



Panel A shows the five rounds of the couples experiment. All couples complete all five rounds. The
order of the first two rounds (Individual and Discussion ) is randomized. Similarly, the order of the
following three rounds (Discussion, Guess-Sharing, and Draw-Sharing ) is randomized.
Panel B describes the structure of the different rounds. In the Individual round, each spouse gets two
sets of private draws from the urn and makes a private guess after each set of draws. The Individual
round is the only round with no discussion. In the Discussion round, each spouse makes one set of
draws followed by a private guess. The two spouses are then asked to discuss and make a joint guess.
Next, each spouse makes a final private guess. Both versions of the Info-Sharing rounds are identical to
the Discussion round, except for that they include additional information sharing before the discussion
and joint guess. In the Draw-Sharing round, each spouse is informed about their partner's draws earlier
in the round, and then asked to make a private guess. In the Guess-Sharing round, each spouse is
informed about their partner's guess earlier in the round, and then asked to make a private guess.

                                                       37
                                                   Figure 2: Actual and Perceived Performance

                                                   Panel A: Average Expected Earnings Compared to Beliefs

                                                     Actual Performance                                           Beliefs about
                                      160
                                                                                                                  Performance
            Expected Earnings (Rs.)
                                      140
                                      120
                                      100
                                      80




                                             2 Draws         6 Draws         10 Draws                        Husbands'         Wives'
                                                                                                              Beliefs          Beliefs

                                                      Husbands' Earnings                          Wives' Earnings
                                                      Bayesian                                    Random                       +/- 1 SE

                                                   Panel B: Belief Updating Compared to Bayesian

                                                     Husbands                                                    Wives
                15




                                                                                         15




                                                          Bayesian                                                  Bayesian
       Second Guess




                                                                                   Second Guess




                                                                         Actual                                                    Actual
            10




                                                                                        10
                5




                                                                                         5




                                            -5             0             5                            -5             0             5
                                                 2nd Draw: Red - White                                     2nd Draw: Red - White


Panel A shows spouses' actual and their perceived performance in the game. The left panel shows
the average expected earnings of the final guesses in the Individual round by the total number of
draws in the round. Blue and gray bars indicate the mean expected earnings for husbands and wives,
respectively. Triangles indicate the mean expected earnings for Bayesian risk-neutral optimal guesses
conditional on the same draws, and crosses indicate the mean expected earnings if guessed randomly
(i.e., uniformly among all possible guesses). Bands show ± one standard error. The right panel shows
spouses' predictions of how much their own and their spouse's guesses would earn on average. These
predictions were incentivized by a Rs. 50 reward for being within Rs. 30 of the actual average. Blue and
grey bars show spouses' predictions of husbands' and wives' average expected earnings, respectively.
Panel B shows the average second private guess in the Individual round depending on the net number
of red draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in participants' second signal. The blue and grey
curves show locally-weighted means (lowess) for husbands and wives, respectively. The dotted lines
show the average of what a risk-neutral Bayesian would have guessed given the same signals.

                                                                                  38
   Figure 3: Spouses' Guesses in Individual, Discussion, and Draw-Sharing Rounds

                                            Panel A: Husbands
                        Discussion vs Individual                  Draw-Sharing vs Individual
           15




                                                           15
                              Individual                                  Individual
     Second Guess




                                      Discussion                                Draw-Sharing
          10




                                                           10
           5




                                                           5
                      -5           0           5                 -5            0           5
                    2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White             2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White


                                              Panel B: Wives

                        Discussion vs Individual                  Draw-Sharing vs Individual
           15




                                                           15




                              Individual                                  Individual
     Second Guess
          10




                                                           10




                                      Discussion                                Draw-Sharing
           5




                                                           5




                      -5           0           5                 -5            0           5
                    2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White             2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White


Notes: This figure shows the average second private guess of husbands (Panel A) and wives (Panel B).

    · The x-axis denotes the net number of red draws (i.e. the number of red draws minus the number
      of white draws) in the second signal of the round.
    · The gray dots indicate average guesses in the Individual Round, where participants made the
      second set of draws themselves.
    · The dark-blue dots in the graphs on the left indicate guesses in the Discussion Round, where
      the second set of draws had to be communicated to the participant via discussion.
    · The lavender dots in the graphs on right indicate average guesses in the Draw-Sharing round,
      after the respondent is told of his/her spouse's draws by the experimenter (but before the joint
      discussion).



                                                      39
                                                                         Figure 4: Weights on Own vs. Others' Information

                                             Panel A: Husbands' Guesses (Couples Experiment)                                                     Panel B: Wives' Guesses (Couples Experiment)
                                                                                                                                                                p = 0.61         p = 0.94         p = 0.35


                                        .8




                                                                                                                                           .8
           Coefficient on Second Info         Own Info                   Teammate's Info                                                         Own Info                   Teammate's Info




                                                                                                              Coefficient on Second Info
                                        .6




                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                             p = 0.00         p = 0.00         p = 0.00
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                               Individual   Discussion     Draw-Sharing      Draw-Sharing                                         Individual   Discussion     Draw-Sharing      Draw-Sharing
                                                                           Pre-Discussion   Post-Discussion                                                                   Pre-Discussion   Post-Discussion
40




                                              Panel C: Men's Guesses (Strangers Experiment)                                                     Panel D: Women's Guesses (Strangers Experiment)
                                        .8




                                                                                                                                           .8
                                              Own Info                   Teammate's Info
           Coefficient on Second Info




                                                                                                              Coefficient on Second Info
                                                                                                                                                 Own Info                   Teammate's Info
                                        .6




                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                             p = 0.00         p = 0.00         p = 0.04                                                         p = 0.12         p = 0.02         p = 0.10
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                           0


                                               Individual   Discussion     Draw-Sharing      Draw-Sharing                                         Individual   Discussion     Draw-Sharing      Draw-Sharing
                                                                           Pre-Discussion   Post-Discussion                                                                   Pre-Discussion   Post-Discussion


     Notes: This figure shows the weights participants put on different pieces of information. The upper two panels show weights for husbands (Panel
     A) and wives (Panel B ) in the couples experiment; the lower two panels show weights for men (Panel C ) and women (Panel D ) in the strangers
     experiment. For each of these groups, we estimate equation 1 and then display the sum of 2 + 3t for each of the following four types of
     private guesses: (a) Individual, where participants collect all information on their own; (b) Discussion, in which participants collect the first set
     of information on their own and the second set is only accessible via discussion; (c) Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion), where participants receive the
     second set of information directly from the experimenter but before any discussion with their teammate; (d) Draw-Sharing (post-discussion), in
     which participants receive the second set of information directly and have the chance to discuss it with their teammate. For each of the dark-blue
     bars, we show the p-value of testing whether the weight in that round equals the corresponding weight in the Individual round (grey bar).
                                                              Figure 5: Average Expected Earnings by Number of Draws


                                            Panel A: Husbands' Guesses (Couples Experiment)                                   Panel B: Wives' Guesses (Couples Experiment)




                                                                                                                       130
                                      130
                 Expected Earnings (Rs)




                                                                                                 Expected Earnings (Rs)
                                                Own Info                                                                         Own Info




                                                                                                              120
                             120


                                                              Wife's Info                                                                    Husband's Info




                                                                                                     110
              100    110




                                                                                              100
                                                1                 5                  9                                            1                 5                9
                                                           # Second Draws                                                                    # Second Draws
41




                                             Panel C: Men's Guesses (Strangers Experiment)                                   Panel D: Women's Guesses (Strangers Experiment)




                                                                                                                     130
                                     130
                 Expected Earnings (Rs)




                                                                                                 Expected Earnings (Rs)
                                                Own Info                                                                         Own Info




                                                                                                             120
                             120




                                                                                                                                            Teammate's Info



                                                                                                     110
                     110




                                                           Teammate's Info
              100




                                                                                              100
                                                 1                 5                 9                                            1                5                 9
                                                            # Second Draws                                                                  # Second Draws


     Notes: This figure shows the average expected earnings (in rupees) of the second private guesses depending on the number of draws in the second
     signal. The figure shows expected earnings for husbands (Panel A) and wives (Panel B) in the couples sample and by men (Panel C) and women
     (Panel D) in the strangers sample. The x-axis denotes the number of draws in the second signal of the round. Gray dots indicate expected earnings
     of final private guesses in the Individual Round, where participants made the second set of draws themselves. Dark-blue dots in the graphs on the
     left indicate earnings from final private guesses pooling all guesses in which the second set of draws had to be communicated to the participant
     via discussion, i.e. the Discussion round (both pre and post discussion) and the Draw-sharing round. Bands show ± one standard error.
                                   Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                                              Couples           Strangers
                                                        Husbands     Wives    Men      Women
               Marriage & Age
               Married                                      1.00     1.00     0.56      0.85

               Years married | Married                      12.33    12.23    13.00    15.09
                                                            (8.47)   (8.45)   (7.65)   (8.66)
               Age                                          36.46    31.86    34.92    34.39
                                                            (9.10)   (8.34)   (8.69)   (8.48)

               Education
               Highest grade attended                        7.86     8.11     7.77     7.26
                                                            (3.31)   (3.29)   (3.54)   (3.44)
               Read Tamil                                    0.86     0.83     0.77     0.75

               Multiplied correctly                         0.48     0.33     0.52      0.36


               Work
               Works (at least 1 day/week)                  1.00     0.42     1.00      0.54

               Daily work hours | Works                      8.23     5.56     7.93     4.40
                                                            (2.74)   (3.61)   (3.18)   (3.65)
               Days working per week | Works                 5.73     5.90     5.27     5.75
                                                            (1.05)   (1.15)   (1.26)   (1.31)
               Daily earnings (in Rs.) | Works               571      280      577      282
                                                            (269)    (196)    (300)    (210)

               Ability at task
               Actual ability (exp. earnings in Rs.)        122      120      117       119
                                                            (37)     (36)     (37)      (38)
               Belief of own ability (in Rs.)               144      137      139       144
                                                            (44)     (45)     (45)      (46)
               Belief of partner's ability (in Rs.)         142      153      123       123
                                                            (39)     (40)     (47)      (53)

               Who in general is better at the task?
               Men                                          0.21     0.22     0.13      0.14
               Women                                        0.40     0.39     0.27      0.26
               About the same                               0.39     0.39     0.60      0.59
               Number of participants                        397      399      250      250


Notes: This table shows averages of key background characteristics for the couples and strangers
samples. Standard deviations for non-binary variables are in parentheses. Columns 1 and 2 describe
our main experimental sample of 400 married couples; columns 3 and 4 describe our secondary sample
of 500 individuals. "Highest grade attended" refers to the highest school grade attended out of 12.
Tamil is the local language. "Multiplied correctly" equals 1 if the participant knew the answer to
"What is 3 × 9?" " | " means "conditional on". Earnings are in Indian Rupees (US$1  70 Rupees).
Actual ability refers to the expected earnings of participants' final guesses in the Individual round. Four
people in the couples sample did not complete the demographic survey at the end of the experiment,
so are excluded from this table.
                                                       42
                   Table 2: Couples: Reduced-Form and Structural Estimates

                                      Reduced-Form Coefficients               Structural Parameters
                                       Pooled    Husbands         Wives     Pooled     Husbands         Wives
                                         (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)             (6)
  1 : First Info                       0.43       0.50            0.37      0.82***     0.82***        0.71***
                                       (0.03)     (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.16)      (0.16)         (0.26)

  2 : Second Info                      0.53       0.54            0.54      1.37***    1.29***         1.32***
                                       (0.05)     (0.08)          (0.07)     (0.27)     (0.28)          (0.44)

  3,1 : Second Info X                  -0.20      -0.32            -0.04    -0.73***   -1.00***         -0.33
  Discussion                            (0.06)     (0.08)         (0.08)     (0.21)     (0.24)         (0.38)

  3,2 : Second Info X                  -0.28      -0.53            -0.01    -0.99***   -1.32***         -0.31
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)         (0.09)     (0.12)         (0.12)     (0.26)     (0.31)         (0.55)

  3,3 : Second Info X                   -0.13     -0.35            0.11       -0.29     -0.86**         0.44
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)       (0.09)      (0.12)         (0.12)     (0.29)      (0.37)        (0.58)

  : Constant/                         10.29       10.14           10.39     67.63***   60.82***    71.46***
  Structural Noise Parameter           (0.12)      (0.15)          (0.15)    (4.72)     (5.20)      (5.61)

  Observations                          4000       2000            2000      4000        2000           2000
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                        0.02                                 0.14
  p-value: 3,2 equal across genders                        0.00                                 0.13
  p-value: 3,3 equal across genders                        0.00                                 0.08
  Includes Info X Order FEs              Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes


Notes: This table show reduced-from and structural estimates for the couples sample's Discussion
and Draw-sharing rounds.

Reduced-form coefficients: Columns 1 to 3 show reduced-form results, estimating equation 1 by
OLS. The dependent variable is participants' private guess. "First Info" indicates the net number of red
draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second Info" indicates
the net number of red draws in the second set of draws. "Discussion" is an indicator that equals one
for the final private guess in the Discussion round, when the second set of draws were drawn by the
participant's spouse and then (potentially) communicated to her through discussion. "Draw-Sharing
(pre-discussion)" indicates the second private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the participant
was directly told their spouse's information but before discussing it with their spouse. "Draw-Sharing
(post-discussion)" indicates the third private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the discussion. All
regressions include order fixed effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info." Standard errors
are clustered at the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.

Structural parameters: Columns 4 to 6 show estimates of the structural model described in Section
4.3. "First Info" and "Second Info" indicate the weights placed on the first and second set of signals in
the agents' quasi-Bayesian updating rule. The interaction terms indicate the difference in weight on
the second signal in Discussion and Draw-Sharing rounds (see notes for reduced-form estimates for
more detail). Bootstrapped standard errors (clustered at the couple level) in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.



                                                     43
    Table 3: Couples' Expected Earnings by Type of Guess and Number of Draws

                                    Pooled     Husbands     Wives      Pooled    Husbands     Wives
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
  Discussion                         -2.48      -4.47        -0.49      0.01       -0.59       0.43
                                    (2.06)      (2.71)      (2.83)     (2.94)     (3.83)      (4.20)

  Draw-Sharing                        -4.92     -8.32        -1.52      4.03        3.47       4.24
  (pre-discussion)                   (3.03)     (3.90)      (4.02)     (3.89)      (5.01)     (5.33)

  Draw-Sharing                        -0.44      -4.22       3.33       2.98        3.64       2.06
  (post-discussion)                  (3.16)     (3.87)      (4.02)     (3.76)      (4.90)     (5.53)

  # First Draws                                                        2.50       2.62        2.36
                                                                       (0.31)     (0.38)      (0.41)

  # Second Draws                                                       2.54       3.26        1.77
                                                                       (0.53)     (0.71)      (0.76)

  # Second Draws X                                                      -0.66       -1.04      -0.24
  Discussion                                                           (0.59)      (0.81)     (0.85)

  # Second Draws X                                                    -2.33       -3.18        -1.44
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)                                        (0.75)      (1.03)     (1.07)

  # Second Draws X                                                      -0.79      -2.05       0.45
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)                                       (0.66)      (1.05)     (1.02)

  Constant                         119.98      121.08      118.88     100.78      98.80      103.19
                                    (1.71)      (2.27)      (2.42)     (3.21)      (4.13)     (4.26)
  Observations                       4000        2000        2000       4000        2000       2000


Notes: This table compares spouses' expected earnings in the Discussion and Draw-sharing rounds to
their earnings in the Individual round. The table shows OLS estimates of the following two equations:

   Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µi +  · Tirt + irt                                                   (4)
   Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µi +  · Tirt + 1 # First Drawsirt + 2 # Second Drawsirt              (5)
                           + 3 · Tirt · # First Drawsirt + 4 · Tirt · # Second Drawsirt + irt

where Expected Earningsirt is the expected earnings from i's guess in round r and treatment t.
We include round-fixed effects µr and individual-fixed effects µi in both regressions. As before,
Tirt is a vector of indicators corresponding to the Discussion, Draw-sharing (pre-discussion) and
Draw-Sharing (post-discussion) treatments. Equation 5 additionally includes # First Drawsirt and
# Second Drawsirt , which indicate the number of draws in the first and second set of signals, as well
as interacting them with the vector of treatments Tirt . All regressions include order fixed effects and
individual fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.




                                                  44
                   Table 4: Strangers: Reduced-Form and Structural Estimates

                                       Reduced-Form Coefficients              Structural Parameters
                                       Pooled      Men        Women         Pooled       Men       Women
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)
  1 : First Info                       0.51       0.51        0.49          0.90***    0.79***     0.99***
                                       (0.05)     (0.07)      (0.07)         (0.25)     (0.23)      (0.26)

  2 : Second Info                      0.51       0.53        0.49          1.51***    1.27***     1.71***
                                       (0.06)     (0.10)      (0.10)         (0.41)     (0.45)      (0.44)

  3,1 : Second Info X                  -0.26     -0.37             -0.16   -1.11***    -0.97***    -1.16***
  Discussion                            (0.08)    (0.12)          (0.11)    (0.30)      (0.41)      (0.40)

  3,2 : Second Info X                  -0.43     -0.51        -0.36        -1.51***    -1.22***    -1.73***
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)         (0.11)    (0.15)      (0.15)        (0.34)      (0.50)      (0.49)

  3,3 : Second Info X                  -0.26      -0.30            -0.23   -1.00***    -0.76**     -1.24**
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)       (0.10)     (0.15)          (0.14)    (0.36)      (0.51)      (0.51)

  : Constant/                          10.71     10.73        10.70        69.22***   69.44*** 67.59***
  Structural Noise Parameter            (0.13)    (0.19)       (0.19)       (6.50)     (7.70)   (8.31)

  Observations                          2500       1250           1250       2500        1250          1250
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                        0.22                                 1.00
  p-value: 3,2 equal across genders                        0.51                                 0.96
  p-value: 3,3 equal across genders                        0.72                                 0.94
  Includes Info X Order FEs              Yes       Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes

Notes: This table shows reduced-from and structural estimates for the strangers sample's Discussion
and Draw-sharing rounds.

Reduced-form coefficients Columns 1 to 3 show reduced-form results, estimating equation 1 by
OLS. The dependent variable is participants' private guess. "First Info" indicates the net number of red
draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second Info" indicates
the net number of red draws in the second set of draws. "Discussion" is an indicator that equals one
for the final private guess in the Discussion round, when the second set of draws were drawn by the
participant's partner and then (potentially) communicated to her through discussion. "Draw-Sharing
(pre-discussion)" indicates the second private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the participant
was directly told their partner's information but before discussing it with them. "Draw-Sharing (post-
discussion)" indicates the third private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the discussion. All
regressions include order fixed effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info." Standard errors
are clustered at the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.

Structural parameters: Columns 4 to 6 show estimates of the structural model described in Section
4.3. "First Info" and "Second Info" indicate the weights placed on the first and second set of signals in
the agents' quasi-Bayesian updating rule. The interaction terms indicate the difference in weight on
the second signal in Discussion and Draw-Sharing rounds (see notes for reduced-form estimates for
more detail). Bootstrapped standard errors (clustered at the couple level) in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.



                                                     45
    A       Learning in the Household: Online Appendix

                                      Figure A.I: Visual Aids

                                           (a) Guess Scale




                                      (b) Payment Scale

                                      PAYMENT SCALE
                                                                                       Exactly
                                                                                       correct!
              7 or more



                                                ·
                                              4 balls                                   0 balls



                 ·                                                                        ·
              balls away                       away                                      away



                            6          5       4           3         2          1          0




                           Rs. 30   Rs. 60    Rs. 90     Rs. 120   Rs. 150   Rs. 180   Rs. 210



Notes: This figure uses visual used to explain the experiment to study participants.

Panel A: The figure shows the scale which participants used to make their guesses. It shows the
13 possible urn compositions ranging from 4 to 16 red balls (among 20 balls in total). We induced
common priors: Participants were informed that in each round, each of these compositions were
equally likely (probability 1/13 each). Participants guessed by placing a small token on top of the
corresponding number.

Panel B: The figure shows the scale used to explain the incentives for accurate guessing to participants.
For each pair of participants, one of their guesses was randomly selected to determine the pair's
payment. On top of their participation fee, each couple receives an amount in Rupees (Rs.) equal
to max{(210 - 30 × |g - r|), 0}, where g is the guess and r the true number of red balls for the
randomly-selected guess. See more detail in Section 3.2.


                                                    46
Figure A.II: Strangers' Guesses in Individual, Discussion, and Draw-Sharing Rounds


                                                 Panel A: Men
                       Discussion vs Individual                   Draw-Sharing vs Individual
         15




                                                           15
                                                                          Individual
   Second Guess




                   Individual
        10




                                                           10
                                        Discussion                                Draw-Sharing
         5




                                                           5
                     -5           0           5                  -5            0           5
                   2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White              2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White


                                            Panel B: Women

                      Discussion vs Individual                    Draw-Sharing vs Individual
   15




                                                           15




                                                                          Individual
                  Individual
   10




                                                           10




                                        Discussion                                Draw-Sharing
   5




                                                           5




                   -5            0           5                   -5            0           5
                  2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White               2nd Signal: # Red Minus # White


Notes: This figure shows the average second private guess of men (Panel A) and women (panel B) in
the strangers sample.

    · The x-axis denotes the net number of red draws (i.e. the number of red draws minus the number
      of white draws) in the second signal of the round.
    · The gray dots indicate average guesses in the Individual Round, where participants made the
      second set of draws themselves.
    · The dark-blue dots in the graphs on the left indicate guesses in the Discussion Round, where
      the second set of draws had to be communicated to the participant via discussion.
    · The lavender dots in the graphs on right indicate average guesses in the Draw-Sharing round,
      after the respondent is told of his/her spouse's draws by the experimenter (but before the joint
      discussion).

                                                      47
                                      Figure A.III: Weights in Joint Decisions

                                          Panel A: Spouses' Information Weights




                                 .8
                                 .6
                       Coefficient
                                 .4
                                 .2
                                 0




                                              Discussion              Draw-Sharing


                                            Husband's Info        Wife's Info     +/- 1 SE


                                          Panel B: Strangers' Information Weights
                                     .8
                                     .6
                       Coefficient
                                     .4
                                     .2
                                     0




                                              Discussion               Draw-Sharing


                                            Men's Info        Women's Info       +/- 1 SE


Notes: Each pair of bars above shows OLS estimates of 1 and 2 in the following equation:

                Joint Guessirt =  + 1 · Husband's Infoirt + 2 · Wife's Infoirt +             irt

Husband's Infoirt is defined as the number of "net red draws" (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in
the husband's set of signals. Wife's Infoirt is number of net red draws in the wife's set of signals. The
left pairs of bars show estimates for joint guesses in the Discussion rounds, and the right pairs show
estimate for the Draw-Sharing round. Panel A shows estimates for the sample of married couples, and
Panel B shows estimates for the sample of mixed-gender pairs of strangers. Whiskers denote standard
errors clustered at the couple/group level.


                                                             48
          Table A.I: Transcripts of Joint Discussions: Summary Statistics

                                                    Couples         Non-Couples
                                              Husbands Wives        Men     Women
            Spoke First                         0.51   0.49         0.48     0.52
            Spoke Last                          0.57   0.43         0.53     0.47
            Asked for Other's Information       0.14   0.12         0.33     0.39
            Explained Task to Teammate          0.04   0.03         0.00     0.00
            Shared Guess                        0.40   0.42         0.29     0.29
            Shared Number of Draws              0.25   0.28         0.19     0.20
            Shared Composition of Draws         0.27   0.32         0.22     0.24
            Suggested Final Guess               0.65   0.53         0.61     0.45
            Entered Guess                       0.60   0.42         0.50     0.50
            Length of Discussion (mins)         1.63   1.63         0.92     0.92

Notes: This table shows averages of key characteristics of the discussion among participants for
the couples and non-couples samples. These variables were constructed using transcripts of the
discussions between participants before the joint guesses were made.

    · Columns 1 and 2 describe our main experimental sample of 400 married couples; columns
      3 and 4 describe our secondary sample of 500 individuals.
    · For the couples sample, we pool the discussions across 4 rounds, and exclude the Individual
      round. For the non-couples sample, we pool the discussions across 3 rounds, and exclude
      the Individual round and Discussion round with same-gender pairs.
    · "Shared Number of Draws" equals 1 if participants shared their total draws or mentioned
      the specific composition of their draws, ("I drew 4 red balls and 1 white ball"). "Shared
      Composition of Draws" equals 1 if participants shared the specific composition of draws
      ("I drew 4 red balls and 1 white ball") or mentioned that they drew more of one color ("I
      drew more red balls than white"). "Entered Guess" refers to the participant who placed
      the token on the sheet (A.I) as the joint guess.
    · 83% of our transcripts were audible, so the remaining have been excluded from this table.




                                               49
                          Table A.II: Comprehension and Memory

         Question                                            Couples          Strangers
                                                         Husbands    Wives   Men    Women
         A. Basic Design
         Number of balls                                    0.95      0.97   0.98    0.96
         Colors of balls                                    1.00      0.99   1.00    1.00
         B. Common Prior
         Possible < 4 red                                   0.92      0.93   0.92    0.94
         Possible > 16 red                                  0.95      0.94   0.94    0.93
         Who chooses number of red balls                    0.84      0.87   0.79    0.83
         Likelihood of each number                          0.85      0.87   0.78    0.79
         C. Signals
         Learn more from more balls                         0.90      0.93   0.85    0.92
         Possible have 4 draws                              0.76      0.80   0.73    0.80
         How number draws differs                           0.55      0.58   0.46    0.49
         How spouse's draws differ                          0.63      0.65   0.57    0.66
         D. Incentives
         Payment if 1 off                                   0.92      0.89   0.90    0.91
         Payment if way off                                 0.89      0.85   0.85    0.86
         Payment if 4 off                                   0.92      0.89   0.91    0.92
         E. Memory
         Correctly remembered own guess                     0.94      0.95   0.92    0.92
         Correctly remembered # of own draws                0.99      0.97   0.96    0.98
         Correctly remembered # of own red draws            0.84      0.86   0.85    0.85
         F. Memory of Draws (from follow-up sample)
         Correctly remembered # of own draws                                 0.96    0.97
         Correctly remembered # of own red draws                             0.78    0.85
         Correctly remembered # of partner's draws                           0.89    0.90
         Correctly remembered # of partner's red draws                       0.72    0.64

Notes: This table shows summary statistics of participants comprehension of the task and their memory of
previous draws and guesses. Cols 1 and 2 show our main experimental sample of 400 married couples; cols
3 and 4 show our secondary sample of 500 individuals. The questions asked were as follows:
    · Panel A: shows answers to questions "How many balls are in the urn?" (correct answer: 20), and
      "What colors are the balls?" (red and white).
    · Panel B: "Is it possible to have less than 4 /more than 16 red balls?" (no); "Who chooses how many
      balls are red?" (the computer), and "Are some numbers more likely than others?" (no).
    · Panel C: "Do you learn more from one draw or five draws?" (five); "Can you get exactly 4 draws in
      any round?" (no); "Will you have the same or different numbers of draws across rounds?" (could be
      same or different); "Will your partner have the same or different number to you?" (could be same or
      different).
    · Panel D: shows the fraction of people who could correctly indicate their payment on the scale if
      their guess was 1, 11, or 4 balls off.
    · Panel E: shows the proportion of participants who correctly remember their own guess and draws
      in the Guess-Sharing and Draw-Sharing rounds when these questions were asked.
    · Panel F: shows the fraction of people who correctly remember their own and their partner's draws
      in the third experimental round (Appendix A.2). "Correctly remembered # of own draws" and
      "Correctly remembered # of own red draws" correspond to results pooled across 4 rounds, including
      the In-Person round. "Correctly remember # of partner's draws" and "Correctly remembered # of
      partner's red draws" correspond to the In-Person round.
                                                50
             Table A.III: Explaining Differences Between Husbands and Wives

                                          (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                                                                            
  Own Net Red                           0.56      0.67       0.56         0.59      0.60      0.56      0.78      0.61
                                        (0.03)    (0.09)     (0.04)       (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.03)    (0.11)    (0.05)

  Spouse's Net Red                      0.31      0.21       0.34         0.28      0.25      0.31       0.13     0.32
                                        (0.04)    (0.10)     (0.04)       (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.11)    (0.05)

  Spouse's Net Red X                    0.16      0.25           0.16     0.15      0.13      0.15      0.25      0.18
  Guesser Is Wife                       (0.05)    (0.10)         (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.10)    (0.07)

  Spouse's Net Red X                               0.11                                                  0.13
  Guesser Is Older                                (0.10)                                                (0.10)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                              -0.09                                  -0.09
  Guesser Thinks Sole HHDM                                       (0.05)                                 (0.05)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                                       0.06                          0.05
  Spouse Better                                                           (0.05)                        (0.05)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                                                 0.10                0.10
  Guesser Thinks Spouse Better                                                      (0.06)              (0.06)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                                                           0.05      0.05
  Guesser Comprehension Index                                                                 (0.03)    (0.03)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                                                                               0.04
  Public Discussion                                                                                               (0.07)

  Spouse's Net Red X                                                                                               -0.09
  Public Discussion X Guesser Is Wife                                                                             (0.10)

  Constant                              10.56     10.56      10.56        10.56     10.55     10.55     10.55     10.58
                                         (0.08)    (0.08)     (0.08)       (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.09)
  N                                       3200      3200       3200         3200      3200      3200      3200      2400


Notes: This table shows OLS regressions where the dependent variable is a person's individual guess.

      · Regressions use data from the couples sample. These regressions stack the post-discussion guesses
        from both Discussion rounds and the pre- and post-discussion guesses in the Draw-sharing round,
        except for column 8, which does not include the pre-discussion guesses.
      · All columns include an interaction between Partner's Net Red and an indicator for the guesser
        being a wife. Columns 2 to 7 add interactions between Partner's Net Red and other variables, to
        test whether heterogeneity along these variables explains the difference between wives and others.
        Column 8 tests whether the discussion being public affects the husband's or wife's weights.
      · In each column we also control for the corresponding interactions between Own Net Red and the
        variables in that column (coefficients not shown).
      · "Guesser Is Older" means the person guessing is older than their partner. "Guesser Thinks Sole
        HHDM" means the guesser considers themselves the sole household decision maker. "Partner
        Better" indicates that the guesser's partner earns more from their guesses on average; "Guesser
        Thinks Partner Better" indicates that the guesser thinks their partner earns more from their
        guesses on average. "Comprehension index" is the fraction of comprehension questions the guesser
        answered correctly, normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of
        the entire sample. "Public Discussion" means that the experimenter was present while the couple
        held their discussion.


                                                            51
          Table A.IV: Comparing Mixed- and Same-Gender Pairs of Strangers

                                    Reduced-Form Coefficients            Structural Parameters
                                    Pooled     Men       Women         Pooled       Men      Women
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)        (5)       (6)
  1 : First Info                    0.51      0.51       0.49          0.86***    0.72***    0.99***
                                    (0.05)    (0.07)     (0.07)         (0.18)     (0.25)     (0.24)

  2 : Second Info                   0.51      0.53        0.48         1.43***    1.14***    1.72***
                                    (0.06)    (0.10)      (0.10)        (0.29)     (0.46)     (0.43)

  3,1 : Second Info X               -0.29     -0.39        -0.19       -1.05***   -0.84**    -1.13**
  Discussion                         (0.08)    (0.13)     (0.12)        (0.28)     (0.43)     (0.41)

  3,2 : Second Info X                 0.06      0.06       0.06          0.01       -0.07      -0.06
  Discussion X Same-Gender Pair      (0.07)    (0.10)     (0.11)        (0.16)     (0.29)     (0.26)

  : Constant/                       10.71     10.73      10.69         66.15***   63.59***   67.76***
  Structural Noise Parameter         (0.13)    (0.19)     (0.19)        (6.33)     (8.81)     (8.54)

  Observations                       1500       750        750           1500       750        750
  Includes Info X Order FEs          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes

Notes: This table shows reduced-form and structural estimates for strangers' choices.
Reduced-form coefficients: Cols 1 to 3 show reduced-form results for the strangers sample, esti-
mating by OLS a variant on equation 1. In particular, it shows estimates of

             Guessirt = +1 · First Infoirt + 2 · Second Infoirt
                        +3,1 · Discussionirt + 3,2 · Discussionrt · Same-Gender Pairirt

These regressions include only the Discussion and Individual rounds. "First Info" indicates the net
number of red draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second
Info" indicates the net number of red draws in the second set of draws. "Discussion" is an indicator
that equals one for the final private guess in the Discussion round, when the second set of draws were
drawn by the participant's partner and then (potentially) communicated to them through discussion.
"Same-Gender Pair" is an indicator for whether the participant's teammate is of the same gender as
him/her. All regressions include order fixed effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info."
Standard errors are clustered at the couple level.
Structural parameters: Cols 4 to 6 show estimates of a variant of the structural model described
in Section 4.3.The model is identical to that in Section 4.3 except that the weight put on the second
set of signals, 2 takes the following form:

           2rt = 2 + µ2r + 3,1 · Discussionrt + 3,2 · Discussionrt · Same-Gender Pairrt

where "Discussion" and "Same-Gender Pair" are defined as in the reduced-form OLS specification.
"First Info" and "Second Info" indicate the weights placed on the first and second set of signals in
the agents' quasi-Bayesian updating rule. The interaction terms indicate the difference in weight on
the second signal in Discussion rounds and, in addition, in Discussion rounds when playing with a
teammate of the same gender (see notes for reduced-form estimates for more detail). Bootstrapped
standard errors (clustered at the couple level) in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.


                                                  52
  Table A.V: Strangers' Expected Earnings by Type of Guess and Number of Draws

                                     Pooled       Men       Women       Pooled       Men      Women
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)
  Discussion                          -4.22       -5.69      -2.75       4.08        -1.87     9.77
                                     (2.81)      (3.90)     (3.41)      (3.88)      (5.81)    (5.28)

  Draw-Sharing                        -8.85     -13.23        -4.46      0.46        -7.42      8.34
  (pre-discussion)                    (3.85)     (5.19)      (4.82)     (4.69)      (6.92)     (6.07)

  Draw-Sharing                         -6.18      -8.62       -3.74      -4.15       -8.29      0.11
  (post-discussion)                   (3.93)     (5.41)      (4.75)     (4.66)      (6.86)     (6.46)

  # First Draws                                                         2.37       2.55       2.14
                                                                        (0.40)     (0.52)     (0.59)

  # Second Draws                                                        2.95         1.78     4.07
                                                                        (0.81)      (1.13)    (1.13)

  # Second Draws X                                                      -2.32        -1.10    -3.46
  Discussion                                                            (0.92)      (1.41)     (1.23)

  # Second Draws X                                                     -2.68         -1.69    -3.64
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)                                         (0.94)      (1.40)     (1.37)

  # Second Draws X                                                       -0.73       -0.22      -1.24
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)                                        (0.97)      (1.43)     (1.42)

  Constant                          119.57      118.38     120.77      100.67     103.02      98.55
                                     (2.29)      (3.23)     (2.89)      (4.17)     (5.47)      (5.79)
  Observations                        2500        1250       1250        2500       1250        1250


Notes: Using the same approach as Table 3, this table compares expected earnings in the Discussion
and Draw-sharing rounds to their earnings in the Individual round for the strangers sample. The table
shows OLS estimates of the following two equations:

   Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µi +  · Tirt + irt                                                 (6)
   Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µi +  · Tirt + 1 # First Drawsirt + 2 # Second Drawsirt            (7)
                           + 3 · Tirt · # First Drawsirt + 4 · Tirt · # Second Drawsirt + irt

where Expected Earningsirt is the expected earnings from i's guess in round r and treatment t.
We include round-fixed effects µr and individual-fixed effects µi in both regressions. As before,
Tirt is a vector of indicators corresponding to the Discussion, Draw-sharing (pre-discussion) and
Draw-Sharing (post-discussion) treatments. Equation 7 additionally includes # First Drawsirt and
# Second Drawsirt , which indicate the number of draws in the first and second set of signals, as well
as interacting them with the vector of treatments Tirt . All regressions include order fixed effects and
individual fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.




                                                  53
                               Table A.VI: Understanding Differences Between Couples and Strangers

                                                    All rounds               Draw-sharing round                Discussion rounds
                                                 (Pre- & Post-Disc.)   (Pre-Discussion) (Post-Discussion)       (Post-Discussion)
                                                    (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
                                                                                                                   
                 Own Net Red                      0.53       0.49      0.56      0.51      0.49      0.32      0.54       0.57
                                                  (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.07)    (0.05)    (0.08)    (0.03)     (0.05)

                 Teammate's Net Red               0.28       0.24      0.18        0.14    0.39      0.38      0.28       0.21
                                                  (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.08)   (0.05)    (0.08)    (0.04)     (0.06)

                 Teammate's Net Red X             0.13        0.09      0.16       0.07     0.11      0.00     0.12        0.15
                 Guesser Is Woman                 (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.11)   (0.07)    (0.11)    (0.05)     (0.08)

                 Teammate's Net Red X                         0.07                 0.07               0.01                 0.11
                 Guesser Is Husband In Couple                (0.06)               (0.10)             (0.11)               (0.08)

                 Teammate's Net Red X                        0.14                 0.22               0.20                  0.06
54




                 Guesser Is Wife In Couple                   (0.05)               (0.10)             (0.09)               (0.06)

                 Constant                        10.67      10.67      10.63     10.63     10.76     10.76     10.64     10.64
                                                  (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.09)    (0.09)    (0.10)    (0.10)    (0.07)    (0.07)
                 N                                 5200       5200       1300      1300      1300      1300      2600      2600


     Notes: This table shows OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is a person's individual guess. All regressions pool all data from
     both the couples and strangers sample.

         · In cols 1 and 2, the sample includes all final guesses made by both men and women in the two Discussion rounds plus the pre- and
           post-discussion guesses from the Draw-sharing rounds.
         · Cols 3 and 4 show results for the pre-discussion Draw-sharing guesses alone, and cols 5 and 6 show results from the post-discussion
           Draw-Sharing guesses alone. Cols 7 and 8 show results from the Discussion round guesses (after the joint discussion) alone.
         · "Own Net Red" refers to the net red minus white draw in the set the person guessing drew his or herself, and "Partner's Net Red"
           to same in the set the guesser's partner drew. "Is Woman" equals one if the guesser is a woman, and "Is Wife In Couple" equals
           one if the person guessing is a woman and is in the couples sample, i.e. is playing with her husband.
         · The regressions also include controls for Own Net Red interacted with Is Woman and Is Wife In Couple (coefficients not shown).
             Table A.VII: Explaining Differences Between Couples and Strangers

                                     (1)       (2)          (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
  Own Net Red                      0.49      0.52      0.48       0.52      0.55      0.50      0.49      0.66
                                   (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.07)    (0.06)    (0.05)    (0.08)

  Teammate's Net Red               0.24      0.20      0.25       0.20       0.13     0.26      0.24       0.10
                                   (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.05)    (0.07)    (0.06)    (0.04)    (0.09)

  Teammate's Net Red X              0.07      0.04       0.09      0.07     0.12       0.09      0.07      0.10
  Guesser Is Husband In Couple     (0.06)    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.07)

  Teammate's Net Red X              0.09      0.09       0.11      0.08      0.09      0.10      0.10      0.10
  Guesser Is Woman                 (0.06)    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)

  Teammate's Net Red X             0.14      0.17       0.14      0.14      0.16      0.14      0.13      0.20
  Guesser Is Wife In Couple        (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.05)    (0.06)

  Teammate's Net Red X                        0.08                                                         0.09
  Guesser Is Older                           (0.05)                                                       (0.05)

  Teammate's Net Red X                                   -0.08                                             -0.06
  Guesser Thinks Sole HHDM                              (0.04)                                            (0.04)

  Teammate's Net Red X                                             0.07                                    0.06
  Teammate Better                                                 (0.04)                                  (0.04)

  Teammate's Net Red X                                                       0.10                          0.10
  Guesser Thinks Teammate Better                                            (0.06)                        (0.06)

  Teammate's Net Red X                                                                 -0.04               -0.03
  Guesser Is Married                                                                  (0.06)              (0.07)

  Teammate's Net Red X                                                                          0.05      0.05
  Guesser Comprehension index                                                                   (0.02)    (0.02)

  Constant                         10.67     10.67     10.67      10.66     10.66     10.67     10.66     10.66
                                    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)
  N                                  5200      5200      5200       5200      5200      5200      5200      5200


Notes: This table shows OLS regressions where the dependent variable is a person's individual guess. All
regressions pool data from both the couples and strangers sample, and the sample includes all final guesses
made by both men and women in the two Discussion rounds plus the pre- and post-discussion guesses from
the Draw-sharing rounds.

      · Column 1 repeats the specification in column 2 from Table A.VI. The other columns add interactions
        between Partner's Net Red and other variables, to test whether heterogeneity along these variables
        explains the difference between wives and others.
      · When we add an interaction between Partner's Net Red and a variable, we control for the corre-
        sponding interaction(s) with Own Net Red (coefficients not shown).
      · "Guesser Is Older" means the person guessing is older than their partner. "Guesser Thinks Sole
        HHDM" means the guesser considers themselves the sole household decision maker. "Partner Better"
        indicates that the guesser's partner earns more from their guesses on average; "Guesser Thinks
        Partner Better" indicates that the guesser thinks this is so. "Guesser Is Married" indicates that
        the guesser is married; this is always one in the couples sample, but not in the strangers sample.
        "Comprehension index" is the fraction of comprehension questions the guesser answered correctly,
        normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the entire sample.


                                                       55
                           Table A.VIII: Couples' Weights on Husbands' and Wives' Info in Joint Guesses

                                                                 Discussion Round                                    Draw-Sharing Round
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)
                                                                                                                                               
          Husband's Info                       0.45     0.35      0.45      0.40     0.48     0.34      0.62     0.49     0.60     0.66     0.60     0.49
                                               (0.04)   (0.08)    (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.10)    (0.06)   (0.10)   (0.09)   (0.07)   (0.08)   (0.12)

          Wife's Info                          0.50     0.61      0.58      0.57     0.52     0.80      0.54     0.65     0.54     0.54     0.47     0.58
                                               (0.04)   (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.07)    (0.06)   (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.10)   (0.11)

          Husband's Info X                              0.16                                   0.13              0.20                                0.26
          Husband Better                                (0.09)                                (0.09)             (0.12)                              (0.12)

          Wife's Info X                                 -0.25                                 -0.24              -0.22                               -0.24
          Husband Better                                 (0.09)                                (0.09)            (0.11)                              (0.11)

          Husband's Info X                                          0.03                       0.02                        0.03                       0.08
          Husband Says He's Better                                 (0.09)                     (0.09)                      (0.12)                     (0.13)

          Wife's Info X                                            -0.18                      -0.18                        0.02                       -0.01
          Husband Says He's Better                                 (0.09)                     (0.09)                      (0.13)                     (0.13)
56




          Husband's Info X                                                  0.17               0.14                                 -0.14             -0.21
          Husband Says He's HHDM                                            (0.09)            (0.09)                               (0.12)            (0.13)

          Wife's Info X                                                     -0.23             -0.24                                 0.01              0.04
          Husband Says He's HHDM                                            (0.10)            (0.10)                               (0.12)            (0.12)

          Husband's Info X                                                            -0.05    -0.04                                         0.04     -0.01
          Surveyor Present                                                           (0.09)   (0.08)                                        (0.12)   (0.12)

          Wife's Info X                                                               -0.05    -0.09                                         0.15     0.14
          Surveyor Present                                                           (0.09)   (0.08)                                        (0.12)   (0.12)
          Observations                          800      800        800      800      800      800       400      400      400      400      400      400
          p-value: Interaction has no impact
                                                         0.00      0.17      0.01     0.97                        0.02     0.93     0.47     0.58
             on relative information weights

     Notes: This table shows OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the joint guess in the first Discussion round. "Husband's
     Info" indicates the Bayesian risk-neutral optimal guess after observing only the husband's own set of draws. Similarly, "Wife's Info"
     indicates the Bayesian guess given only the wife's draws. "Husband better" is an indicator variable for whether the husband's first
     guesses (using only his first set of draws) have a higher expected earnings than his wife's. "Husband Says He's Better" indicates
     whether the husband's guess of his average earnings at the experimental task is higher than his guess of his wife's earnings. "He says
     He's HHDM" indicates whether the husband says that he is the primary household-decision maker. Standard errors are clustered at
     the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.
        Table A.IX: Couples: Expected Earnings in Joint versus Private Guesses

                                  Joint Guess Compared to Private Guesses Made by:
                                Pooled    Husbands         Wives    Pooled    Husbands    Wives
                                 (1)        (2)             (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)
        Private Guess          -2.17       -2.70           -1.72      1.77      2.97       0.63
                                (0.70)      (0.91)         (0.90)    (1.48)    (1.84)     (2.00)

        # Husband's Draws                                           2.34       2.49       2.19
                                                                    (0.42)     (0.44)     (0.44)

        # Wife's Draws                                              2.76       2.80       2.65
                                                                    (0.41)     (0.45)     (0.43)

        Private Guess X                                               -0.27     -0.11      -0.45
        # Husband's Draws                                            (0.25)    (0.30)     (0.34)

        Private Guess X                                             -0.81     -1.46        -0.17
        # Wife's Draws                                               (0.26)    (0.34)     (0.34)

        Constant               121.32     121.44          120.74    102.26    101.69     102.55
                                (2.32)     (2.55)          (2.55)    (3.42)    (3.73)     (3.70)
        Observations             4400       2800           2800      4400       2800       2800

Notes: This tables compares expected earnings generated by couples' joint guesses and private guesses.
The table shows OLS estimates of the following two equations:

Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µc +  · Jointirt + irt                                              (8)
Expected Earningsirt =  + µr + µc +  · Jointirt + 1 Husband's Drawsirt + 2 Wife's Drawsirt         (9)
                        + 3 · Jointirt · # Husband's Drawsirt + 4 · Jointirt · # Wife's Drawsirt + irt

where Expected Earningsirt is expected earnings from i's guess in round r and treatment t. We include
round-fixed effects µr and couple-fixed effects µc in both regressions. Jointirt is an indicator for being a
joint guess. Equation 9 additionally includes # Husband's Drawsirt and # Wife's Drawsirt , indicating
the number of draws the husband and wife got, respectively, and interacting these with Jointirt .

    · We restrict regressions to treatments with both private and joint guesses (that is, excluding the
      Individual round). We include all guesses in these rounds that occur after potentially learning
      about both the spouse's information (i.e., all guesses except first private guesses).
    · Table shows OLS regressions. All regressions include joint guesses from the Discussion and Draw-
      Sharing rounds and individual guesses from the Discussion round (after the discussion) and
      Draw-Sharing round (both the guess immediately after being told of their partner's information
      but before the discussion, and the guess after the discussion).
    · Cols 1 and 4 include joint guesses and private guesses by both husbands and wives. Columns
      2 and 5 include only joint guesses and husbands' guesses. Columns 3 and 6 include only joint
      guesses and wives' guesses.
    · "Joint Guess" is an indicator for couples' joint guesses post discussion. "# Husband/Wife's Draws"
      are the number of draws that husband/wife had in their private set of signals.
    · All regressions include order fixed effects and couple fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
      at the group level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.


                                                     57
     Table A.X: Reduced Form: Including Interactions with First Information

                                              Couples                            Strangers
                                    Pooled    Husbands     Wives        Pooled     Men       Women
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)
  First Info                        0.42       0.47        0.37         0.45      0.44       0.45
                                    (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.06)    (0.09)     (0.09)

  Second Info                       0.54        0.55       0.54         0.49      0.54       0.46
                                    (0.05)      (0.08)     (0.07)       (0.07)    (0.10)     (0.10)

  First Info X                        0.02       0.07       -0.00        0.12       0.13      0.13
  Only Accessible via Discussion     (0.05)     (0.08)     (0.08)       (0.07)     (0.12)    (0.11)

  First Info X                        0.07       0.12       0.04         0.12       0.07      0.19
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)      (0.08)     (0.11)     (0.12)       (0.09)     (0.15)    (0.13)

  First Info X                        0.01       0.13       -0.08        -0.08      -0.11     -0.03
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)     (0.08)     (0.11)     (0.12)       (0.09)     (0.16)    (0.14)

  Second Info X                     -0.20      -0.33        -0.04      -0.28      -0.39       -0.18
  Only Accessible via Discussion     (0.06)     (0.08)     (0.09)       (0.08)     (0.12)    (0.11)

  Second Info X                     -0.30      -0.56        -0.02      -0.44      -0.52      -0.38
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)      (0.08)     (0.12)     (0.12)       (0.11)     (0.15)    (0.16)

  Second Info X                       -0.13    -0.38        0.13        -0.23      -0.28      -0.21
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)     (0.08)     (0.12)     (0.12)       (0.10)     (0.15)    (0.14)

  Constant                          10.29      10.13      10.39        10.71      10.78      10.64
                                     (0.12)     (0.15)     (0.15)       (0.14)     (0.19)     (0.21)

  Observations                       4000        2000       2000         3000      1500       1500
  Includes Info X Order FEs          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes

Notes: This table shows reduced-form results, estimating equation 1 by OLS.

    · Columns 1 to 3 include the sample of married couples, and columns 4 to 6 include the
      sample of pairs of strangers.
    · The dependent variable is participants' private guess. "First Info" indicates the net number
      of red draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws) in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second
      Info" indicates the net number of red draws in the second set of draws. "Discussion" is
      an indicator that equals one for the final private guess in the Discussion round, when
      the second set of draws were drawn by the participant's spouse and then (potentially)
      communicated to them through discussion.
    · "Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)" indicates the second private guess in the Draw-Sharing
      round, after the participant was directly told their spouse's information but before dis-
      cussing it with their spouse. "Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)" indicates the third private
      guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the discussion.
    · All regressions include order fixed effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info."
      Standard errors are clustered at the couple or group level. *, **, and *** indicate signifi-
      cance at the p < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.


                                                 58
A.1      Guess-Sharing Round

    The Guess-sharing round is identical to the Draw-sharing round, except that instead
of sharing with each person the number of balls of each color their spouse drew, the
surveyor shares their spouse's guess and the total number of draws (1, 5 or 9) on which
that guess was based. Figure A.IV shows estimates for the Individual, Discussion,
and Guess-Sharing rounds. The results look similar to those for the Draw-Sharing
round. Husbands strongly discount their wife's information relative to their own in
both the pre-discussion and post-discussion guesses. Wives appear to put less weight
on husband's information in the pre-discussion Guess-Sharing round. This could be
explained by differential processing of own compared to others' information, but also
by other (potentially rational) reasons, such as mistrust of husbands' guesses or the
increased computational difficulty of backing out what the husband's information must
have been given his guess. Post-discussion wives put equal weight on their own and
their husband's information. Table A.XI shows the corresponding reduced-form and
structural estimates, which confirm the visual impressions from Figure A.IV.33




  33
     Note that the structural estimates assume that participants are able to back out from their part-
ner's guess what their information must have been. Less weight on partner's information could there-
fore reflect not just intrinsic discounting others info but also the extent to which that this is a difficult
problem for participants to solve (or one they do not attempt to solve).


                                                     59
  Figure A.IV: Couples' Weights on Own vs. Others' Info in Guess-Sharing Rounds


                                          Panel A: Husbands' Guesses


                                              p = 0.00           p = 0.00            p = 0.00
                        .6
          Coefficient
                        .4
                        .2
                        0




                             Individual      Discussion       Guess-Sharing        Guess-Sharing
                                                              Pre-Discussion      Post-Discussion




                                           Panel B: Wives' Guesses


                                              p = 0.61           p = 0.06            p = 1.00
                        .6
          Coefficient
                        .4
                        .2
                        0




                             Individual      Discussion       Guess-Sharing        Guess-Sharing
                                                              Pre-Discussion      Post-Discussion



Notes: This figure shows the weights husbands (Panel A) and wives (Panel B ) in our couples sample
put on different pieces of information. We estimate coefficients using a version of equation 1 and then
display the sum of 2 + 3t for each of the following four types of private guesses: (a) Individual, where
participants collect all information on their own; (b) Discussion, in which participants collect the first
set of information on their own and the second set is only accessible via discussion; (c) Guess-Sharing,
where participants receive the second set of information directly from the experimenter; (d) Guess-
Sharing + Discussion, in which participants receive the second set of information directly and have
the chance to discuss it with their partner. Bands show ± one standard error.



                                                    60
                    Table A.XI: Couples' Weights in Guess-Sharing Rounds

                                      Reduced-Form Coefficients               Structural Parameters
                                       Pooled    Husbands         Wives     Pooled     Husbands         Wives
                                         (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)             (6)
  1 : First Info                       0.43       0.50            0.37      0.72***     0.74***        0.61***
                                       (0.03)     (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.14)      (0.15)         (0.19)

  2 : Second Info                      0.53       0.54            0.54      1.20***    1.15***         1.13***
                                       (0.05)     (0.08)          (0.07)     (0.24)     (0.26)          (0.38)

  3,1 : Second Info X                  -0.20      -0.32            -0.04    -0.64***   -0.90***         -0.27
  Discussion                            (0.06)     (0.08)         (0.08)     (0.19)     (0.23)         (0.33)

  3,2 : Second Info X                  -0.42      -0.57           -0.24     -0.97***   -1.24***        -0.54*
  Guess-Sharing (pre-discussion)        (0.09)     (0.12)         (0.12)     (0.23)     (0.27)         (0.40)

  3,3 : Second Info X                  -0.23      -0.43            0.00     -0.56***   -0.88***         -0.16
  Guess-Sharing (post-discussion)       (0.09)     (0.12)         (0.12)     (0.22)     (0.28)         (0.40)

  : Constant/                         10.29       10.14           10.39     61.37***   55.70***    64.34***
  Structural Noise Parameter           (0.12)      (0.15)          (0.15)    (4.51)     (5.00)      (5.27)

  Observations                          4000       2000            2000      4000        2000           2000
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                        0.02                                 0.14
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                        0.04                                 0.21
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                        0.01                                 0.19
  Includes Info X Order FEs              Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes

Notes: This table shows reduced-form and structural estimates for the couple sample's Discussion
and Guess-Sharing rounds.

Reduced-form coefficients: Columns 1 to 3 show reduced-form results, estimating equation 1
(though replacing the Draw-Sharing round with the Guess-Sharing round) by OLS. The dependent
variable is participants' private guess. "First Info" indicates the net number of red draws (i.e.,
red draws minus white draws) in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second Info" indicates the net
number of red draws in the second set of draws. "Only Accessible via Spouse" is an indicator that
equals one for the final private guess in the Discussion round, when the second set of draws were
drawn by the participant's spouse and then (potentially) communicated to her through discussion.
"Guess-Sharing (pre-discussion)" indicates the second private guess in the Guess-Sharing round, after
the participant was directly told their spouse's previous guess (as well as the number of draws that
guess was based on) but before discussing it with their spouse. "Guess-Sharing (post-discussion)"
indicates the third private guess in the Guess-Sharing round, after the discussion. All regres-
sions include order fixed effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info." Standard errors
are clustered at the couple level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.

Structural parameters: Columns 4 to 6 show estimates of the structural model described in Section
4.3. "First Info" and "Second Info" indicate the weights placed on the first and second set of signals in
the agents' quasi-Bayesian updating rule. The interaction terms indicate the difference in weight on
the second signal in Discussion and Guess-Sharing rounds (see notes for reduced-form estimates for
more detail). Bootstrapped standard errors (clustered at the couple level) in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the p<0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.


                                                     61
A.2     Third Experiment

    After the completion of the experimental rounds with couples and strangers, we
conducted a third experimental round with an additional sample of participants who
had not previously participated in our study. The goal of this experimental round was
to test the limits of our findings by considering robustness to three different features:
(i) the salience of participants' partners' draws, (ii) the possibility for anchoring on
their own draws first, and (iii) the size of the incentives for good guessing.


A.2.1   Treatments

   This experiment consisted of six rounds, played in a completely randomized order,
corresponding to six different treatment conditions. Two of these were a Discussion
round and a Draw-sharing round, exactly as in our first experiment, included to provide
a baseline and comparison with our previous sample. The other four rounds were
variations of the Draw-sharing round and are described below.
   Draw-by-Draw round. This round aims to increase the salience of partner's
draws. It proceeds identically to the Draw-sharing round, except that the experi-
menter shares their partner's draws with each participant ball-by-ball. For instance,
the experimenter would say `Your partner first drew a red ball, then a white ball, ...'
and so on.
    In-person round. In this round, we increase the salience of partner's draws further.
In particular, while each participant is making their set of draws, their partner remains
in the booth and can observe their draws. (As a result, there is no need for the
experimenter to share draws afterwards). Both participants guess, in private, after
observing each set of draws; there is no discussion or joint guess. This design also
controls for order effects by construction, since the participant who draws second learns
their partner's draws before their own.
    No-First-Guess round. In this round, to seek to mitigate any potential anchoring
on own information, participants do not make a guess directly after making their own
set of draws. Otherwise, the round proceeds identically to the Draw-sharing round.
    Reverse-Order round. This round has one participant learn their partner's draw
first, with the aim of ensuring that any tendency to anchor on the first piece of in-
formation would work against under-weighting their partner's information. To begin

                                           62
with, one person makes a set of draws from the urn. The other participant is then
informed of their partner's draws and makes a guess, before making their own set of
draws and another guess.34 We only include this second participant, who learned their
partner's draws first, in the analysis. Finally, the pair hold a discussion, and make
post-discussion guesses as usual.
   Higher-Stakes treatment. We increased the incentives for accurate guessing in
a randomly-chosen 3 out of 6 rounds. The maximum amount couples could earn and
their loss in earnings per ball away from the truth were both increased by 50%, to Rs.15
and Rs. 45 respectively.


A.2.2       Results

    Our follow-up experiment was interrupted mid-data collection by the COVID-19
pandemic, and (at time of writing) has not been safe to resume since. We have data
for 146 pairs of individuals--68 mixed-gender pairs, 67 same-gender male pairs, and 11
same-gender female pairs--out of a planned sample size of 400 pairs (200 mixed-gender,
100 male and 100 female). To increase statistical power, we pool results across both
genders and all types of pairs.
    Comparison with main strangers sample. Figure A.V shows the coefficients
from estimating equation 1 on our follow-up sample. The upper panel first checks that
we obtain similar results in the baseline Discussion and Draw-Sharing rounds as we do
in our previous strangers sample. As in the main strangers sample, participants weight
their teammate's information significantly less than their own in the Discussion round
and the Draw-Sharing round pre-discussion. In contrast, the post-discussion weights
on their teammate's information is lower but not statistically different than the weight
on their own information. Relative to the strangers results shown in Panels C and D
of Figure 4, participants put slightly less weight on their partner's information in the
Discussion round, slightly more in the Draw-Sharing round pre-discussion, and a very
similar weight in the Draw-Sharing round post-discussion.
   As we did not include an Individual round, we cannot directly test for order effects
within rounds (i.e. that people weight own information more because it came first) in
the same way as our main experiment. However, the similar results below from our In-
 34
      In the same manner as the original Draw-sharing round, e.g. `four red, five white'.



                                                   63
Person and Reverse Order rounds, in which the order was reversed for some, suggest
that as with the strangers sample, this overweighting of own information is unlikely to
be due to order effects.
    Effects of new treatments. The lower panel of Figure A.V shows the weights par-
ticipants place on each set of signals in the Draw-Sharing round and the new treatments
(rounds) introduced in our follow-up design. We focus on the pre-discussion guess in all
rounds, as this is where the relative underweighting of partner's information emerges in
the Draw-Sharing round. The new rounds produce only modest increases in the weight
attached to partner's information, and in all cases it remains underweighted relative
to own information. Compared to a Draw-Sharing round weight of 0.29, participants
place weights on partner's information of 0.32 in the Draw-by-Draw round, 0.44 in
the In-Person round, 0.37 in the No-First-Guess round and 0.44 in the Reverse-Order
round. All of these are substantially less than the average weight put on own infor-
mation (0.58), and the difference between own and partner's information is significant
except for the Reverse-Order round (which was the most underpowered).
    Overall, these results suggest that neither the relative salience of partner's draws, nor
anchoring on one's own draws with a first guess, can explain our findings. The Reverse-
Order round indicates that even creating the possibility of anchoring on one's partner's
draws first does not overturn the underweighting of partner's information. Perhaps
most striking of all, even in the In-Person round, in which participants directly watch
each other make the draws, they still put 24% less weight (p=0.03) on their partner's
information than their own.
     Effect of higher incentives. Figure A.VI shows participants' weight on signals
separately by whether they faced the usual stakes for accurate guessing (Rs. 30 per ball
away) or higher stakes (Rs. 45 per ball away). The figure shows that the stakes have
little effect: when the stakes are high, participants do not appear to place a higher
weight on their own or their partner's information in pre-discussion guesses.




                                             64
     Figure A.V: Weights on Partner's Information in the Follow-Up Experiment

                                        Panel A: Discussion vs. Draw-Sharing

                                Own Info                               Teammate's Info
                                                       p = 0.00              p = 0.07                 p = 0.58
                        .6
          Coefficient
                        .4
                        .2
                        0




                               Discussion &           Discussion         Draw-Sharing               Draw-Sharing
                               Draw-sharing                              Pre-Discussion            Post-Discussion



                               Panel B: Variations of Draw-Sharing (Pre-Discussion)

                             Own Info                               Teammate's Info
                                           p = 0.00      p = 0.00       p = 0.03        p = 0.02        p = 0.20
                        .6
          Coefficient
                        .4
                        .2
                        0




                             All Rounds Draw-Sharing     Draw by        In Person       No First        Reverse
                                                          Draw                           Guess           Order


Notes: This figure shows the weights that men and women together in our follow-up sample put on their
partner's information in different rounds, with the average weight on their own information across those
rounds for comparison. We estimate coefficients from equation (1). The lighter bars show the weights on
the guesser's own information and the darker bars show the weight on their partner's information. Bands
show ± one standard error.
    · Panel A compares the Discussion round to the pre- and post-discussion guesses in the Draw-Sharing
      round. These rounds had the same structure as the corresponding rounds in our main experiments.
    · Panel B compares variations on the Draw-Sharing round, always looking at the pre-discussion guess
      (but after participants had learned their partner's information). The variations are: (a) Sequential,
      identical to the draw-sharing round except that the experimenter shares partner's information ball-
      by-ball; (b) In Person, in which each participant directly observes their partner make their draws,
      as well as making their own; (c) No First Guess, identical to the Draw-sharing round except that
      participants do not make a guess immediately after drawing their own set of balls; (d) Reverse
      Order, in which one participant learns their partner's draws before making their own.
                                                             65
       Figure A.VI: Weights by Size of Incentives in the Follow-Up Experiment



                                Own Info                Teammate's Info
                           .8




                                                 p = 0.03             p = 0.00
                           .6
             Coefficient
                           .4
                           .2
                           0




                                All rounds     Usual stakes         Higher stakes



Notes: This figure shows the weights that men and women together in our follow-up sample put on
different pieces of information.

   · We estimate coefficients from equation (1). We pool data across all rounds which had (a) the
     same incentives as our main experiment ("Usual Stakes") and (b) incentives increased by 50 %
     ("Higher Stakes").
   · Each couple did three randomly-selected rounds with Usual Stakes and three with Higher Stakes.
   · The regressions include controls for the round treatment condition (Discussion, Draw-Sharing
     etc.) as the randomization of stakes was not perfectly balanced by this variable. Bands show
     ± one standard error.




                                               66
A.3     Comparing Structural to Non-Structural Results

    In this section we consider whether the estimates of the structural model outlined
in Section 4.3 are consistent with the main non-structural results presented elsewhere
in Section 5. To do so, we simulate, using the estimates of the parameters of the
model, what guesses participants would make given the signals they had. To eliminate
unnecessary noise, instead of simulating just once for each guess of what the participant
would choose (which is noisy), we calculate the expected guess. We then create versions
of columns 4-6 of Tables 2 and Figure 3 using the simulated data. The question these
analyses allow us to answer is, "Are the estimated biases from the model sufficient
to explain the patterns found in the reduced-form and non-structural results?" If the
model implied that the non-structural analyses would look very different than in fact
they do, this would suggest that the model is not capturing something important about
the biases we document.
    Columns 1 to 3 of Table A.XII replicate the final three columns of Table 2, our
main reduced-form results. Columns 4 to 6 show the same regressions but using the
model-implied expected guesses as the dependent variable rather than participants'
true guesses. Note that these variables, because they are expectations rather than
single draws from the distribution of guesses, are mechanically much less noisy than
the actual guesses. However, as Table A.XII shows, the size of the coefficients are
extremely similar (i.e., comparing cols 1 to 4, 2 to 5, and 3 to 6). Our interpretation of
these results is that the model estimates are sufficient to explain the pattern of results
shown in the reduced-form analyses.
    Figure A.VII compares the non-parametric results from Figure 3 with similar esti-
mates using the model-simulated data. For clarity, there are four panels, representing
the individual round and discussion round separately for husbands and wives. Each
panel shows the estimates given the actual guesses that participants make (in gray)
along with the model-simulated expected guesses (in blue). As expected, actual guesses
are noisier, but slope of the curves are extremely similar within each panel, suggesting
that the non-parametric and structural effect sizes are of comparable magnitude.




                                           67
               Table A.XII: Comparing Reduced-Form to Structural Results

                                                                                 Model-Implied
                                              Actual Guesses
                                                                                Expected Guesses
  1 : First Info                      0.43        0.50         0.37         0.40      0.46         0.35
                                       (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.01)    (0.01)       (0.01)

  2 : Second Info                     0.53        0.54         0.54         0.52      0.55         0.52
                                       (0.05)      (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.01)    (0.01)       (0.02)

  3,1 : Second Info X                 -0.20      -0.32              -0.04   -0.18     -0.30        -0.06
  Discussion                           (0.06)     (0.08)           (0.08)    (0.01)    (0.01)       (0.01)

  3,2 : Second Info X                 -0.28      -0.53              -0.01   -0.25     -0.44        -0.05
  Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)        (0.09)     (0.12)           (0.12)    (0.02)    (0.02)       (0.02)

  3,3 : Second Info X                   -0.13    -0.35              0.11    -0.10     -0.25        0.06
  Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)       (0.09)     (0.12)           (0.12)    (0.02)    (0.02)       (0.02)

  : Constant                          10.29      10.14         10.39        10.03     10.01        10.01
                                       (0.12)     (0.15)        (0.15)       (0.02)    (0.02)       (0.02)
  Observations                         4000        2000            2000      4000      2000            2000
  p-value: 3,1 equal across genders                         0.02                                0.00
  p-value: 3,2 equal across genders                         0.00                                0.00
  p-value: 3,3 equal across genders                         0.00                                0.00
  Includes Info X Order FEs             Yes        Yes              Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes


Actual Guesses: Columns 1 to 3 show reduced-form results, estimating equation 1 by OLS. They
are identical to those shown in columns 1 to 3 of Table 2. The dependent variable is participants'
private guess. "First Info" indicates the net number of red draws (i.e., red draws minus white draws)
in the first set of signals. Similarly, "Second Info" indicates the net number of red draws in the
second set of draws. "Discussion" is an indicator that equals one for the final private guess in the
Discussion round, when the second set of draws were drawn by the participant's spouse and then
(potentially) communicated to her through discussion. "Draw-Sharing (pre-discussion)" indicates the
second private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the participant was directly told their spouse's
information but before discussing it with their spouse. "Draw-Sharing (post-discussion)" indicates the
third private guess in the Draw-Sharing round, after the discussion. All regressions include order fixed
effects interacted with "First Info" and "Second Info." Standard errors are clustered at the couple
level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the p < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels.

Model-Implied Expected Guesses: show the same regressions as in columns 1 to 3, but use
the expected guesses (conditional on actual signals) implied by the structural estimates presented in
columns 4 to 6 of Table 2.




                                                   68
                                     Figure A.VII: Comparing Non-Parametric to Structural Results

                                                              Panel A: Husbands

                           Individual Round                         Discussion Round                        Draw-Sharing Round
              15




                                                         15




                                                                                                  15
                               Actual Guesses                           Actual Guesses                           Actual Guesses
              10




                                                         10




                                                                                                  10
                                       Model-Implied                            Model-Implied                            Model-Implied
                                      Expected Guesses                         Expected Guesses                         Expected Guesses
              5




                                                         5




                                                                                                  5
                      -5            0           5              -5            0           5             -5             0           5
                             Red Minus White                          Red Minus White                          Red Minus White
69




                                                               Panel B: Wives

                           Individual Round                         Discussion Round                        Draw-Sharing Round
              15




                                                         15




                                                                                                  15
                               Actual Guesses                           Actual Guesses                           Actual Guesses
              10




                                                         10




                                                                                                  10
                                       Model-Implied                            Model-Implied                            Model-Implied
                                      Expected Guesses                         Expected Guesses                         Expected Guesses
              5




                                                         5




                                                                                                  5
                      -5            0           5              -5            0           5             -5             0           5
                             Red Minus White                          Red Minus White                          Red Minus White


     Notes: This figure shows the average second private guess of husbands (Panel A) and wives (Panel B). The x-axis denotes the net number
     of red draws (i.e. red draws minus white draws) in the second signal of the round. Blue dots indicate average actual guesses, while gray
     dots indicate average expected guesses from the structural model described in Section 4.3 (using the estimated parameters in columns 5
     and 6 of Table 2). Curves denote locally-weighted averages (lowess).
