                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW RESILIENT IS MORTGAGE CREDIT SUPPLY? EVIDENCE FROM THE
                           COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                        Andreas Fuster
                                          Aurel Hizmo
                                     Lauren Lambie-Hanson
                                         James Vickery
                                         Paul S. Willen

                                      Working Paper 28843
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28843


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Eric Hardy, Natalie Newton and Dick Oosthuizen for outstanding research assistance,
Scott Frame, Philipp Schnabl, Felipe Severino, and numerous other colleagues for comments, as
well as workshop participants at the Journal of Finance and Fama-Miller Center Conference on
the Financial Consequences of COVID-19, University of Zurich, Louisiana State University, the
Philadelphia Fed, Penn State University, Dartmouth (Tuck), the Dallas Fed, and the CFPB
Research Conference. Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
represent the opinions of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston or Philadelphia, the Federal
Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, the Swiss National Bank, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andreas Fuster, Aurel Hizmo, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, James Vickery, and Paul S.
Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Resilient Is Mortgage Credit Supply? Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic
Andreas Fuster, Aurel Hizmo, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, James Vickery, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 28843
May 2021
JEL No. G21,G23,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the evolution of US mortgage credit supply during the COVID-19 pandemic. Although
the mortgage market experienced a historic boom in 2020, we show there was also a large and
sustained increase in intermediation markups that limited the pass-through of low rates to
borrowers. Markups typically rise during periods of peak demand, but this historical relationship
explains only part of the large increase during the pandemic. We present evidence that pandemic-
related labor market frictions and operational bottlenecks contributed to unusually inelastic credit
supply, and that technology-based lenders, likely less constrained by these frictions, gained
market share. Rising forbearance and default risk did not significantly affect rates on "plain
vanilla" conforming mortgages, but it did lead to higher spreads on mortgages without
government guarantees and loans to the riskiest borrowers. Mortgage-backed securities purchases
by the Federal Reserve also supported the flow of credit in the conforming segment.


Andreas Fuster                                    James Vickery
Swiss National Bank                               Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Boersenstrasse 15                                 james.vickery@phil.frb.org
CH-8022 Zurich
Switzerland                                       Paul S. Willen
and CEPR                                          Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
andreas.fuster@gmail.com                          Research Department
                                                  600 Atlantic Avenue
Aurel Hizmo                                       Boston, MA 02210-2204
Federal Reserve Board                             and NBER
20th and C St NW                                  paul.willen@bos.frb.org
Washington, DC 20551
aurel.hizmo@frb.gov

Lauren Lambie-Hanson
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
lslambiehanson@alum.mit.edu
I        Introduction
2020 was an extraordinary year for the US mortgage market. Lenders underwrote a
record $4 trillion in new mortgages, a far higher volume than in any year since 2003.1
On the price side, the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS) rate on
30-year fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) fell below 3 percent for the first time since the se-
ries began in 1970, reaching lows of about 2.7 percent. Rocket Companies, the largest US
mortgage lender, recorded $9.4 billion in net income, up more than 900 percent from 2019.

    Market participants in March of 2020 would not have expected such good news. The
emergence of COVID-19 appeared to presage bad times for the industry. With the spread
of the virus, lockdowns, and social distancing, how would lenders close loans? Who
would buy houses? How would mortgage servicers deal with commitments to pay prin-
cipal and interest to investors as well as taxes and insurance when Congress had told bor-
rowers that they could postpone payment without penalty? Yet borrowers and lenders
seemingly overcame all these challenges.

    Underlying these positive outcomes, however, are signs that the mortgage market has
not functioned entirely normally during the pandemic. In addition to historically high
lending and historically low rates, we have seen historically high spreads between mort-
gage rates and commonly used benchmarks. Figure 1 shows that while mortgage and
Treasury rates generally co-move closely, the difference between the 30-year FRM rate and
10-year Treasury yield widened significantly during the pandemic, peaking at levels not
seen since the 2008 financial crisis.2 And while mortgage lenders were highly profitable,
industry practitioners reported tighter credit standards in response to the heightened risk
of forbearance and delinquency.3

   In this paper, we study the evolution of the mortgage market during the COVID-19
pandemic and evaluate the extent to which the events of the pandemic led to a contraction
1 From   2008 through 2019, annual mortgage originations never exceeded $2.4 trillion, and they exceeded $2
  trillion only three times. Lending volume was $3.7 trillion in 2003, which was the previous record. The 2003
  lending boom remains significantly larger in real terms or scaled by the stock of outstanding mortgages,
  however. Statistics are from Inside Mortgage Finance and can be seen on p. 8 of Urban Institute (2021).
2 The effective duration of a 30-year mortgage is much shorter than 30 years due to prepayment. Although

 widely used, 10-year Treasury yields are not a perfect benchmark for reasons we explain below.
3 For example, the Mortgage Bankers Association estimates that mortgage credit availability dropped sharply

  at the onset of the pandemic to its lowest level in six years, and it had not recovered much through the end
  of 2020 (Mortgage Bankers Association, 2021).


                                                      1
                          Figure 1: Mortgage Rates and Treasury Yields

                   (a) Interest Rates                                                                                                     (b) Mortgage-Treasury Spread




                                                                           30-Year Mortgage Rate minus 10-Year Treasury Yield, %
                                      30-Year Mortgage Rate (PMMS)                                                                  3
      8
                                      10-Year Treasury Yield


                                                                                                                                   2.5
      6
  %




                                                                                                                                    2
      4




      2                                                                                                                            1.5




    0                                                                                                                                1
  01jan2000   01jan2005   01jan2010         01jan2015          01jan2020                                                           01jan2000   01jan2005   01jan2010   01jan2015   01jan2020


Data source: Freddie Mac 30-Year Fixed Rate Mortgage Average in the United States [MORTGAGE30US]
and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate
[DGS10], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Sample period through end of 2020.


in mortgage credit supply. Our analysis combines financial market data on prices and
yields for mortgage-backed securities (MBS), time-series data on mortgage interest rates,
microdata on mortgage rate offers and interest rate locks from the Optimal Blue platform,
and several other mortgage data sets. We make the following four main points.

   1. Except for a period of financial market turbulence in March 2020, the high mortgage-
      Treasury spread is more than accounted for by a sustained 100 basis point increase in
      the "primary-secondary" spread--that is, by an increase in the price of intermedia-
      tion in the primary mortgage market. A similar spike in the intermediation markup
      is observed based on measures of gain-on-sale earned by mortgage lenders. Thus,
      the situation is quite different from 2008, when mortgage rates were elevated due to
      the high spread on MBS in financial markets.

   2. Intermediation markups typically rise during refinancing booms due to capacity
      constraints (Fuster et al., 2017). But this historical relationship accounts for only part
      of the increase in markups in 2020. In other words, the elasticity of mortgage supply
      was abnormally low. We present evidence that operational issues and labor market
      frictions related to the pandemic contributed to this lower elasticity. Consistent with
      these frictions, we show that technology-based ("fintech") lenders gained market
      share among mortgages that are more complex and labor intensive to originate.

                                                                      2
   3. The mortgage rate spread widened for loans bearing the greatest credit risk for fi-
      nancial intermediaries. These loans span the socio-economic spectrum, including
      both non-guaranteed jumbo mortgages to high-income borrowers, and low-credit-
      score Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgages.4 The number of lenders
      offering credit in these segments of the market also fell sharply. While forbearance
      and default risk was not an important driver of higher markups for a typical prime
      mortgage, it did lead to a contraction of supply in some other parts of the market.

   4. MBS purchases by the Federal Reserve ("quantitative easing" or QE) lowered mort-
      gage rates and supported mortgage credit supply. We identify these effects in part
      using institutional features of the "to-be-announced" forward market.

    We are also able to rule out several plausible alternative explanations for the sharp rise
in mortgage markups. Using geographic variation, we show that factors related to local
market competition, or the direct macroeconomic and health effects of the virus, do not
play an important role; instead, the rise in markups was broadly based. Using the cross
section of mortgages, we show that forbearance and default risk did not play a significant
role in producing the higher spreads observed in the prime conforming market, where
lenders are less exposed to default than in other market segments. Finally, we show that
borrowers shopped more and switched more frequently between lenders during the pan-
demic; along with our evidence on local competition, this speaks against the hypothesis
that the high markups reflect an increase in lender pricing power.

    Beyond shedding light on the financial effects of the pandemic, our results yield more
general lessons about the resilience of the US mortgage finance system and the frictions
that limit interest rate pass-through to borrowers. A first lesson is that, despite recent
improvements in information technology, industry capacity constraints still bind during
periods of peak demand. Although mortgage rates fell to record lows in 2020, our results
imply that rates paid by borrowers would be lower still under a system where rates ad-
just automatically with market yields during an economic downturn, as in the automatic
stabilizer mortgage proposed by Eberly and Krishnamurthy (2014) (see also Guren et al.,
2020; Campbell et al., 2020), or in a system with a larger role for adjustable-rate mortgages.
That said, we also find that fintech lenders gained market share during the pandemic, par-
ticularly for complex loans, suggesting that technology indeed helps ameliorate capacity
4 FHA mortgages are government guaranteed, but these guarantees do not fully insulate mortgage interme-
diaries against default risk. See Kim et al. (2018) and the discussion in Section VI for more details.


                                                  3
 constraints and overcome operational bottlenecks, consistent with Fuster et al. (2019).5

     A second lesson is that government guarantees, which play a key role in the agency
 mortgage market, supported intermediation and lowered rates in the face of a large
 macroeconomic shock, as was also the case during the Great Recession (Calem et al., 2013;
 Vickery and Wright, 2013). At the same time, our results highlight the limits of these guar-
 antees. Because lenders are not fully indemnified against risk, especially in the FHA seg-
 ment, the pandemic did result in a contraction in supply for the riskiest borrowers. We
 are also able to disentangle the effects of government credit guarantees and Fed QE (e.g.,
 Di Maggio et al., 2020) by comparing conforming, jumbo, and super-conforming loans
 (the latter carry a government guarantee but are only partly eligible for Fed purchases).
 We find that both QE and government guarantees supported credit supply in the con-
 forming segment, although guarantees appear to have had a more persistent effect.

    The evidence in this paper adds to a large body of research about the transmission
 of monetary policy and interest rate shocks through the mortgage market and the role
 of financial frictions, including Berger et al. (2020), Di Maggio et al. (2017), Fuster et al.
 (2013), and Fuster et al. (2017); see Amromin et al. (2020) for a recent review. Our results
 are also related to research on the growing presence of nonbank mortgage intermediaries,
 which now originate more than half of new loans and are more sensitive to liquidity risk
 (Kim et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2020; Buchak et al., 2018).

     Finally, we contribute to a growing body of research about the mortgage market and
 consumer credit markets more generally during the COVID-19 pandemic.6 An et al. (2021),
 Cherry et al. (2021), Capponi et al. (2021), and McManus and Yannopoulos (2021) study
 mortgage forbearance during the pandemic. Agarwal et al. (2021) show that savings
 from refinancing during the pandemic are more skewed toward higher-income borrow-
 ers than in earlier refinancing waves. Work on other consumer credit markets includes
 Iverson et al. (2020) on bankruptcy and Horvath et al. (2020) on credit card borrowing.
5 Erel and Liebersohn (2020) show that nonbank fintech lenders also gained importance in small-business
  lending during the pandemic, accounting for a substantial portion of Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)
  loans. Kwan et al. (2021) show that banks with stronger information technology (IT) capabilities originated
  more PPP loans and attracted more deposits during the pandemic.
6 Bracke et al. (2020) conduct a study similar in several respects to ours for the UK mortgage market, finding

  evidence of tighter credit standards and a drop in lending after the onset of the pandemic. This again sug-
  gests that government guarantees (which are absent in the UK) were important in sustaining US lending.




                                                      4
II      Data

II.A Optimal Blue

The Optimal Blue platform connects mortgage lenders to whole loan investors, allowing
lenders to search for pricing information, initiate rate locks, and sell mortgages.7 Lenders
are typically nonbank mortgage companies, but smaller banks and credit unions are also
represented. Investors include large banks and other institutions that retain loans pur-
chased on the platform in portfolio or package them for securitization. More than 1,000
lenders and over 200 investors are active on the platform, and Optimal Blue estimates that
the platform has been used to lock one-third of US mortgage originations in recent years.
Coverage may be even higher for 2020 due to a rise in the share of nonbank lending.8

     Our analysis uses the following two forms of information produced by the platform.

    Rate locks. Rate lock data reflect individual locks for mortgages processed by Opti-
mal Blue, and include a comprehensive set of underwriting variables including the loan-
to-value (LTV) ratio, FICO score, debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, loan amount, loan program,
purpose (purchase or refinance), asset and income documentation, employment, occu-
pancy status, property type, and ZIP code. The data also include lender, branch, and loan
officer identifiers. The data cover about 280 metropolitan areas as well as rural areas.

    Rate lock data have several advantages over servicing data often used in mortgage
research. First, the data include not only the mortgage note rate, but also the discount
points or credits paid or received by the borrower and the duration of the lock. This is
important because in practice borrowers select from a menu of rate-point combinations,
and points vary through time and across loans. Second, we observe the date and time
of the rate lock, as opposed to the closing date, which generally differs from the pricing-
relevant lock date by weeks or months.9 Third, the data are available in near real time.

     Mortgage offers. We also use data on the menu of loan contracts and associated inter-
7 Optimal   Blue data (as referenced throughout) are anonymized mortgage market/rates data that do not
  contain lender or customer identities or complete rate sheets.
8 Among the top 50 lenders by volume, nonbanks accounted for 69 percent of originations in 2020, and 74

 percent in 2020:Q4, up from 60 percent in 2019. Source: Inside Mortgage Finance, Jan. 29, 2021.
9 The rate is typically locked about the time when the borrower submits a loan application, but it can happen

  before or after.


                                                      5
  est rates offered by lenders through Optimal Blue's "Pricing Insight" engine. The engine
  allows users to retrieve the real-time distribution of offers (that is, combinations of rates
  and net points and fees) for a loan with given characteristics in a particular local mar-
  ket. The interface is designed for lenders to compare their pricing with that of their peers.
  We use the engine to run daily searches in one local market (Los Angeles), twice-weekly
  searches in four markets, and weekly searches in 15 additional markets, collecting of-
  fer data for 100 loan types representing different combinations of FICO score, LTV ratio,
  loan program, purpose (purchase or cash-out refinance), occupancy (owner-occupied or
  investor), rate type (30-year fixed or 5/1 adjustable), and loan amount.10

      Mortgage offer rates represent a direct measure of supply that can be observed regard-
  less of whether the offer results in a loan in equilibrium. The Insight data also allow us
  to see how the number of lenders active in different segments of the market evolves over
  the pandemic. A limitation of the offer data, however, is that there is no fixed lender
  identifier, meaning we cannot track lenders over time or include lender fixed effects.


  II.B Other Data Sources

  We use a variety of other data sources. For mortgage rates, in addition to Optimal Blue,
  we use data from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey and the Mortgage
  Bankers Association (MBA). All MBS pricing information comes from J.P. Morgan Mar-
  kets. Mortgage servicing rights valuation data are provided by SitusAMC, an indepen-
  dent valuation service company. For direct evidence on lender income and costs, we use
  the MBA Quarterly Performance Report. Data on mortgage industry employment come
  from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) Current Employment Statistics, and job post-
  ings come from Burning Glass Technologies. Data on county-level daily COVID-19 cases
  come from the New York Times GitHub repository. Evidence on borrower search is ob-
  tained from Google Trends. We also use public Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
  data for geographic market characteristics (e.g., lender concentration). Lastly, we use loan-
  level data from eMBS on mortgages securitized through Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and
  Ginnie Mae to study fintech lending, and Black Knight McDash servicing data ("McDash
  data") to study the jumbo market and to cross-validate several of our results.
10 Allsearches condition on full income, asset, and employment documentation, and require that the mort-
  gage finances a single-unit home. If a lender represents more than one investor, we observe the most
  competitive investor offer. For more details see Bhutta et al. (2021), who compare mortgage offer rates and
  lock rates to study the efficiency of borrower search in the mortgage market.


                                                      6
III    Rates and Markups for Conforming Mortgages
In this section, we measure the evolution of mortgage rates and markups in 2020. We start,
in Section III.A, by breaking down the spread between mortgage rates and benchmark 10-
year Treasury yields into several components. In Section III.B, we use this decomposition
to show that one component, the primary-secondary spread, a measure of intermediary
markups, largely explains the behavior of the mortgage-Treasury spread. In Section III.C,
we calculate intermediary markups using gain-on-sale, an alternative and arguably more
accurate measure. Gain-on-sale paints a very similar picture: Both methods imply large
and persistent increases in markups. In Section III.D, as a reality check, we look directly
at intermediary income reported by lenders, which also shows large gains.

    Our focus in this section and in Section IV is on the largest segment of the market,
conventional conforming loans (which are generally securitized via Fannie Mae or Fred-
die Mac). These are typically "plain-vanilla" 30-year fixed rate loans to prime borrowers
making a down payment of 20 percent or more. As the core of the market, conforming
rates and quantities are closely tracked by policymakers and market participants.


III.A Decomposing the Mortgage-Treasury Spread

Define r p as the "primary mortgage rate" paid by the borrower, r10 as the yield on a 10-
year Treasury note, and rs as the yield on a new-production MBS into which a typical
newly originated mortgage with note rate r p would be securitized. We can decompose
the mortgage-Treasury spread as

                  r p - r10 =           r p - rs             +          rs - r10        .   (1)
                                Primary-secondary spread             MBS yield spread


We can furthermore decompose the MBS yield spread as follows:

                                                    Option           Option-Adjusted
              rs - r10        rdur - r10        +                +                   .      (2)
                                                     Cost             Spread (OAS)
                          Duration Adjustment


   Duration Adjustment reflects the fact that the MBS may have a different duration from
the 10-year Treasury. MBS duration is not known ex-ante, since it depends on prepayment

                                                    7
  behavior, so instead it is estimated using a model that simulates different interest rate and
  prepayment paths. Option Cost measures the value of the borrower's prepayment option;
  the borrower can prepay at any time and will tend to do so especially when rates fall (in
  order to refinance into a new loan). Since MBS investors are short this option, they require
  compensation in terms of a higher MBS yield. Finally, Option-Adjusted Spread (OAS) is a
  residual that captures various factors that affect relative pricing between Treasuries and
  MBS, such as liquidity differences, the risk-bearing capacity of marginal investors in the
  two markets, relative bond supply, perceived credit risk differences, and non-interest-rate
  prepayment risk (Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca, 2019).11

  III.A.1 Measurement

 While headline mortgage rates and Treasury yields are readily available, decomposing
 the mortgage-Treasury spread into the four components in equations (1) and (2) is less
 straightforward. Most important, MBS yields, durations, option costs, and OAS are not
 directly observed, but are obtained based on MBS pricing models featuring interest rate
 simulations and prepayment projections; we rely on models from J.P. Morgan Markets, as
 noted earlier. Two further complications are that (i) MBS are traded in coupons of 50 basis
 point (bp) increments, and a mortgage with a given note rate could be securitized into
 different new production coupons; and (ii) MBS investors do not receive the entire note
 rate, as some portion of the cash flow is diverted to pay for the agency credit guarantee
 (g-fees) and servicing. We account for these factors by calculating a net note rate:

                                       Net Note Rate = r p - g - s.                                       (3)

  Our baseline measure of r p is the 30-year FRM rate from the Freddie Mac PMMS; for the
  guarantee fee g we take the effective g-fee on new production MBS from Fannie Mae's 10-
  Q disclosures; and the (base) servicing fee s is set to 25 bp, which is the market convention
  for MBS issued by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie
  Mac. We then calculate the MBS yield, duration, option cost, and OAS by interpolating
  values between the two MBS coupons on either side of the net note rate.
11 Fortextbook descriptions of MBS pricing, see Fabozzi (2016) or Davidson and Levin (2014). Note that the
  decomposition in (2) is not exact, since the OAS and the "zero-volatility spread" (which is the sum of OAS
  and option cost) are calculated as an average spread relative to each point on the interest rate curve based
  on which future cash flows are discounted, while the left-hand-side measure is a simple spread at a given
  point on that curve.



                                                       8
III.B What Happened over 2020? How Does It Compare with 2007­09?

Panel A of Figure 2 traces out the evolution of the mortgage-Treasury spread in 2020 in
terms of changes relative to the beginning of the year, and it decomposes these changes
into the four components discussed above. The mortgage-Treasury spread increased
rapidly starting in late February, peaking at about 90bp above pre-pandemic levels in
late March (seen in the black dots in the figure). The mortgage-Treasury spread then
gradually normalized, but even in August it remained about 50bp higher than at the start
of the year. The spread did not return to pre-pandemic levels until November 2020.

    The decomposition in the figure shows that this rise in the mortgage-Treasury spread
is more than entirely accounted for by a sharp increase in the primary-secondary spread--
that is, by a higher price of intermediation in the primary mortgage market. In contrast,
the three financial market components (duration, option cost, and OAS) were actually
lower than their pre-pandemic levels over most of 2020.

     There were, however, some temporary effects of financial market disruptions during
the flight to liquidity in March 2020. OAS increased sharply in March, reflecting an am-
plification of risk premia in financial markets as well as deleveraging by mortgage REITs.
The option cost also increased, reflecting the rise in interest rate volatility. But these spikes
were short-lived. On March 15, the Federal Reserve resumed its MBS quantitative easing
program, and on March 23 it announced that it would purchase agency MBS in the vol-
ume needed to support market functioning. These actions are associated with a rapid
normalization of OAS, which then fell below pre-pandemic levels. The duration adjust-
ment also became negative after February 2020, reflecting a drop in the model-implied
duration of newly originated mortgages (from 4.7 years in January to 3.2 years by July).

    For comparison, panel B of Figure 2 presents the same decomposition of the mortgage-
Treasury spread over the June 2007­May 2009 financial crisis period, when the spread was
similarly elevated. The figure shows that the sources of the elevated spread are very dif-
ferent between the two episodes. The primary-secondary spread barely moves during the
financial crisis, and it is the spread on MBS in secondary financial markets, and particu-
larly a rise in OAS, that accounts for the unusually high gap between mortgage rates and
Treasury yields, at least until early 2009, when financial markets start to normalize.

   Given these facts, our focus in this paper is on understanding the high markup in the

                                               9
primary mortgage market during the pandemic. But first we consider two alternative
ways of measuring the markup: gain-on-sale and lender profit margins.


III.C    Measuring Intermediation Markups: Gain-on-Sale

The primary-secondary spread examined above is appealing in the context of decom-
posing different factors affecting mortgage rates actually paid by borrowers. It is also
frequently followed by policymakers and market commentators, thanks to its apparent
simplicity. However, it has a few conceptual shortcomings, as discussed in detail in
Fuster et al. (2013) and Fuster, Lo, and Willen (2017).

    Most important, the primary-secondary spread does not accurately capture how banks
and nonbank mortgage lenders think about the margin they earn from originating a mort-
gage that is securitized in the MBS market. Rather than "earning" the mortgage rate and
"paying" the MBS yield over the life of the loan, originators earn most of their margin
upfront, as the difference between the amount they receive from selling the loan in the
secondary market and the amount paid to the borrower. The only relevant "flow" in-
come over the life of the loan is the servicing strip (equal to 25bp per year in case of GSE
loans, and 44bp for FHA loans). This can be earned by either the mortgage originator or
another firm that acquires the right (and obligation) to service the loan. The value of the
mortgage servicing right (MSR) is usually capitalized and incorporated in the calculation
of the lender margin, which is often referred to as the "gain-on-sale."

   Formally, consider a mortgage with initial balance S0 . Assume that time is continuous
and the loan has constant prepayment hazard  p . Using the notation from above, the
value of the loan is
                                  
                           V=       e-rs t St r p - g +  p dt.
                                    0
Assuming that the lender can sell the loan in the MBS market for V , the lender's profit, or
"gain-on-sale," on the loan is V - S0 . With a constant prepayment hazard, St = S0 e-( p )t ,
and gain on sale can be expressed as

                                   V - S0   r p - rs - g
                                          =              .                               (4)
                                     S0        rs +  p

The logic here is exactly as described above: The higher the prepayment hazard  p , the


                                             10
  less profitable the loan (assuming r p - g > rs ).

      Equation (4) omits two components that are important in actual gain-on-sale calcula-
  tions. First, lenders typically value the servicing flow s separately from the rest of the cash
  flow. The net servicing income flow is s(1 - cs ), where cs is the cost of servicing as a share
  of servicing income. Second, the lender typically collects points and fees at origination,
  which we denote as F, so the initial cash outlay is not S0 but S0 - F.12 Taking those two
  factors into account, we can write gain-on-sale as

                                        r p - rs - g - s        s (1 - c s )             F
                                    =                    +                        +                .      (5)
                                             rs +  p             rs +  p                 S0
                     Gain-on-Sale
                                        Secondary Market     Mortgage Servicing       Points and
                                             Income            Right (MSR)               Fees


  (1 - cs )/(rs +  p ) is known as the servicing multiple. Similarly, 1/(rs +  p ) for the first
  term can be seen as a valuation multiple used to value the "interest-only (IO)" strip pro-
  vided by the numerator (paying a constant fraction of the unpaid principal balance of the
  loan while the loan is active and nothing when the loan prepays).

      Our approach to measuring gain-on-sale follows Fuster, Lo, and Willen (2017). To
  compute the value of secondary market income, we assume that the lender sells the loan
  in the TBA market.13 Specifically, we start with r p - g - s and interpolate between the two
  nearest MBS coupons (for example, if r p - g - s = 3.25, we take the equal-weighted aver-
  age price of a 3.0 coupon and a 3.5 coupon). To value the MSR, we use valuation multiples
  provided by SitusAMC, an independent valuation service company. These multiples are
  based on transaction values of brokered bulk MSR deals, surveys of market participants,
  and a pricing model, and capture the net value of servicing, that is, the value of the in-
  come flow minus expected costs.14 The multiples are provided to us at monthly frequency
  at the coupon-by-loan type (GSE versus FHA) level.15 All components are expressed per
12 F is net of loan-level price adjustments (LLPAs) paid to the GSE when selling the loan.
13 "TBA"   stands for "to be announced," which is the MBS market where new agency mortgages are typically
   forward-sold. See Vickery and Wright (2013) for additional institutional details.
14 Fuster et al. (2013) calculate a measure of  called "OPUC," where they explicitly consider the choice of

   coupon into which a loan is securitized but for the most part assume constant multiples over time. In
   Internet Appendix A.2, we show that results using OPUC are qualitatively similar.
15 Appendix Figure A.1 shows the evolution of these multiples for conventional conforming and FHA seg-

   ments. Multiples for given fixed coupons decreased over time, reflecting the drop in market interest rates.
   However, the interpolated multiple at the typical coupon rate for new loans decreased only modestly before
   fully reverting over the course of 2020.


                                                       11
 $100 loan amount, as is standard in the industry.

     Figure 3 compares our estimates for intermediation markups based on the simple
 primary-secondary spread measure from Section III.A.1 and the gain-on-sale methodol-
 ogy from this section. Panel A shows the primary-secondary spread based on three dif-
 ferent mortgage rate series, the PMMS survey rate (our baseline), the Mortgage Bankers
 Association (MBA) weekly application survey, and the Optimal Blue Insight data.16 De-
 spite some differences across the three series, the primary-secondary spread increases
 significantly at the onset of the pandemic regardless of which mortgage rate is used.17

     Panel B of Figure 3 shows time series of our estimates of gain-on-sale in the conform-
 ing market, based on the same three mortgage rate series. In all cases, gain-on-sale jumps
 by about 250 bp from mid-February to early April 2020, and then stays high over the rest
 of the year. Based on the PMMS and MBA series, it is on average roughly 200 bp higher
 than in the second half of 2019; with the Insight series, the increase is around 175 bp. If
 we compare panels A and B of Figure 3, we see similar patterns, with the main difference
 being that the primary-secondary spread (panel A) reverts more toward its pre-pandemic
 level at the end of 2020 than gain-on-sale (panel B).

     Gain-on-sale shows just how profitable mortgage lending was in the last three quar-
 ters of 2020. Originations over the period averaged more than $1 trillion a quarter. Multi-
 plying our quarterly gain-on-sale measures by origination volumes implies total industry
 gain-on-sale of about $162 billion, or $54 billion a quarter. Had gain-on-sale remained
 at its pre-pandemic level of 2.5 percent, the industry would have earned only $82 billion
 over these three quarters--that is, half as much as it did.


 III.D      Lender Profit Margins

 Direct evidence on intermediaries' loan production profits also indicates record-high mar-
 gins. We obtain data from the Mortgage Bankers Association Quarterly Performance Re-
16 The  PMMS and MBA surveys ask lenders for both rates and discount rates offered. Since the discount
  points change each week, and there is a rate-point trade-off, the published survey rates are not directly
   comparable week to week. To address this, we use the point-rate trade-offs estimated in the Optimal Blue
   offer (Insight) data for 2017 through 2020 to adjust survey rates to a "constant discount points" rate. For
  previous years when Optimal Blue data are not available, we estimate these trade-offs using MBS prices.
17 Internet Appendix Figure A.2 shows that the patterns are also qualitatively similar when we use the Current

   Coupon (CC) to measure for MBS yields. The CC yield is not as reliable in this time period, however, since
   every MBS coupon traded far above par in 2020. See Fuster et al. (2013) for a related discussion.


                                                      12
 port, which has been collecting quarterly data from roughly 340 mortgage banks on rev-
 enues and expenses since 2008:Q3.18 Panel A of Figure 4 plots the time series of average
 total net production income (in basis points of loan volume) reported by the firms in the
 sample--meaning the margin between loan production revenues and expenses. We note
 that mortgage banks do not necessarily capture the entire intermediation markup, as they
 often act as correspondent lenders for larger banks ("aggregators") that then sell the loans
 in the secondary market and also capture part of the markup.

     Income in Q2 through Q4 of 2020 is extraordinary compared with all other quarters
 in the data. Net production income is about 60 bp in 2020:Q1, already at the higher end
 of incomes over the previous few years, but it was more than three times as high, 203
 bp, in Q3. Furthermore, this higher net margin was earned on loan production that was
 almost twice as high. In panel B, we multiply the net production income by the average
 reported origination volume per firm, which was $1.335 billion in Q3 and $1.472 billion
 in Q4, versus $728 million in Q1. The resulting total net production income therefore
 skyrocketed from below $5 million in Q1 to an average of $21.4 million over the remaining
 quarters of 2020, with a peak of more than $27 million in Q3.

     These data provide further confirmation that the price of intermediation in the mort-
 gage market was historically high in 2020. They also show that high measured gain-on-
 sale at least partly translated into high lender profit margins rather than being absorbed
 by expenses not accounted for in our gain-on-sale calculations.19 We now study the role
 of different economic factors in accounting for these strikingly high markups.



 IV Capacity Constraints
 We first examine whether industry capacity constraints can explain the high intermedia-
 tion markups documented above. Individual loan officers and underwriters are limited in
 how quickly they can process mortgage applications, and lenders face significant adjust-
 ment costs in hiring and training new workers, particularly in the short run. Fuster et al.
18 Note  that the sample of reporting firms changes over time, and we have access to only aggregate series,
   not firm-level series. Also, these statistics are not specific to the conventional conforming segment; they
   combine all originations.
19 For instance, Fuster et al. (2013) discuss pipeline hedging costs, which are proportional to implied interest

  volatility. However, while this volatility spiked early in the crisis, it has since been at or below its level of
   January and February 2020.


                                                        13
 (2017) find evidence that these constraints lead to an increase in mortgage markups dur-
 ing periods of peak demand--in other words, given limited capacity, lenders "step on the
 brakes" by increasing the margins charged to borrowers.20


 IV.A Is 2020 Consistent With Historical Patterns?

 Figure 5 studies whether the historical relationship between intermediation markups and
 capacity utilization can account for the high markups in 2020. The figure plots mortgage
 demand against two measures of intermediation markups we have used already: the
 primary-secondary spread and the gain-on-sale ( ). Our preferred proxy for demand is
 the difference between the weighted average coupon (WAC) on the stock of mortgages
 and the 10-year Treasury yield. This measure is highly correlated with applications for
 (refinance) loans and is arguably exogenous to current mortgage supply shocks, because
 it does not rely on current mortgage rates.21 We also use the MBA mortgage applications
 index as an alternative direct measure of demand.

     The figure shows that the price of intermediation during the pandemic significantly
 exceeds what would be predicted simply based on the level of demand. Red squares in
 Figure 5 are from 2020, with the number indicating the month of the observation. Blue
 circles are from 2012 through 2019. There is a clear positive historical relationship between
 markups and mortgage demand. But from about April 2020 onward, markups are well
 above the line of best fit, regardless of which demand or markup measure is used.

     Table 1 quantifies the "excess" markup by regressing the primary-secondary spread or
 gain-on-sale on either of the mortgage demand proxies and time dummies corresponding
 to different phases of the pandemic. In all cases, the pandemic dummies indicate large,
 statistically significant excess markups from March 2020 onward. The historical relation
 between markups and demand can account for only about 20 to 40 percent of the rise in
20 Consistent with the presence of capacity constraints, Fuster
                                                              et al. (2017) show that loan processing times are
   strongly positively correlated with mortgage application volumes. Sharpe and Sherlund (2016) also find
   evidence of capacity constraints, showing that refinancing waves induce substitution away from complex
   mortgages that are more labor intensive to process and underwrite.
21 In contrast, using the difference between WAC and the current mortgage rate may produce bias in the

   estimated markup relationship, because mortgage rates reflect the intersection of demand and supply
  (Fuster et al., 2017). The WAC-10-year Treasury spread is highly correlated with an estimate of the percent-
   age of active mortgage borrowers who are refinance candidates (from Lambie-Hanson, 2020), measured in
   either monthly levels ( = 0.77) or monthly changes ( = 0.70) from January 2008 through October 2020.



                                                       14
 intermediation markups, depending on the specification.22,23

     Column 1 shows that the primary-secondary spread is 77 bp higher than expected in
 March through May, and 86 bp higher in June through August (that is, it increased an
 additional 9 bp). By comparison, the one-standard-deviation residual from this regres-
 sion excluding the COVID-19 period is only 8.9 bp (last row of table). Thus, one could
 consider the COVID-19 period roughly a "9 sigma" event that persists for well over six
 months. Results are similar in column 2, although the regression fit is slightly weaker.
 The excess intermediation markup is also highly significant when we use gain-on-sale
 as the dependent variable (columns 3 and 4). Gain-on-sale is $1.05 to $1.30 higher than
 expected over March through May, rising to $1.40 to $1.60 over June through August.24


 IV.B Operational Constraints in Expanding Capacity

 We now document several pieces of evidence suggesting that operational issues related
 to the pandemic made it more difficult for lenders to expand capacity in 2020. This pro-
 vides a plausible explanation for why the mortgage supply curve was unusually inelastic
 relative to previous lending booms.

 IV.B.1     Labor Market Frictions

 Anecdotal evidence suggests the remote-work environment created significant challenges
 in hiring, training, and onboarding new loan officers, processors, and other mortgage em-
 ployees. One leading industry participant told us that it has been difficult to train new
22 On  the high end of this range, the coefficient in column 4 would project a maximum increase in gain-on-
   sale of 109 bp, given that the MBA applications index increased from an average of 449 in January 2020 to
   a maximum of 1002. This compares with an actual increase in gain-on-sale of 279 bp.
23 The pandemic dummies from March through August are comparatively smaller for gain-on-sale than for

   the primary-secondary spread, considering that the latter is a flow measure while the former measures the
   total gain earned by intermediaries. This reflects (i) a flattening of the relationship between gain-on-sale
   and the primary-secondary spread during the pandemic, and (ii) the fact that gain-on-sale is below the line
   of best fit at the start of 2020, while the primary-secondary spread is close to its fitted value.
24 Our estimates could overstate gain-on-sale if the SitusAMC servicing multiples fail to properly reflect the

   risks for servicers of elevated forbearance and non-payment. But in Section V.A we show there is no evi-
   dence of a rising interest rate premium for high-risk conventional conforming loans during the pandemic,
  which speaks against this hypothesis. We also have no reason to doubt that the SitusAMC valuations in-
   ternalize the risks of forbearance; in fact, given secondary market illiquidity for MSRs, transactions may
   understate going-concern values if they mainly reflect forced sales at fire-sale prices. Finally, even if we set
   the servicing multiple to zero--a very extreme assumption--this would reduce gain-on-sale by only about
   $1, still not bringing it fully in line with historical patterns.


                                                        15
 employees and to monitor their work, and that as a result lenders prioritized hiring ex-
 perienced professionals (generally from competitors) who were well known and trusted
 and did not require much training or supervision. Consistent with this message, an exec-
 utive at large nonbank lender Mr. Cooper explained their limited expansion in capacity
 as follows: "It reflects the fact that we add capacity at a deliberate pace with an eye on the long
 term. And additionally, when the crisis hit and we shifted to work-from-home status, that slowed
 our hiring and our onboarding" (Ivey, 2020). The diversion of staff and managerial attention
 to process the wave of forbearance applications appears to have been an additional drain
 on the effective labor supply, at least early in the pandemic (Berry and Kline, 2020).

      Disruptions to the licensing of mortgage loan officers also held back growth in la-
  bor supply. Nonbank loan officers must be licensed through the Nationwide Multistate
  Licensing System (NMLS), a process including background checks, fingerprinting, an ex-
  amination, and ongoing education.25 During the early months of the pandemic, half of
  the fingerprinting locations were shuttered, and about 10 percent remained closed as of
  December 2020. Testing sites also closed in the early months, although the NMLS began
  offering a remote testing option in September. These factors limited the inflow of de novo
  loan officers and also affected employees switching from banks to nonbanks or changing
  their state of employment.26

     This qualitative evidence suggests that the supply of labor was relatively inelastic dur-
  ing the pandemic, which would imply unusually slow hiring compared with the level of
  labor demand and also a sharp increase in the price of labor. We now present evidence
  supporting these predictions.

    Panel A of Figure 6 shows that lenders added nearly 50,000 mortgage loan officers and
 underwriters (MLOs) after the emergence of COVID-19 in March 2020. This took MLO
 employment to a post-financial crisis high of 360,000, although employment remained
 120,000 MLOs short of its all-time peak in 2004. Data from Burning Glass in panel A
25 A  new license is required not just for de novo loan officers, but also for experienced loan officers transition-
   ing from banks to nonbanks or moving across states. In the latter two cases, the loan officer is permitted to
   temporarily operate for 120 days before obtaining a new license (Mortgage Bankers Association, 2019). We
  were told, however, that in some cases licensing delays exceeded this 120 day grace period.
26 In an email communication, one industry participant told us, "Testing centers closed at times and have had

   limited availability. This has prevented new LOs [loan officers] from joining the industry right away. We have seen
   delays of anywhere from a few weeks to a few months depending on the restrictions in the area."




                                                          16
 also show a sharp rise in MLO job postings during the COVID-19 period.27 Postings
 fluctuated around 1 vacancy per 100 employees prior to COVID-19, but jumped to more
 than 2 per 100 during the pandemic.

    To test whether MLO hiring was low relative to the number of postings, we estimate
 the following regression:

                 log( MLOt+1 ) - log( MLOt ) =  +  1 pt +  2 pt-1 +  2 pt-2 +  t ,

 where the dependent variable is the log change in MLO employment between mid-month
 t and mid-month t + 1 (from the BLS Current Employment Statistics, Establishment Sur-
 vey) and p are monthly MLO postings per employee from Burning Glass. The regression
 is estimated on data from March 2012 through February 2020. Coefficients are shown in
 Internet Appendix Table A.1 and imply a correlation of about 0.5 between actual employ-
 ment growth and employment growth predicted just by current and lagged job postings.

    Panel B of Figure 6 presents predictions from this regression model that illustrate how
 anomalous the pandemic period was for the hiring-vacancies relationship. Dots labeled
 "COVID" are out-of-sample predictions for March 2020 through December 2020. Actual
 employment growth fell short of the predicted value in all 10 months. Overall, we esti-
 mate that monthly employment growth averaged about 1.5 percentage points less than
 we would expect. In panel A, the line labeled "Counterfactual Employment" quantifies
 the cumulative effect of this hiring gap. Actual MLO employment at the end of 2020 was
 60,000 lower than what would be predicted based on the historical relationship between
 postings and employment growth.

     Turning to the cost of labor, it is difficult to observe the compensation packages offered
 to loan originators, which often involve a combination of a signing bonus, fixed salary,
 and loan volume incentives. Nevertheless, available data from the Mortgage Bankers As-
 sociation, analyzed in Appendix B.2, are consistent with a significant increase in labor
27 BurningGlass Technologies is an employment analytics and software company that crawls more than
 40,000 online job boards and company websites daily, scraping and cleaning information on job postings.
 We focus on job postings with the O*NET job code 13-2072, which includes professionals who evaluate,
 authorize, or recommend approval of commercial, real estate, or credit loans, including mortgage loan of-
 ficers and agents, collection analysts, loan servicing officers, loan underwriters, and payday loan officers.
 We further capture "mortgage loan officers" as postings in this category that have the words "mortgage,"
 "mtg," "home," or "residential" in the job title.



                                                      17
 costs during the pandemic. Labor costs per dollar of loan volume typically fall signifi-
 cantly during lending booms due to scale economies; but we show labor costs declined
 only slightly during the 2020 boom. A conservative estimate is that personnel expenses
 scaled by loan volume were unusually high by at least 25 bp by 2020:Q4, equivalent to
 more than 10 percent of average personnel costs measured over the previous five years.

 IV.B.2     Operational Issues in Mortgage Origination

 The pandemic also made the process of originating a mortgage more complex and uncer-
 tain. Obtaining documentation of borrower employment and income was often challeng-
 ing because many businesses were physically closed, and the high rate of job loss often re-
 quired checking employment status multiple times before closing (Berry and Kline, 2020).
 County recorder offices were closed or operating on limited schedules, making it hard to
 complete title searches and causing delays in recording mortgages, which in turn raised
 concerns about the potential for fraud (Hughes, 2020). Other steps in the process, such as
 property appraisals and obtaining notarized signings of closing documents, were more
 cumbersome due to social distancing. For example, Michael Fratantoni of the Mortgage
 Bankers Association noted that "there are steps in the process that are still physical, like the
 actual mortgage note. If it's a paper note, someone still has to show up at the office and collect
 those and send it on to the next step in the process." (Berry and Kline, 2020)


 IV.C       Technology and Capacity Constraints

 The mortgage industry has undergone significant technological change in recent years.
 Did technology play a role in expanding lending capacity and mitigating operational and
 labor market frictions during the pandemic? For instance, information technology can
 enable the origination process to be less labor intensive and more automated and thereby
 more scalable, consistent with Fuster et al.'s (2019) finding that technology-based mort-
 gage lenders adjust processing capacity more elastically.28 Technology-based lenders are
 also likely to rely on digitized records rather than paper documents and be able to transi-
 tion their workforce more easily to remote work. It is also possible that borrowers placed
 more value on a high-quality online platform during the pandemic, given the challenges
28 Rocket  Mortgage CEO Jay Farner emphasized this scalability in the context of the 2020 refinancing wave
 in the firm's 2020:Q3 earnings call, as reported by industry newsletter HousingWire: "Farner also said Rocket
 was able to scale more aggressively than competitors due to its tech stack and business model, which he said is far more
 efficient because it doesn't require disproportionately high headcounts." (Kleimann, 2020).


                                                           18
  of face-to-face interactions and the transfer of physical documents.29

      We use loan-level data from eMBS and the classification of "fintech" lenders from
  Fuster et al. (2019) to assess whether technology-based lenders expanded lending more
  rapidly during the pandemic.30 We investigate two questions. First, did fintech lenders
  increase their overall market share? Second, did they gain market share particularly for
  mortgages that are complex and time intensive to underwrite? This second test is moti-
  vated by Sharpe and Sherlund (2016), who find that capacity constraints induce lenders to
  ration credit by prioritizing simpler and less labor-intensive mortgage applications. Fol-
  lowing Sharpe and Sherlund, we use low-credit-scores and purchase mortgages as two
  measures of these more complex-to-underwrite loans.

      We estimate linear probability models in which the dependent variable is a dummy
  equal to 1 if the originator is a fintech lender in the Fuster et al. (2019) classification. The
  right-hand-side variable of interest is a pandemic dummy equal to 1 for mortgage appli-
  cations underwritten and processed during the pandemic, which, given the time to close
  a loan, we proxy by an origination date after March 2020. The model is estimated using
  loan-level eMBS data on agency mortgage originations, combining data from Fannie Mae,
  Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. The sample period is January 2019 through December 2020.
  Like Fuster et al. (2019), our main specifications exclude bank loans, to isolate differences
  between fintech lenders and other nonbank lenders with a similar funding model and
  common regulatory environment.

     Results in Table 2 indicate an increase in the fintech market share during the pandemic,
 concentrated among complex loans. Columns 1 through 3 focus on purchase mortgages,
 which are typically more complicated and labor intensive to underwrite than refinancings.
 In column 1, which includes no controls (that is, a simple difference in means) the fintech
 share is 2.8 percentage points higher during the pandemic than in the pre-pandemic pe-
 riod (defined as loans closed from January 2019 through March 2020). Column 2 controls
29 For example, Rocket Mortgage CEO Farner claimed during the company's third quarter earnings call that
 "[d]emand for a completely digital experience has never been stronger and Rocket is delivering." (Kleimann, 2020).
30 The Fuster et al. (2019) classification identifies six mortgage lenders that offered a fully online application

   as of the end of 2016: Rocket (Quicken Loans), Better Mortgage, Guaranteed Rate, LoanDepot, Movement
   Mortgage, and Supreme Lending (Everett Financial). Online lending platforms were much more ubiquitous
   in 2020 than in 2016, but this set of lenders has remained near the technology frontier. Relying on this list
   also limits the influence of look-back biases or subjective judgments about which lenders are technology
   leaders today, because the Fuster et al. (2019) classification was set well before the start of the pandemic. It
   does, however, mean we miss some technology-based lenders that have emerged more recently.


                                                        19
 for state fixed effects (the most granular geographic information in these data) as well
 as loan and borrower characteristics such as quadratic functions of credit score, debt-
 to-income, and loan-to-value (see table notes for full list of controls). The coefficient is
 somewhat smaller, at 2.1 percentage points, but remains statistically and economically
 significant. Quantitatively, the increase is about one-fifth of the sample mean of 11.1. Col-
 umn 3 includes a pandemic × (credit score <680) interaction term, which indicates that
 the rise in fintech share is significantly larger for low-credit-score mortgages. The total
 effect for these loans is about 4.1 percentage points.

     The next three columns focus on refinancings, the sector where fintech lenders his-
 torically have specialized. Interestingly, the overall fintech share of refinancings is little
 changed during the pandemic, although again the fintech share does rise for low-credit-
 score borrowers, as shown by the positive interaction term in column 6. The final three
 columns are based on a pooled sample including both purchase mortgages and refinances.
 The increase in the fintech lenders' overall share reflects their gains in the purchase mar-
 ket as well as a compositional shift in lending toward refinancings.

     In Internet Appendix C, we trace out the timing of these changes by replacing the pan-
 demic dummy with monthly time dummies and plotting the resulting coefficients. The
 purchase-mortgage graph is particularly striking: The fintech market share is very stable
 at about 7 percent prior to the pandemic, but then it jumps sharply by about 3 percentage
 points as the pandemic takes hold, before declining later in 2020 as conditions start to nor-
 malize.31 As an additional robustness test, we re-estimate the analysis in Table 2 while
 retaining bank lenders in the sample. The results (also presented in Internet Appendix C)
 are similar to our main estimates.

     These results support the view that technology and automation helped the mortgage
 industry manage the capacity constraints and operational challenges associated with the
 pandemic. In particular, the fintech market share increased most markedly for purchase
 mortgages and loans to low-credit-score borrowers, exactly those loans which are typi-
 cally de-prioritized during periods when capacity constraints bind (Sharpe and Sherlund,
 2016).
31 Weinvestigate the composition of this increase in the fintech share, finding that it is broadly based across
 the set of six firms classified as technology-based lenders.




                                                      20
  V Alternative Explanations: Risk, Health and Competition
 We now consider several other plausible drivers of the rising price of intermediation for
 conforming mortgages, related to default and forbearance risk, the direct health and eco-
 nomic effects of the virus, and lender market power. The evidence we present below
 suggests that none of these factors played an important role in accounting for the high
 markups in 2020.


  V.A Forbearance and Default Risk

  The pandemic led to a surge in mortgage forbearance and non-payment, reflecting high
  unemployment and a CARES Act provision requiring servicers to provide up to a year
  of forbearance on federally backed mortgages.32 Non-payment is costly for mortgage
  lenders and servicers, even in the conforming market where loans are securitized and
  carry a credit guarantee. First, there is liquidity risk because the servicer is required to ad-
  vance mortgage payments, taxes, and insurance even if the borrower stops paying. These
  advances will eventually be reimbursed, but funding them in the interim may be expen-
  sive or infeasible.33 Second, there is "pipeline" risk that the loan becomes nonperforming
  just after origination, before it can be sold.34 Third, servicing a delinquent loan is much
  more labor intensive and costly.

      We use the cross section of mortgage rates to study whether this heightened default
  risk led to a risk premium that increased mortgage rates for borrowers. Our approach
  uses the fact that the rate of non-payment was much higher for low-credit-score borrow-
  ers (see Internet Appendix E for evidence based on McDash servicing data). If rising
  default risk is being priced into conforming mortgage rates, we should see an increase in
  the interest rate spread between low- versus high-score conforming mortgages.
32 At the peak in June 2020, 8.6 percent of all mortgages were in forbearance (source: Mortgage Bankers Asso-
   ciation). The total mortgage non-payment rate more than doubled during the early part of the pandemic:
   from 3.2 percent in January 2020 to 7.8 percent by May 2020 (Black Knight Financial Services, 2020).
33 This was a cause of great concern in the industry early in the pandemic. On April 21, 2020, it was announced

   that servicing advances for conforming mortgages securitized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would be
   capped at four months of principal and interest (Federal Housing Finance Agency, 2020). This cap does not
   apply to taxes, insurance, and other payments.
34 Such loans typically would be sold privately at a significant discount. The GSEs and FHA took some steps

   to limit pipeline risk during the pandemic, but these steps only partially protected lenders (for example,
   the GSEs agreed in April 2020 to purchase loans in forbearance, but only at a 500­700bp discount: See
   https://bankingjournal.aba.com/2020/04/fhfa-to-purchase-qualified-loans-in-forbearance.)


                                                      21
     We first estimate this default risk spread using Optimal Blue Insight data on mortgage
 offers from lenders. Our data include offer rates for otherwise identical mortgages with
 a FICO score of both 680 and 750. We measure the rate premium for a FICO 680 loan by
 estimating the regression:

                          rateimt = mt +  t × (FICOi = 680) +  imt ,                                    (6)

    where rateimt is the interest rate on an offer i in CBSA m during week t, FICOi = 680 is
 a dummy for a FICO score of 680 rather than 750, and mt are CBSA×week fixed effects.
 Other loan characteristics are held fixed (e.g., DTI=36, LTV=80 and balance of $300K).  t
 then traces out the evolution of the FICO 680-750 interest rate spread.

     We also compute an analogous spread using Optimal Blue rate locks data, estimating:

                    rateilmt = mt + lt +  t × FICO bini +  Xilmt +  ilmt ,                              (7)

     where rateilmt is the interest rate on lock i issued by lender l in CBSA m during week t;
 FICO bini is a set of five FICO bin dummies; mt and lt are CBSA×week and lender×month
 fixed effects; and Xilmt is a set of loan and borrower controls including log loan amount,
 DTI and DTI squared, and dummies for the lock period and property type. For loans with
 discount points or credits, we convert the lock rate to a zero-points equivalent interest rate
 using the market rate-point trade-off measured each week in Optimal Blue Insight.35

    Estimates of  t from these two models are reported in the top two panels of Figure 7.
 There is no evidence of a persistent increase in the interest-rate spread on low-FICO mort-
 gages, for either mortgage offers or rate locks. The interest rate spread does spike tem-
 porarily in March 2020, associated with the onset of the pandemic and dislocation in the
 MBS market. But by April, the interest rate spread returns to a narrow band around or
 even slightly below the pre-pandemic levels of about 40 bp.
35 Borrowers pay discount points to buy down the interest rate on their mortgage. Conversely, mortgages
 with net credits have higher interest rates. The shape of the trade-off between rates and net points moves
 over time and has become flatter since the onset of the pandemic. Our Optimal Blue Insight data include
 daily offered interest rates for loans with different numbers of net points (+2, +1, 0, ­1, and ­2). We use
 this pricing grid to adjust the interest rate on each loan to an equivalent zero-point loan. We then use
 this adjusted rate as our dependent variable. An alternative approach is to include additional controls
 interacting points and credits with time dummies; this generates similar results.




                                                     22
    Data on quantities paint a similar picture. Panel C of Figure 7 plots the number of con-
forming lenders offering mortgages to borrowers with different FICO scores, calculated
by averaging the number of rate offers in the Optimal Blue Insight data across the 20 Case-
Shiller metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs). The number of lenders drops temporarily in
March, and more so for lower FICO loans, but it is subsequently quite stable, and there
is no evidence of significant rationing to low-credit-score borrowers. Panel D plots the
percentage of conforming rate locks below two FICO thresholds (680 and 640). For pur-
chase mortgages (the two solid lines), there is no evidence of a drop in the percentage of
low-FICO rate locks. There is a drop for refinances, but this is typical during a refinancing
boom because high-credit-score borrowers have a greater propensity to refinance when
rates fall (e.g., Keys et al., 2016)

   This evidence suggests that heightened default risk is not an important reason for the
high markups on prime conforming mortgages during the pandemic. Default risk is more
important for rates in the high-risk FHA market, however, as we show in Section VI.


V.B Macroeconomic and Health Shocks

Although we find little role for individual default risk, perhaps intermediation markups
incorporate a more general premium due to the macroeconomic and health shocks asso-
ciated with the virus. In such a case, we might nevertheless expect to see heterogeneity,
but primarily across locations, depending on how severely the locality is affected by the
spread of the pandemic and drop in economic activity.

    In Table 3, we examine variation in locked rates across the 100 most populous metro
areas. We regress loan-level interest rates (adjusted for points) from 1.1 million conven-
tional conforming loans locked from November 2019 through August 2020 on metro area
fixed effects, loan characteristics (e.g., loan-to-value ratio, credit score) interacted with
week locked, and different proxies for how severely a metro area was affected by COVID-
19, in terms of both the economic and health impacts.

   The first variable we try is COVID-19 cases per 1,000 metro area residents in the pre-
ceding calendar month. Since this variable equals 0 everywhere prior to February 2020,
the preceding months provide our "pre-period." In fact, higher local case numbers are
associated with slightly lower mortgage interest rates (column 1). The effect is extremely


                                             23
 small, however--a one-standard-deviation rise in case rate is associated with only a 0.3
 bp drop in mortgage rates. Results are similar if we instead use a dummy for metro areas
 in the top quartile of cases per capita (column 2).

     Next we study the economic shock. Job losses, measured as the standardized year-
 over-year change in the local unemployment rate, are positively correlated with mortgage
 rates, although again the effect is not economically meaningful. A one-standard-deviation
 increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 1.2 bp increase in mortgage rates.
 The aggregate increase in unemployment (from 3.5 percent to a peak of 14.8 percent na-
 tionally) would correspond to 2.7 standard deviations, or a rate impact of about 3 bp.36


 V.C      Competition

 Table 3 also examines whether imperfect competition may help explain the rise in markups,
 motivated by Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016), who find lower mortgage rate pass-through
 in concentrated markets. Using two measures of market concentration interacted with a
 COVID-19 dummy (= 1 from March 14, 2020, onward), we find no evidence that con-
 centration reduced pass-through of lower rates during this episode. In column 4, the
 concentration measure is the share of mortgages originated in 2019 by the metro area's
 top four lenders, while in column 5 it is the local Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI).
 Both measures are derived from 2019 HMDA data and standardized to a mean of zero
 and a standard deviation of one. Neither interaction term is statistically significant, and
 the confidence bounds exclude any economically significant effect.37

    We also consider the possibility that the pandemic itself reduced competition and
 thereby led to higher markups. Detailed updated measures of local concentration are
 not yet available, but national data provide no support for this hypothesis--in fact, the
 market share of the largest lenders if anything decreased in Q2 and Q3 of 2020, as we doc-
 ument in Internet Appendix Figure A.11 based on data from Inside Mortgage Finance.
36 Our  sample in Table 3 runs through August 2020. We choose to focus on the early part of the pandemic,
  when the primary-secondary spread was at its largest and the unemployment rate was high, to gauge an
   upper bound on the impact of the economic shock. The unemployment effect is even smaller if we extend
   the sample through the end of 2020.
37 As shown in column 6, the results of Table 3 remain similar if we consider a multivariate specification in-

   cluding interactions for the virus spread, unemployment, and concentration together. In Internet Appendix
  Table A.4, we also estimate the same models using an alternative data set of conventional conforming loans,
   the McDash data. Again we find little relationship between interest rates and either virus spread or market
   concentration, and the effect of unemployment is also insignificant (with a negative point estimate).


                                                      24
    In short, the rise in mortgage spreads during the pandemic is a national phenomenon,
and is not significantly related to the degree of virus spread, the depth of the economic
crisis, or local market concentration. Consistent with these findings, Internet Appendix
Figure A.12 shows, based on Optimal Blue data, that although mortgage rates do vary
across metro areas, the differences are generally small, and from early 2019 through late
2020, the rank ordering of metro areas is quite persistent.


V.D    Shopping

Even if there are many lenders, each originator may enjoy market power if borrowers do
not search extensively (e.g., Wolinsky, 1986). It is also possible that borrowers search less
actively during refinancing booms, because they do not need to scour the marketplace to
beat their current rate, which could increase lenders' bargaining power (see Bhutta et al.
2021 for some direct evidence on this point). However, mortgage search activity appears
to have been extremely high during the pandemic. Google Trends data in panel A of
Figure 8 indicate that web searches for refinance-related terms spiked in March and re-
mained elevated thereafter. As shown in panel B of Figure 8, borrower search activity
was also unusually high relative to what would be predicted based on the level of refi-
nance incentives, measured by the WAC-10-year spread as in our earlier analysis.

   Also speaking against a "low search intensity" hypothesis, servicer retention--the
share of borrowers refinancing through their existing servicer--decreased during the pan-
demic. In 2020:Q3, only 18 percent of borrowers who refinanced remained with their pre-
vious servicer, the lowest rate for at least 15 years (Black Knight Financial Services, 2020).



VI     Credit Supply in Riskier Market Segments
So far our analysis has focused on prime conforming mortgages. We now turn to other
segments--the FHA market and the jumbo market--that present additional risk and com-
plexity for intermediaries. Studying these riskier segments and comparing them with the
conforming market sheds light on two questions: (1) Did the spike in forbearance and de-
fault risk reduce credit supply for the riskiest borrowers and those not eligible for govern-
ment guarantees; and (2) did Federal Reserve policy intervention through the resumption
of MBS quantitative easing support mortgage credit supply?


                                             25
 VI.A Default Risk and Credit Guarantees

 VI.A.1      The FHA Market

 We previously showed that the rise in forbearance and non-payment risk had little effect
 on prime conforming mortgage rates. But now we revisit this question for the FHA mar-
 ket, where mortgage intermediaries are significantly more exposed to default risk. This
 is because FHA borrowers default at much higher rates, and because institutional fea-
 tures of the FHA market shift more risk to the lender and servicer (Kim et al., 2018).38 For
 instance, servicers are obligated to advance payments on past-due mortgages until termi-
 nation or modification, and they face significant delays before being reimbursed.39 The
 liquidity risk of servicing advances is particularly acute for the nonbank mortgage compa-
 nies that now dominate FHA lending, because these nonbanks are financed by short-term
 debt and cannot issue insured deposits or access government liquidity backstops.40

     First we estimate cross-sectional differences in interest rates between FHA borrow-
 ers with lower versus higher default risk. We proceed using the same methodology as
 in Section V.A, first analyzing interest rates on mortgage offers and rate locks, and then
 studying quantities. For interest rates, we focus on the rate difference between borrow-
 ers with a credit score of 640 versus 680. A credit score of 680 is typical for FHA loans
 (roughly at the 60th percentile in the first quarter of 2020), while 640 is roughly at the 20th
 percentile.41

   Results in Figure 9 show a clear increase in the interest-rate premium for the riskiest
 FHA borrowers. Panel A traces the evolution of the FICO 640-680 interest rate spread in
38 FHA    borrowers are typically lower-income and often first-time home buyers. In June 2020, 15.7 percent of
   FHA loans were 60 or more days past due, compared with only 6.7 percent of conventional loans. (Source:
   2020:Q2 MBA delinquency survey.)
39 The FHA servicer is also not fully compensated for foreclosure costs. Tozer (2019) estimates that uncompen-

   sated costs are about $10,000 per FHA claim. To limit liquidity outflows, the FHA determined that loans
   that re-perform after exiting forbearance can be made current by issuing a partial claim, reimbursing the ser-
  vicer for principal and interest advances during forbearance. The FHA also created a temporary liquidity
   facility for servicers.
40 Urban Institute (2021) calculates that in December 2019, 90 percent of Ginnie Mae mortgages were origi-

   nated by nonbanks, and the nonbank share had increased to 93 percent by December 2020.
41 Internet Appendix Figure A.16 displays the credit score distribution of FHA originations over the 2019­

   2020 period. Other assumptions for the offer data are that we study 30-year purchase-money FRMs with
   zero points, LTV = 95 to 97 percent (which is by far the most common in the FHA segment), and DTI of 36
  percent.



                                                       26
 the offer data. The spread is stable at about 20 bp before the pandemic, but it rises sharply
 beginning in April 2020, coincident with the post-CARES Act surge in forbearance. The
 spread peaks at about 70 bp in June, 50 bp above pre-pandemic levels. The spread then
 decreases and displays some volatility, but it remains elevated through to December 2020.
 The low-FICO spread also increases in the locks data (panel B of Figure 9), although the
 peak increase is only about 25 bp, compared with 50 bp in the offer data.42

     Data on quantities are also consistent with a decline in credit supply to high-risk FHA
 borrowers. Panel C of Figure 9 shows that the number of lenders offering any FHA mort-
 gages drops by one-quarter during the market volatility in March 2020. In the highest
 risk segment (640 FICO) the number of lenders then falls further in April, to half the pre-
 pandemic level, even though lenders re-enter the market for lower risk loans. Lenders
 gradually return to the FICO 640 segment later in 2020. Similarly, Panel D shows that the
 share of FHA purchase rate locks to borrowers with a FICO score lower than 640 drops
 from 30 percent before the pandemic to less than 15 percent in April, coincident with the
 spike in rate spreads and drop in the number of lenders.43 Notably there is no similar
 decline for FHA refinances. For an FHA issuer, refinancing an existing customer does not
 present additional risk, because the issuer is already responsible for advancing payments
 if the borrower defaults.44

      So far we have focused on variation in risk within the FHA market. Section A.4 in
  the Internet Appendix instead compares markups on FHA loans with less risky prime
  conforming loans. We indeed find that both the primary-secondary spread and gain-on-
  sale increased by larger amounts for FHA mortgages, consistent with an amplification of
  the risk premium associated with FHA lending.
42 This  difference between offers and equilibrium outcomes may reflect heterogeneity in supply responses
   across lenders--e.g., a subset of risk-averse lenders post very high rates for low-FICO loans, but these
   lenders comprise only a small share of locks because their uncompetitive rates mean that few borrowers
   choose them. We see a similar pattern in the jumbo results in the following section.
43 As the figure shows, the fraction of loans to lower-than-680 FICO borrowers also falls but by a smaller

   amount. We also find similar patterns for quantities using McDash origination data--see Figure A.16 in
   the Internet Appendix. The timing of the drop in low-credit-score lending is less sharp in McDash than
   Optimal Blue, however, which we interpret as being due to the variable time lag between the lock date and
   origination date (recalling that McDash reports only the latter).
44 In fact, refinancing may even reduce risk by lowering the borrower's monthly payment (Fuster and Willen,

   2017). Furthermore, a large majority of FHA refinances occur under a streamlined refinancing program that
  waives many requirements, including the need to conduct a property appraisal. Thus, operational issues
   related to the pandemic would disproportionately affect the FHA purchase market.




                                                     27
 VI.A.2      The Jumbo Market

 Jumbo mortgages are large loans exceeding the conforming limits for agency securitiza-
 tion. Although jumbo borrowers typically have high incomes and credit scores, jumbos
 are relatively risky for lenders and investors (usually banks) because they do not carry
 government-backed credit guarantees. Comparing jumbo and conforming loans there-
 fore sheds light on whether these guarantees stabilized credit supply in the pandemic.

     We use Optimal Blue data to estimate the interest rate spread on jumbo mortgages
 compared with smaller but otherwise identical conforming mortgages, following our ear-
 lier methodology. Results are presented in Figure 10.

     Panel A plots the jumbo-conforming offer rate spread for a mortgage with LTV of 80
 and credit score of 750. Prior to the pandemic, jumbos carried an interest rate premium
 of 10-25 bp. This spread then increases sharply, to 80-100 bp from April through August
 2020, before declining to about 50 bp by the end of 2020. The estimated spread based on
 rate locks (Panel B) follows a similar pattern, from 0-10 bp to a peak of 40-50 bp from
 April through August, then a decline to about 30 bp by December.45

     Panel B of Figure 10 plots the interest rate premium on "superconforming" (also known
 as "conforming jumbo") mortgages. These are loans that exceed the national conforming
 loan limit but are eligible for agency securitization because they are located in a county
 with a higher local limit (Vickery and Wright, 2013).46 Superconforming loans are some-
 what less liquid and are also less likely to be purchased by the Federal Reserve in its
 quantitative easing program, as we discuss in Section VI.B. Including superconforming
 × time dummies in the rate locks regression model, we find that the superconforming-
 conforming spread does indeed rise early in the pandemic, from 10-20 bp to 30-35 bp,
 coincident with the period of significant Fed MBS purchases. The spike in the spread is
 only temporary, however; it falls back to near-normal levels by mid-June.

        We also find a reduction in the volume of jumbo lending. The number of lenders of-
45 We   also see a rise in the jumbo-conforming spread in time-series rate data from Mortgage News Daily and
   the Mortgage Bankers Association--see Figure A.18 in the Internet Appendix. Insight data also indicate a
   large increase in the jumbo-conforming spread for 5/1 ARMs.
46 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac may not purchase or securitize mortgages exceeding the relevant conforming

   loan limit. The national conforming limit ($510,400 in 2020 for a single-family home) applies in most coun-
   ties, but the limit is higher in counties with high home prices, up to $765,600 in 2020. Superconforming
   mortgages are loans for amounts between the national limit and these higher local limits.


                                                      28
  fering jumbos to FICO 750 borrowers on the Optimal Blue platform drops by more than
  half in the early stages of the pandemic (Panel C of Figure 10), before slowly recovering
  to about 20 percent below pre-pandemic levels by December 2020. For lower FICO bor-
  rowers (680 and 640) the number of active lenders collapses almost to zero. By contrast,
  the number of lenders in the conforming market remains fairly steady, as shown earlier
  in Figure 7. The volume of jumbo locks as a fraction of all rate locks declines by about
  half, both for purchase loans and refinancings (panel D), before recovering.

      This evidence is consistent with a negative supply response, but an important caveat
  is that Optimal Blue primarily reflects mortgages originated by nonbanks. Banks have a
  strong presence in the jumbo market, and several large banks stopped purchasing jumbos
  from nonbanks during the pandemic (Eisen, 2020). A potential concern is that the drop in
  quantity we observe simply reflects substitution in lending from nonbanks to banks.

      For a more representative picture of the jumbo market, we turn to McDash loan-level
  data, which have good coverage of both banks and nonbanks. We estimate linear proba-
  bility models in which the dependent variable equals 1 for a jumbo loan, using McDash
  loans within a 10 percent window around the applicable conforming loan limit (the na-
  tional limit, or the relevant higher local limit for mortgages in high-cost counties). The
  key explanatory variable is a pandemic dummy equal to 1 from April 2020 onward.

     Results in panel A of Table 4 show a significant decline in the fraction of jumbo loans,
  of about 7 to 8 percentage points compared with a sample average of 16 percentage
  points.47 These results are fairly similar across purchase mortgages and refinancings and
  are also robust to controlling for loan characteristics.

     To sum up, the results in this section indicate that heightened forbearance and non-
  payment risk did have some chilling effects on mortgage credit supply outside the prime
  conforming market. Those affected include low-income FHA borrowers as well as high-
  income jumbo borrowers ineligible for government guarantees.48
47 In  Internet Appendix G we trace out the dynamics of the jumbo share by replacing the single pandemic
   dummy with a vector of time dummies. These coefficients show a sustained downward trend in the fraction
   of jumbo loans beginning in early 2020, which bottoms out in the third quarter.
48 In Internet Appendix H we also study lending in the small non-qualified-mortgage ("non-QM") part of the

   jumbo market (the non-QM segment is studied in detail in DeFusco et al., 2019). We find non-QM lending
   drops in line with jumbo lending as a whole during the pandemic, but there is no obvious evidence of an
   amplification of the legal risk associated with non-QM loans.



                                                    29
VI.B Quantitative Easing

The Fed rapidly increased the size of its MBS portfolio during the early months of the cri-
sis, from $1.37 trillion at the start of March 2020 to $1.90 trillion by the start of July (source:
New York Federal Reserve Bank). Since the Fed purchases only agency MBS (excluding
jumbos), our evidence above on the jumbo market may in part reflect the beneficial ef-
fects of Fed QE on mortgage credit supply. Understanding the effects of QE during the
pandemic is also of independent interest.

   The earlier time-series evidence in Figure 2 suggests that the resumption of Fed QE in
mid-March did reduce mortgage financing costs. OAS drops by about 40 bp right after
QE begins, and option cost declines due to a drop in interest rate volatility. These changes
are almost exactly offset by a rise in the primary-secondary spread, however, leaving the
mortgage-Treasury spread almost unchanged.

    A different way to measure these effects that does not just rely on time-series variation
is to study superconforming mortgages exceeding the national conforming limit, as we
already did in Section VI.A.2. Superconforming mortgages are less likely to be purchased
by the Fed because the Fed obtains agency MBS pools through the "to-be-announced" or
TBA market, and pools comprising more than 10 percent of superconforming loans are
not TBA eligible (Vickery and Wright, 2013; Huh and Kim, 2020). Matching eMBS loan-
level data to security-level data on the Fed's MBS holdings, we confirm that the proba-
bility of an agency mortgage ending up in a pool in the Fed's MBS portfolio does indeed
drop sharply just above the national conforming limit, declining by about 40 percent.

    Using this fact, panel B of Table 4 restricts our McDash sample just to high-cost coun-
ties and studies relative shifts in lending around both the national conforming loan limit
(columns 1 through 3) and the higher local limit (columns 4 through 6). This allows us to
disentangle the effects of Fed QE from credit guarantees. The results indicate that both QE
and guarantees appear to have promoted credit supply--lending drops in relative terms
just above both the national and local limits during the pandemic. The effects around
the local limit (the upper bound to qualify for government guarantees) are quantitatively
larger relative to the sample mean, however, suggesting that credit guarantees had a rela-
tively larger effect in bolstering credit supply.

   Figure A.20 in the Internet Appendix further explores the dynamics of these effects,

                                                30
finding that the loan volume effects around the national limit (which reflect only QE) are
significant in the early stages of the pandemic, but they are less persistent than the effects
at the local limit. This is consistent with our earlier interest rate estimates in Figure 10,
which show that the superconforming-conforming spread is elevated only through June
2020, while the jumbo-conforming spread remains high throughout 2020.

   We conclude that Fed QE lowered mortgage rates and expanded credit supply dur-
ing the pandemic, but that the direct effects of QE may have faded after a few months.
Our estimates do not reflect the full general-equilibrium effects of QE, however, and thus
should be interpreted accordingly.


VI.C     Summing Up

Our results indicate that government-backed credit guarantees supported mortgage lend-
ing during the pandemic, evidenced by a relative increase in rates and decline in quan-
tities in the jumbo market, which does not feature guarantees. Our analysis of the FHA
market, however, also shows that public guarantees are not always sufficient to fully insu-
late lenders against default risk--we find evidence of a contraction in supply for high-risk
FHA borrowers despite the presence of guarantees. Federal Reserve quantitative easing
also supported credit supply, particularly in the early stages of the pandemic.



VII     Conclusion
The mortgage market experienced a historic boom in 2020, with record origination vol-
umes and lender profits. But while many borrowers benefited from record-low mortgage
rates, the evidence presented in this paper suggests that intermediation frictions limited
the pass-through of lower rates to households. This limited pass-through is only partially
explained by the historical relationship between markups and mortgage demand. Several
pieces of evidence indicate that operational frictions reduced the elasticity of mortgage
supply; in other words, hiring new workers and expanding capacity was more difficult
than usual, keeping lender markups high. At the same time, there was a shift in the
underwriting of complex loans toward more elastic "fintech" lenders.

   As in the 2008 financial crisis, government credit guarantees have played an impor-


                                             31
tant role in stabilizing credit supply, reflected in a larger increase in mortgage interest rate
spreads in the jumbo segment of the market, where such guarantees are absent. However,
our results also highlight the fact that such guarantees have not fully insulated lenders
from risk, and that this residual exposure has been priced into mortgage interest rates at
least for some borrowers. Our results are suggestive of some surprising "barbell" distribu-
tional effects of the pandemic, with low-income FHA borrowers and high-income jumbo
borrowers experiencing a decline in credit availability relative to middle-class borrowers.

    Our results show that during the last three quarters of 2020, intermediaries collected
4 to 5 percent of a mortgage's balance for the service of linking borrowers with savers,
or about $160 billion in total. One surprising question is whether for rate-and-term re-
finances, it makes sense for intermediaries to collect anything. For an individual lender
making a loan to a new borrower, careful underwriting makes sense, as the lender is tak-
ing on a new risk. But from the standpoint of the economy as a whole, a rate-and-term
refinance uniformly lowers the likelihood of default, even if no new underwriting is done.

    The costs of socially unnecessary underwriting cascade across the economy. For some
borrowers, the high price of intermediation makes refinancing uneconomic. For borrow-
ers who do refinance, the reduction in rates is smaller. Binding capacity constraints dur-
ing lending booms mean that rate-and-term refinances starve resources from the more
socially useful task of underwriting purchase loans and cash-out refinances. In 2020, op-
erational frictions related to the pandemic only amplified these capacity constraints. Our
findings, therefore, reinforce arguments for both streamlined refinances and automati-
cally refinancing mortgage products. Much like during the financial crisis, such products
would have substantially strengthened the transmission of low interest rates to house-
holds during the pandemic.




                                              32
References
A GARWAL , S., S. C HOMSISENGPHET, H. K IEFER , L. C. K IEFER , AND P. C. M EDINA
  (2021): "Inequality During the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Case of Savings from Mort-
  gage Refinancing," Working Paper.

A MROMIN , G., N. B HUTTA , AND B. J. K EYS (2020): "Refinancing, Monetary Policy, and
  the Credit Cycle," Annual Review of Financial Economics, 12, 67­93.

A N , X., L. C ORDELL , L. G ENG , AND K. L EE (2021): "Inequality in the Time of COVID-19:
  Evidence from Mortgage Delinquency and Forbearance," Working Paper 21-09, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

B ERGER , D. W., K. M ILBRADT, F. T OURRE , AND J. VAVRA (2020): "Mortgage Prepay-
   ment and Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy," Working Paper 25157, National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

B ERRY, K. AND A. K LINE (2020): "Virus Scare Creates Perfect Storm for Mortgage
   Lenders," American Banker, March 19.

B HUTTA , N., A. F USTER , AND A. H IZMO (2021): "Paying Too Much? Borrower Sophisti-
  cation and Overpayment in the US Mortgage Market," Discussion Paper 14924, CEPR.

B LACK K NIGHT F INANCIAL S ERVICES (2020): "Mortgage Monitor: October 2020 Report,"
  Tech. rep.

B OYARCHENKO , N., A. F USTER , AND D. O. L UCCA (2019): "Understanding Mortgage
  Spreads," Review of Financial Studies, 32, 3799­3850.

B RACKE , P., K. C ROXSON , D. FAKHRI , P. S URICO , AND T. VALLETTI (2020): "Mortgage
   Market Disruptions," Occasional Paper 57, Financial Conduct Authority.

B UCHAK , G., G. M ATVOS , T. P ISKORSKI , AND A. S ERU (2018): "Fintech, Regulatory Ar-
  bitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks," Journal of Financial Economics, 130, 453 ­ 483.

C ALEM , P., F. C OVAS , AND J. W U (2013): "The Impact of the 2007 Liquidity Shock on
  Bank Jumbo Mortgage Lending," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45, 59­91.

C AMPBELL , J. Y., N. C LARA , AND J. F. C OCCO (2020): "Structuring Mortgages for
  Macroeconomic Stability," Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

                                            33
C APPONI , A., R. J IA , AND D. A. R IOS (2021): "The Effects of Mortgage Forbearance on
  Refinancing: Evidence from the COVID-19 Period," Covid Economics, 68, 1­46.

C HERRY, S. F., E. X. J IANG , G. M ATVOS , T. P ISKORSKI , AND A. S ERU (2021): "Govern-
  ment and Private Household Debt Relief during COVID-19," Working Paper 28357,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

D AVIDSON , A. AND A. L EVIN (2014): Mortgage Valuation Models: Embedded Options, Risk,
  and Uncertainty, Oxford University Press.

D E F USCO , A. A., S. J OHNSON , AND J. M ONDRAGON (2019): "Regulating Household
  Leverage," Review of Economic Studies, 87, 914­958.

D I M AGGIO , M., A. K ERMANI , B. J. K EYS , T. P ISKORSKI , R. R AMCHARAN , A. S ERU ,
  AND V. YAO (2017): "Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household Con-
  sumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging," American Economic Review, 107, 3550­88.

D I M AGGIO , M., A. K ERMANI , AND C. J. PALMER (2020): "How Quantitative Easing
  Works: Evidence on the Refinancing Channel," Review of Economic Studies, 87, 1498­
  1528.

E BERLY, J. AND A. K RISHNAMURTHY (2014): "Efficient Credit Policies in a Housing Debt
   Crisis," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45, 73­136.

E ISEN , B. (2020): "Wells Fargo Curtails Jumbo Loans Amid Market Turmoil," Wall Street
   Journal, April 4.

E REL , I. AND J. L IEBERSOHN (2020): "Does FinTech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from
   the Paycheck Protection Program," Working Paper 27659, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.

FABOZZI , F. J., ed. (2016): The Handbook of Mortgage-Backed Securities, Oxford University
  Press, 7th ed.

F EDERAL H OUSING F INANCE A GENCY (2020): "FHFA Addresses Servicer Liquidity Con-
   cerns, Announces Four Month Advance Obligation Limit for Loans in Forbearance,"
   Press release, April 21.




                                           34
F USTER , A., L. G OODMAN , D. L UCCA , L. M ADAR , L. M OLLOY, AND P. W ILLEN (2013):
  "The Rising Gap between Primary and Secondary Mortgage Rates," Federal Reserve Bank
   of New York Economic Policy Review, 19, 17­39.

F USTER , A., S. H. L O , AND P. S. W ILLEN (2017): "The Time-Varying Price of Financial
   Intermediation in the Mortgage Market," Staff Report 805, Federal Reserve Bank of
   New York.

F USTER , A., M. P LOSSER , P. S CHNABL , AND J. V ICKERY (2019): "The Role of Technology
   in Mortgage Lending," Review of Financial Studies, 32, 1854­1899.

F USTER , A. AND P. S. W ILLEN (2017): "Payment Size, Negative Equity, and Mortgage
   Default," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9, 167­91.

G UREN , A. M., A. K RISHNAMURTHY, AND T. J. M C Q UADE (2020): "Mortgage Design in
  an Equilibrium Model of the Housing Market," Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

H ORVATH , A., B. K AY, AND C. W IX (2020): "The COVID-19 Shock and Consumer Credit:
  Evidence from Credit Card Data," SSRN Electronic Journal.

H UGHES , C. (2020): "Coronavirus Complicates Home Buying and Mortgage Refinanc-
  ing," New York Times, March 23.

H UH , Y. AND Y. S. K IM (2020): "The Real Effects of Secondary Market Trading Structure:
  Evidence from the Mortgage Market," Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.

I VERSON , B., J. WANG , J. YANG , AND R. K LUENDER (2020): "Bankruptcy and the COVID-
   19 Crisis," Working Paper.

I VEY, B. (2020): "Lender/Servicer Retention Rates Fall Even as Refis Rise," Inside Mortgage
   Finance, 2020:35, September 11.

J IANG , E., G. M ATVOS , T. P ISKORSKI , AND A. S ERU (2020): "Banking without Deposits:
   Evidence from Shadow Bank Call Reports," Working Paper 26903, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

K EYS , B. J., D. G. P OPE , AND J. C. P OPE (2016): "Failure to Refinance," Journal of Financial
  Economics, 122, 482­499.




                                               35
K IM , Y. S., S. M. L AUFER , K. P ENCE , R. S TANTON , AND N. WALLACE (2018): "Liquidity
   Crises in the Mortgage Market," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 49, 347­428.

K LEIMANN , J. (2020): "On Earnings Debut, Rocket Reveals Plans to Dominate the U.S.
  Mortgage Market," HousingWire, September 3.

K WAN , A., C. L IN , V. P URSIAINEN , AND M. TAI (2021): "Stress Testing Banks' Digital
  Capabilities: Evidence From the COVID-19 Pandemic," Working Paper, University of
  Hong Kong and University of St. Gallen.

L AMBIE -H ANSON , L. (2020): "Residential Mortgage Refinancing During the COVID-19
  Pandemic," Special report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

M C M ANUS , D. AND E. YANNOPOULOS (2021): "COVID-19 Mortgage Forbearances:
 Drivers and Payment Behavior," Journal of Structured Finance, 27.

M ORTGAGE B ANKERS A SSOCIATION (2019): "Implementation of MBO Transitional Au-
 thority," Issue brief.

------ (2021): "Mortgage Credit Availability Decreased in December," Data Release.

S CHARFSTEIN , D. AND A. S UNDERAM (2016): "Market Power in Mortgage Lending and
   the Transmission of Monetary Policy," Working Paper, Harvard University.

S HARPE , S. A. AND S. M. S HERLUND (2016): "Crowding Out Effects of Refinancing on
   New Purchase Mortgages," Review of Industrial Organization, 48, 209­239.

T OZER , T. (2019): "A Primer and Perspective on Ginnie Mae," Milken Institute Discussion
  Paper.

U RBAN I NSTITUTE (2021): "Housing Finance at a Glance: A Monthly Chartbook," Febru-
  ary.

V ICKERY, J. AND J. W RIGHT (2013): "TBA Trading and Liquidity in the Agency MBS
   Market," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 19, 1­18.

W OLINSKY, A. (1986): "True Monopolistic Competition as a Result of Imperfect Informa-
 tion," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 493­511.




                                           36
Figure 2: Accounting for the Rise in the Mortgage-Treasury Spread During Two Crises
                             A. COVID-19 Pandemic (2020)
 150


 100


  50


   0


 -50
                                    0



                                                  0




                                                                                                            0


                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                 20
            0




                                                                       0


                                                                                   0
                        0




                                                           20




                                                                                              0
                                 -2



                                              -2




                                                                                                         -2


                                                                                                                     -2




                                                                                                                                            -2
           -2




                                                                    -2


                                                                                -2
                     -2




                                                                                             -2




                                                                                                                                  -
                                                           -
                               ar



                                             pr




                                                                                                       ep



                                                                                                                   ct




                                                                                                                                           ec
                                                                                                                               ov
     an




                                                                  un



                                                                              ul
                   eb




                                                        ay




                                                                                         ug
                                                                            -J




                                                                                                                -O
                            -M



                                         -A


                                                      -M




                                                                                                                            -N


                                                                                                                                       -D
   -J


                 -F




                                                                -J




                                                                                       -A



                                                                                                    -S
                                                                           01
                                        01




                                                                                                              01
 01




                                                               01
                01


                          01




                                                                                     01




                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                  01




                                                                                                                                      01
                                                   01




                                             Benchmark T-yield - 10y                   OAS

                                             Option cost                               Primary-secondary spread


                                             B. Global Financial Crisis (2007-2009)
  200




  100




       0




 -100
                Jul-07           Oct-07           Jan-08        Apr-08          Jul-08            Oct-08        Jan-09           Apr-09          Jul-09


                                              Benchmark T-yield - 10y                  OAS

                                              Option cost                              Primary-secondary spread

Black dots show the change in spread between headline mortgage rate (from PMMS) and 10-year Treasury
yields relative to the beginning of each episode, in basis points. Decomposition based on the methodology
described in Section III.A. Data sources: Freddie Mac PMMS, Optimal Blue, J.P. Morgan Markets.
                                                                       37
                                         Figure 3: Intermediation Markups in the Conforming Market
                                                                                     A. Primary-Secondary Spread
                                               280
                                                                    Freddie Mac PMMS
                                               260                  MBA
                                                                    Optimal Blue Insight
             Primary-Secondary Spread (bps)


                                               240

                                               220

                                               200

                                               180

                                               160

                                               140

                                               120

                                               100

                                                 80
                                                        9


                                                                    19


                                                                               19



                                                                                              9


                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                      9


                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                         20



                                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                       01




                                                                                         01


                                                                                                       01


                                                                                                                  01


                                                                                                                                02




                                                                                                                                                                   02


                                                                                                                                                                                 02


                                                                                                                                                                                            02


                                                                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                20


                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                 n2




                                                                                         l2


                                                                                                   p2


                                                                                                                 v2


                                                                                                                           n2




                                                                                                                                                                   l2


                                                                                                                                                                             p2


                                                                                                                                                                                           v2


                                                                                                                                                                                                    n2
                                                             ar


                                                                          ay




                                                                                                                                       ar


                                                                                                                                                    ay
                                                                                     ju




                                                                                                                                                               ju
                                                                                                             no




                                                                                                                                                                                       no
                                                ja




                                                                                                  se




                                                                                                                           ja




                                                                                                                                                                            se




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                                            m




                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                    01




                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                         m




                                                                                                                                                 m
                                              01




                                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                              01


                                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                                                                        01


                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                        01




                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                               01



                                                                                                       B. Gain-On-Sale
                                                   6
                                                                Freddie Mac PMMS
                                                                MBA
                                               5.5
                                                                Optimal Blue Insight

                                                   5

                                               4.5
             Gain on Sale (%)




                                                   4

                                               3.5

                                                   3

                                               2.5

                                                   2

                                               1.5
                                                       9


                                                                  9


                                                                               19



                                                                                            9


                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                      9


                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                            0


                                                                                                                                                         20



                                                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                     01


                                                                01




                                                                                         01


                                                                                                     01


                                                                                                                   01


                                                                                                                                02


                                                                                                                                          02




                                                                                                                                                                   02


                                                                                                                                                                               02


                                                                                                                                                                                             02


                                                                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                n2



                                                                2




                                                                                       l2


                                                                                                   p2


                                                                                                                 v2


                                                                                                                           n2



                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                 l2


                                                                                                                                                                             p2


                                                                                                                                                                                           v2


                                                                                                                                                                                                    n2
                                                             ar


                                                                          ay




                                                                                                                                       ar


                                                                                                                                                  ay
                                                                                     ju




                                                                                                                                                               ju
                                                                                                            no




                                                                                                                                                                                       no
                                                ja




                                                                                                  se




                                                                                                                          ja




                                                                                                                                                                            se




                                                                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                                            m




                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                    01




                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                         m




                                                                                                                                                 m
                                              01




                                                                                                                        01




                                                                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                              01


                                                                                                          01




                                                                                                                                                                        01


                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                        01




                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                               01




Primary-secondary spread (panel A) and gain-on-sale (panel B) measured based on the methodologies
described in Sections III.A.1 and III.C, respectively. Data sources: Freddie Mac PMMS, Optimal Blue, J.P.
Morgan Markets, MBA (via Haver Analytics).
Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020.

                                                                                                                          38
                                                                         Figure 4: Lenders' Reported Net Production Income
                                                                                          A. In basis points

                                                                200
             Net Production Income (bps)


                                                                150




                                                                100




                                                                 50




                                                                     0
                                                                          q1

                                                                                   q1

                                                                                         q1

                                                                                                   q1

                                                                                                            q1

                                                                                                                   q1

                                                                                                                            q1

                                                                                                                                     q1

                                                                                                                                           q1

                                                                                                                                                    q1

                                                                                                                                                          q1

                                                                                                                                                                   q1

                                                                                                                                                                         q1
                                                                         09

                                                                               10

                                                                                        11

                                                                                               12

                                                                                                        13

                                                                                                                 14

                                                                                                                        15

                                                                                                                                 16

                                                                                                                                          17

                                                                                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                        21
                                                                 20

                                                                              20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                              20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                          B. Multiplied by average originated loan volume
             Avg. Net Production Income per Firm, Million USD




                                                                25



                                                                20



                                                                15



                                                                10



                                                                 5



                                                                 0
                                                                         q1

                                                                               q1

                                                                                         q1

                                                                                                  q1

                                                                                                         q1

                                                                                                                  q1

                                                                                                                           q1

                                                                                                                                  q1

                                                                                                                                           q1

                                                                                                                                                    q1

                                                                                                                                                          q1

                                                                                                                                                                   q1

                                                                                                                                                                         q1
                                                                     09

                                                                              10

                                                                                        11

                                                                                              12

                                                                                                        13

                                                                                                                 14

                                                                                                                        15

                                                                                                                                 16

                                                                                                                                          17

                                                                                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                        21
                                                                20

                                                                          20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                    20




Data source: Mortgage Bankers Association Quarterly Performance Report (QPR). Sample period: 2008:Q3-
2020:Q4. Series in panel A is "Total Net Production Income, Basis Points, Simple Average" from Table B2
of the QPR. For panel B, this series is multiplied by "Avg. Total Loans Originated ($000s)" from the same
table.
                                                                                                                      39
                                                                     Figure 5: Intermediation Markups and the Demand for Refinancing

                A. Prim.-Sec. Spread vs. Proxy for Refi Incentives                                                                                                              B. Prim.-Sec. Spread vs. Application Volume
                                            275                                                                                                                                 275
                                                  2012-2019                                                                                                                           2012-2019
                                                  2020                                                                                                                                2020
                                            250                                                                                      4                                          250                                                             4
                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                 8 8                                                                                                          8     8 8
                                                                                                                                    7                                                                                                          5 7 7
                                                                                                                                  74
                                                                                                                                  5 4                                                                                                      4  4
           Primary-Secondary Spread (bps)




                                                                                                                                               Primary-Secondary Spread (bps)
                                                                                                                            93 77 4                                                                                                          9  4 7
                                                                                                                            6     5   4                                                                                                      4        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      63
                                            225                                                                              8 57                                               225                                                       7 85 5
                                                                                                                             6                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                               665                                                                                                    5       66
                                                                                                                            9                                                                                                     9
                                            200                                                                             10
                                                                                                                            9                                                   200                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                                     10      9                                                                                                                 9 10

                                                                                                              12 11 10 10
                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11
                                            175                                                              12
                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                             121111                                                             175                           12                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                            12       33          3                                                                           12                                 312                 3      3

                                            150                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                        2                                                                                                                                       2
                                            125                                       1 1          12                                                                           125                            11
                                                                                     1            2
                                                                                                  2                                                                                                            1         2   21 2

                                            100                                                                                                                                 100


                                             75                                                                                                                                  75
                                                  1           1.5           2               2.5               3                          3.5                                          200         400               600                        800           1000       1200
                                                                    WAC-10 Year Treasury Yield (%)                                                                                                          MBA Application Index
40




                                            C. Gain-on-Sale vs. Proxy for Refi Incentives                                                                                        D. Gain-on-Sale vs. vs. Application Volume
                                            5.5                                                                            8                                                    5.5                                                           8
                                                  2012-2019                                                             9 8 4 48                                                      2012-2019                                              9 44 8 8
                                                  2020                                                                 10        7
                                                                                                                                 44                                                   2020                                                    410 7
                                                                                                                         8     5
                                                                                                                               74                                                                                                           8 45      7
                                                                                                              12    10 9                                                                                                                   4 1210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                             5                                                                          6 77
                                                                                                                        9                                                        5                                                              12 7 7 6
                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                             12 11
                                                                                                                       9     7                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9       7 9 12
                                                                                                            12 11            65                                                                                                              56 6 11
                                                                                                                 11 10 6 36 5                                                                                12                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5 11     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                            4.5                                                                11 10          5
                                                                                                                                                                                4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5              1110
                                                                                                                   10                                                                                                                           10
           Gain on Sale (%)




                                                                                                                                               Gain on Sale (%)
                                             4                                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                        3                                                                                                                                                  3
                                            3.5                                                                                                                                 3.5
                                                                                                                    3            3                                                                                                              3                   3

                                             3                                                          2                                                                        3                                                              2
                                                                                      1 1                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                     1             1                                                                                                           1              1
                                                                                                  2 2                                                                                                                   2    2
                                            2.5                                                   2                                                                             2.5                                               2


                                             2                                                                                                                                   2


                                            1.5                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                  1           1.5           2           2.5                   3                          3.5                                          200         400              600                         800           1000       1200
                                                                    WAC-10 Year Treasury Yield (%)                                                                                                      MBA Mortgage Application Index

     Notes: numbers next to red squares denote the calendar month in 2020. The trend line and the 90% confidence intervals are estimates
     using data 2012-2019. Spreads and gain on sale computed based on the methodology described in Section III.C. Data sources: Freddie
     Mac PMMS; J.P. Morgan Markets; SitusAMC; Mortgage Bankers Association (via Haver Analytics).
        Figure 6: Mortgage Loan Officer Job Postings and Employment Growth

                   A. Mortgage Loan Officer Postings and Employment
                                                                                                                          Counterfactual
                                                                                                                            employment      400




                                                                                                                                                  In thousands
                                                                                                                                            350
                                                                                Actual Employment
                                                                                                                                            300

                                                                                                                                            250
                            Per 100 Employees




                                                 2.5

                                                 2.0
                                                                                  Postings per 100
                                                 1.5                                Employees

                                                 1.0

                                                 0.5
                                                               2012      2013     2014   2015     2016      2017      2018    2019   2020



                                  B. Predicted versus Actual Employment Growth

                                                0.04
                    Actual Employment Change




                                                0.03

                                                0.02                            Pre-COVID

                                                0.01
                                                                                                                                COVID
                                                0.00

                                               -0.01

                                               -0.02

                                               -0.03
                                                       -0.03          -0.02      -0.01    0.00       0.01          0.02      0.03    0.04
                                                                              Predicted Employment Change


Panel A shows mortgage employment and postings per employee from the BLS Establishment Survey and
Burning Glass Technologies. Panel B compares predicted and actual values from the regression

                                  log MLOt+1 - log MLOt =  +  1 pt +  2 pt-1 +  2 pt-2 +  t

where MLOt and pt correspond to mortgage employment and postings per employee in Panel A. Baseline
regression is run on data from 3/2012 to 2/2020. Dots labeled "COVID" are out-of-sample predictions
for 3/2020 to 12/2020. Counterfactual employment in Panel A uses the predicted growth rates from the
regression to compute employment in the COVID period.




                                                                                             41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42




                                                                                                                                                                                                              No. Lenders                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                               oc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                                               t2




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        160
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                                                                            no
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                                               v2
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                                               c2
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                                             ja
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  0
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                                            fe
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                                                               b2
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                        02                                                                                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m              0
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               m           0                                                                                                                                                                                                ar
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                                                                               r2
                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                                                                                            02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                           01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m             0
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                            m                 0
                                                                                                                                                ay                                                                                                                                                                                                          ay
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     02
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                 0
                                                                                                                                           01                                                                                                                                                                                                               ju
                                                                                                                                                ju                                                                                                                                                                                                              l2
                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                           01               0
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                                            au
                                                                                                                                               au                                                                                                                                                                                                              g2
                                                                                                                                                   g2                                                                                                                                                                                                                02
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           se
                                                                                                                                               se
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                                                                          p2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0




national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020. Data source: Optimal Blue
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                                          t2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                                          v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C. Number of lenders posting offers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A. Offer rate spread: FICO 680 vs 750




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                                          c2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2




                                                                                                                                                                  FICO=750
                                                                                                                                                                             FICO=680
                                                                                                                                                                                        FICO=640
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Share                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                               oc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8




                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                                               t2




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                                                                            no
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                                               v2
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                                               c2
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ja
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                               fe
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                                                               b2
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                          01            02
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m              0
                                                                                                                                               m                                                                                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                          01              20                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                                                                          ap
Notes: Measures of credit supply computed using the methodology described in Section V.A. Vertical line represents the declaration of a

                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                                                                                          r2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m             0
                                                                                                                                            m                                                                                                                                                                                                               ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 7: Credit Supply in the Conforming Market




                                                                                                                                                ay                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                                                           01
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                 0
                                                                                                                                           01
                                                                                                                                                ju                                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                                                                                          l2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                                       01               0
                                                                                                                                               au                                                                                                                                                                                                          au
                                                                                                                                                   g2                                                                                                                                                                                                          g2
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                                                                             02
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                                                                          01                  0
                                                                                                                                               se                                                                                                                                                                                                          se
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                                                                          p2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Purchase, FICO<640
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Purchase, FICO<680




                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                                          t2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                                          v2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B. Locks rate spread: FICO 680 vs 740+




                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                                          c2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D. Distribution of rate locks by credit score




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Refi, FICO<640
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Refi, FICO<680




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                              Figure 8: Web Searches for Mortgage Refinancing

                                             A. Google trends search index for refinance related terms
                                       400




                                       300
                 Search Index




                                       200




                                       100




                                        0
                                         2012m1      2013m1   2014m1   2015m1   2016m1   2017m1       2018m1   2019m1      2020m1         2021m1



                                                     B. Google searches vs. the refinance incentive
                                       400
                                                  2012-2019
                                                  2020                                                                           3



                                       300
                 Google Search Index




                                       200                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                         68 5

                                                                                                                            10       9
                                                                                                        2        12
                                                                                                                      11
                                       100                                                  1




                                        0
                                              1                1.5              2               2.5               3                         3.5
                                                                        WAC-10 Year Treasury Yield

Notes: The Google search index is constructed by averaging the searches for the following terms: mortgage rate, mortgage refinance,
mortgage lender, refinance cost, mortgage cost. Data source: Google Trends.




                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 44




                                                                                                                                                                                                        No. Lenders                                                                                                                   01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                               oc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                               t2




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        160
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                                                            no
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                               v2
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                               c2
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                           01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                             ja
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                           01                  0
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                            fe
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                                               b2
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                        02                                                                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m              0
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               m           0                                                                                                                                                                                ar
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                                                               r2
                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                                                                            02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                           01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m             0
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                            m                 0
                                                                                                                                                ay                                                                                                                                                                                          ay
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     02
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                        01                 0
                                                                                                                                           01                                                                                                                                                                                               ju
                                                                                                                                                ju                                                                                                                                                                                              l2
                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                           01               0
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                            au
                                                                                                                                               au                                                                                                                                                                                              g2
                                                                                                                                                   g2                                                                                                                                                                                                02
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           se
                                                                                                                                               se
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                                                          p2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0




national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020. Data source: Optimal Blue
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                          t2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                          v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C. Number of lenders posting offers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A. Offer rate spread: FICO 640 vs 680




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                          c2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                          n2




                                                                                                                                                                  FICO=750
                                                                                                                                                                             FICO=680
                                                                                                                                                                                        FICO=640
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Share                                                                                                                    01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                          oc




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                          t2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                                                       01                  9
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                          v2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                        01                  9
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                          c2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                                                        01                  9
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                                          fe
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                                                                          b2
                                                                                                                                                        02                                                                                                                                                                                           02
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               m           0                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m              0
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                          01              20                                                                                                                                                                          01              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 9: Credit Supply in the FHA Market




                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                                                          ap
Notes: Measures of credit supply computed using the methodology described in Section V.A. Vertical line represents the declaration of a

                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                                                                          r2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                            m                 0                                                                                                                                                                       01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m             0
                                                                                                                                                ay                                                                                                                                                                                          ay
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                           01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                 0
                                                                                                                                                ju                                                                                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                                                                          l2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                       01               0
                                                                                                                                               au                                                                                                                                                                                          au
                                                                                                                                                   g2                                                                                                                                                                                          g2
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                                                             02
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                                                          01                  0
                                                                                                                                               se                                                                                                                                                                                          se
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                                                          p2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Purchase, FICO<640
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Purchase, FICO<680




                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                                                          t2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                                                       01                  0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                                                          no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                                                          v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B. Rate lock spread: FICO 640 vs 680




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                                                          c2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D. Distribution of rate locks by credit score




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                                        01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FICO=[640,659)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FICO=[620,639)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Refi, FICO<640
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Refi, FICO<680




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               45




                                                                                                                                                                                      No. Lenders                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               oc




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                            120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   160
                                                                                                                                                    t2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                         01
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                          oc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2




                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                             t2
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                         01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                           no
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                             v2
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                         01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                           de
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                             c2
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                         01                  9
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                          ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n2
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                  02
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                              01                  0
                                                                                                                                                        02                                                                                                                                               fe
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               m           0                                                                                                                                                  b2
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                  01             02
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                  m              0
                                                                                                                                          01              20                                                                                                                                              ar
                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                              01              20
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                              ap
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                            m                 0                                                                                                                                               r2
                                                                                                                                                ay                                                                                                                                                  01          02
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                               m             0
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                               ay
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                   01              20
                                                                                                                                                    n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                              ju
                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                                                                                                           01                                                                                                                                                                      02
                                                                                                                                                ju
                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                               01                 0
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                               ju
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                               l2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   02
                                                                                                                                               au
                                                                                                                                                   g2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    01               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         au
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                     g2
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                                                                               se                                                                                                                                                   01                  0
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                   se
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                   p2
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                     02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    01                  0




national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020. Data source: Optimal Blue
                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                        oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                        t2
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                        no
                                                                                                                                                    v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C. Number of lenders posting offers

                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                   v2
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                                     02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    01                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A. Offer rate jumbo-conforming spread




                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                        de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                      01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                        ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FICO=750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FICO=680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FICO=640




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                            Share                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Spread (%)
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .7




                                                                                                                                               oc




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                           .05
                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .25




                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                        t2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                          01                  9                                                                                                                                     01                  9
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                        no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                        v2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                      01                  9
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                        de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                                                         01                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                          01                 9                                                                                                                                      01                  9
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                        ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                     01                  0
                                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                        fe
                                                                                                                                                    b2                                                                                                                                                        b2
                                                                                                                                                        02                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m              0
                                                                                                                                               m                                                                                                                                                          ar
                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                          20                                                                                                                                        01              20
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                               ap                                                                                                                                                        ap
Notes: Measures of credit supply computed using the methodology described in Section V.A. Vertical line represents the declaration of a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 10: Credit Supply in the Jumbo Market




                                                                                                                                                    r2                                                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m             0
                                                                                                                                            m                                                                                                                                                             ay
                                                                                                                                                ay
                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                               ju                                                                                                                                                        ju
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                           01                 0                                                                                                                                      01                 0
                                                                                                                                                ju                                                                                                                                                        ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Purchase




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Refinance




                                                                                                                                                    l2                                                                                                                                                             02
                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                     01               0
                                                                                                                                               au                                                                                                                                                        au
                                                                                                                                                   g2                                                                                                                                                        g2
                                                                                                                                                      02                                                                                                                                                           02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B. Rate lock spreads




                                                                                                                                          01               0                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                                               se                                                                                                                                                        se
                                                                                                                                                    p2                                                                                                                                                        p2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                      01                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D. Share of jumbo rate locks




                                                                                                                                               oc                                                                                                                                                        oc
                                                                                                                                                    t2                                                                                                                                                        t2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                  0                                                                                                                                     01                  0
                                                                                                                                               no                                                                                                                                                        no
                                                                                                                                                    v2                                                                                                                                                        v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jumbo-Conforming Spread




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                      01                  0
                                                                                                                                               de                                                                                                                                                        de
                                                                                                                                                    c2                                                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                          01                 0                                                                                                                                      01                  0
                                                                                                                                               ja                                                                                                                                                        ja
                                                                                                                                                    n2                                                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Super Conforming to Conforming Spread




                                                                                                                                                         02                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                         1
                 Table 1: Intermediation Markups and Mortgage Demand

                                                    (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)
                                                    Primary-Secondary               Gain-on-Sale
                                                        Spread (bp)            ($ per $100 face value)
   Refi incentive (WAC - 10 Year Treasury)       21.71                        0.655
                                                  (1.996)                     (0.0636)

   MBA Applications Index                                      0.0718                        0.00192
                                                                (0.0109)                     (0.000369)

   March - May dummy                             76.81          82.58         1.053           1.300
                                                  (10.45)        (13.20)       (0.270)         (0.353)

   June - August dummy                           85.77          90.42         1.383           1.598
                                                  (5.268)        (5.642)       (0.154)         (0.178)

   September - October dummy                     52.19          55.34         1.285           1.451
                                                  (7.214)        (8.218)       (0.189)         (0.223)

   November - December dummy                     37.67          33.81         1.317           1.285
                                                  (3.042)        (4.679)       (0.114)         (0.165)

   Constant                                      70.88          87.98         1.484           2.100
                                                  (4.621)        (5.368)       (0.188)         (0.216)
   N                                                466            466           466             466
   Mean Y                                         125.28         125.28          3.04            3.04
   R2                                               0.91           0.86          0.78            0.67
   RMSE                                             9.91          12.26          0.39            0.47
   RMSE (no dummies, -Feb. 2020)                    8.93          11.29          0.38            0.47

Data sources: Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA), J.P. Morgan Markets, and Freddie Mac 30-Year Fixed
Rate Mortgage Average in the United States [MORTGAGE30US] and Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System (US) 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate [DGS10], both retrieved from FRED, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. MBA applications index is a three-week backward-looking moving average.
Models include month-of-year dummies (coefficients not displayed). Newey-West standard errors (6 lags)
in parentheses. *  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                 46
             Table 2: Changes in Fintech Mortgage Lending During the Pandemic

  Dependent variable = 100 if mortgage originator is a fintech lender, zero otherwise
                          (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)

                           Purchase Mortgages                     Refinancings                        All Loans

  Pandemic              2.77      2.11      1.39         -0.22       -0.24       -0.83     3.80        0.76         0.06
                         (0.27)    (0.28)    (0.27)      (0.52)      (0.26)      (0.33)     (0.24)     (0.24)      (0.24)

  Pandemic ×                                2.69                                 4.10                             3.48
  FICO<680                                   (0.27)                               (0.41)                           (0.28)

  Num obs.             5284401    5284401   5284401     7054698     7054698   7054698      12339099   12339099    12339099
  Mean of dep. var.     11.09      11.09     11.09       24.91       24.91     24.91         19.00      19.00       19.00
  Loan controls           N          Y         Y           N           Y         Y            N           Y           Y
  FICO<680 dummy          N          N         Y           N           N         Y            N          N            Y

Notes: Fintech lenders are identified based on the classification in Fuster et al. (2019). Pandemic dummy =
1 if estimated origination date is April 2020 or later. Loan controls include: state dummies; government
agency dummies (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, FHA, VA, RHS and Section 184 Indian home); dummies for
refinancing and cash-out refinancing; debt-to-income (DTI), DTI2 , loan-to-value (LTV), LTV2 , credit score,
credit score2 , loan principal, log(loan principal), number of borrowers, and a first-time homebuyer dummy.
Specifications including a FICO<680 interaction term also include an uninteracted FICO<680 dummy in
the controls. Sample period is January 2019 to December 2020. Linear probability model estimated using
eMBS loan-level data on mortgages securitized by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae. Sample
includes nonbank mortgages only. Standard errors clustered by state.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01,
*** p < 0.001.




                                                            47
  Table 3: Metro Area Differences in Conventional Conforming Mortgage Rates (%)

                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Virus spread:
 COVID cases per capita           -0.0032
                                   (0.0008)

 Dummy: MSA in top quartile                    -0.0178                                         -0.0183
                                                (0.0051)                                        (0.0051)

 Unemployment:
 Year-over-year change in U.R.                              0.0112                             0.0118
                                                            (0.0054)                           (0.0051)
 Market concentration:
 COVID × top 4 share                                                    0.0025                  0.0001
                                                                       (0.0042)                (0.0041)

 COVID × HHI                                                                        0.0048
                                                                                   (0.0042)
 Geographic FE                        yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 Loan controls × week FE              yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 N                                 1,130,086   1,130,086   1,130,086   1,130,086   1,130,086   1,130,086

Data Sources: Optimal Blue locks data, New York Times COVID data, Bureau of Labor Statistics unem-
ployment data, and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. Notes: Sample includes loans locked from
November 2019 to August 2020 in the 100 largest CBSAs. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
CBSA level. COVID cases per 1,000 are lagged one month. The top 4 lenders' market share, HHI, and
year-over-year unemployment are all standardized with mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Mortgage
interest rates are adjusted for points paid by borrower (credits received from lender). Additional controls
include CBSA-level fixed effects, as well as lock week interacted with loan characteristics: binned FICO
score, binned loan-to-value ratio, interest rate type (fixed-rate, 5/1 ARM, 7/1 ARM, or 10/1 ARM), and
loan purpose (purchase vs. refinance).  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                   48
                 Table 4: Changes in Jumbo Lending During the Pandemic

                                     A. Change in jumbo share

  Dependent Variable = 100 if mortgage balance exceeds conforming limit
                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
  Pandemic              -8.027       -6.691       -8.990        -6.582       -8.614       -6.756
                         (0.166)      (0.149)      (0.204)       (0.165)      (0.144)      (0.117)
  N                 270292           267645        299819        297252        589233      586663
  Mean Y             15.06            15.09         14.40         14.44         15.13       15.14
  Origination type Purchase         Purchase      Refinance     Refinance        All         All
  Loan controls       N                 Y             N             Y            N            Y




          B. Change in jumbo and super-conforming share, high-cost areas only

  Dependent Variable = 100 if mortgage is above national or local conforming loan limit
                                 > national CLL                              > local CLL
                           (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
  Pandemic              -5.175       -6.487       -7.825          -8.604       -12.68        -11.14
                         (0.319)      (0.191)      (0.179)         (0.293)      (0.372)       (0.273)
  N                 152005           325164         492240         99478    133618            242839
  Mean Y             35.59            27.02          29.76         20.61     19.38             20.55
  Origination type Purchase         Refinance         All         Purchase Refinance            All
  Loan controls        Y                Y              Y             Y         Y                 Y

Notes: Linear probability model, estimated using McDash loan-level data. Sample includes loans
within 10% either side of the conforming loan limit (CLL) applicable to each loan (either the national or
county-level limit, whichever is applicable). In panel B, sample is restricted to "high-cost" counties where
the county-level CLL exceeds the national CLL. Pandemic dummy = 1 if origination date is April 2020 or
later. Loan controls include: zip code dummies, debt-to-income (DTI), DTI2 , loan-to-value (LTV), LTV2 ,
credit score, credit score2 , appraisal amount, and log(appraisal amount). Sample period is January 2019 to
October 2020.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses
clustered at zip code level.




                                                    49
            Internet Appendix for
 "How Resilient Is Mortgage Credit Supply?
  Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic"




Andreas Fuster, Aurel Hizmo, Lauren Lambie-Hanson,
          James Vickery and Paul Willen
A Additional Evidence on Intermediation Markups
A.1 Evolution of Servicing Multiples

       Figure A.1: Base Servicing Multiples for Conforming and FHA Mortgages

                                                                         A. Conforming Mortgages
                                                  6
                                                                                                                                            New Production
                                                                                                                                            4.5 Coupon
                                              5.5
                                                                                                                                            3.0 Coupon

                                                  5
                        Servicing Multiple




                                              4.5

                                                  4

                                              3.5

                                                  3

                                              2.5

                                                  2

                                              1.5
                                                      9




                                                                     9




                                                                                9




                                                                                               9




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                   01




                                                                 01




                                                                               01




                                                                                           01




                                                                                                         02




                                                                                                                    02




                                                                                                                                 02




                                                                                                                                             02




                                                                                                                                                           02
                                               n2




                                                                r2




                                                                           l2




                                                                                          t2




                                                                                                    n2




                                                                                                                   r2




                                                                                                                             l2




                                                                                                                                            t2




                                                                                                                                                      n2
                                                                           ju




                                                                                                                             ju
                                                                                      oc




                                                                                                                                        oc
                                                            ap




                                                                                                               ap
                                              ja




                                                                                                    ja




                                                                                                                                                      ja
                                                                          01




                                                                                                                            01
                                             01




                                                                                     01




                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                                       01




                                                                                                                                                     01
                                                           01




                                                                                                              01




                                                                                B. FHA Mortgages
                                              5.5
                                                                                                                                            New Production
                                                                                                                                            4.5 Coupon
                                                  5                                                                                         3.0 Coupon

                                              4.5
                        Servicing Multiple




                                                  4


                                              3.5


                                                  3


                                              2.5


                                                  2


                                              1.5
                                                      19




                                                                     9




                                                                                 9




                                                                                               9




                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                           21
                                                                   1




                                                                               01




                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                 02




                                                                                                                                               2
                                                  0




                                                                20




                                                                                          20




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                               n2




                                                                           l2




                                                                                                    n2




                                                                                                                             l2




                                                                                                                                                      n2
                                                               r




                                                                                         t




                                                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                           ju




                                                                                                                             ju
                                                                                      oc




                                                                                                                                        oc
                                                            ap




                                                                                                               ap
                                              ja




                                                                                                    ja




                                                                                                                                                      ja
                                                                          01




                                                                                                                            01
                                             01




                                                                                     01




                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                                       01




                                                                                                                                                     01
                                                           01




                                                                                                              01




Data sources: SitusAMC for servicing multiples; Freddie Mac PMMS (panel A) and MBA (panel B) for
mortgage rates. "New Production" interpolates between specific coupons (two examples of which are
shown) to obtain servicing multiples for a loan originated at the primary market mortgage rate adjusted for
discount points.




                                                                                                    1
A.2 Alternative Measures for Conventional Conforming Market

Figure A.2: Primary-Secondary Spread Using the Current Coupon: Conforming Market

                                    220
                                                     Freddie Mac PMMS (CC)
                                                     MBA (CC)
                                                     Optimal Blue Insight (CC)
   Primary-Secondary Spread (bps)




                                    200



                                    180



                                    160



                                    140



                                    120



                                    100
                                           9


                                                     19


                                                                  19



                                                                             9


                                                                                           9


                                                                                                      9


                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                          01




                                                                            01


                                                                                       01


                                                                                                    01


                                                                                                               02




                                                                                                                                                 02


                                                                                                                                                            02


                                                                                                                                                                         02


                                                                                                                                                                                    02
                                                   20


                                                              20




                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                   20
                                     n2




                                                                        l2


                                                                                      p2


                                                                                                 v2


                                                                                                          n2




                                                                                                                                             l2


                                                                                                                                                           p2


                                                                                                                                                                      v2


                                                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                ar


                                                             ay




                                                                                                                     ar


                                                                                                                                  ay
                                                                        ju




                                                                                                                                             ju
                                                                                               no




                                                                                                                                                                    no
                                     ja




                                                                                  se




                                                                                                          ja




                                                                                                                                                       se




                                                                                                                                                                               ja
                                               m




                                                                                                                    m
                                                                       01




                                                                                                                                            01
                                                          m




                                                                                                                               m
                                    01




                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                                 01


                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                                                      01


                                                                                                                                                                 01
                                           01




                                                                                                                01
                                                        01




                                                                                                                             01




Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020. Data
sources: Optimal Blue, J.P. Morgan Markets, MBA (via Haver Analytics).




                                                                                                          2
                  Figure A.3: Evolution of Originator Profits and Unmeasured Costs (OPUC)
                                                           6.5

                                                            6

                                                           5.5

                                                            5

                                                           4.5




                                                OPUC (%)
                                                            4

                                                           3.5

                                                            3

                                                           2.5

                                                            2

                                                           1.5
                                                                        9


                                                                       19


                                                                       19



                                                                        9


                                                                         9


                                                                         9


                                                                        0


                                                                       20


                                                                       20



                                                                        0


                                                                         0


                                                                         0


                                                                        1
                                                                      01




                                                                     01


                                                                      01


                                                                      01


                                                                      02




                                                                     02


                                                                      02


                                                                      02


                                                                      02
                                                                    20


                                                                    20




                                                                    20


                                                                    20
                                                                  n2




                                                                   l2


                                                                  p2


                                                                  v2


                                                                  n2




                                                                   l2


                                                                  p2


                                                                  v2


                                                                  n2
                                                                 ar


                                                                ay




                                                                 ar


                                                                ay
                                                                ju




                                                                ju
                                                              no




                                                              no
                                                               ja




                                                              se




                                                               ja




                                                              se




                                                               ja
                                                              m




                                                              m
                                                             01




                                                             01
                                                             m




                                                             m
                                                            01




                                                            01




                                                            01
                                                           01


                                                           01




                                                           01


                                                           01
                                                           01




                                                           01
                                                           01




                                                           01
Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency in March 13th, 2020. Data
source: https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/2013/1113fust.html.




                                                           Figure A.4: OPUC and Mortgage Demand

                        OPUC vs. Refinance Incentive                                                                                      OPUC vs. Applications
              6                                                                                       8                      6.5
                      2012-2019                                                                                                    2012-2019
                      2020                                                                                4                        2020                                         8
                                                                                                  9                           6
                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                          7                                                                4
                                                                                         10           6                      5.5                                      9
              5                                                                                                                                                        5          7
                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                                               10 6
                                                                               12                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                             4.5                                 12
              4
   OPUC (%)




                                                                                                                  OPUC (%)




                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                              4                                                         3

                                                                                                                             3.5
              3
                                                                           2                                                  3
                                                                 1                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                             2.5                      1
              2
                                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                             1.5
              1
                  1               1.5          2                     2.5        3                         3.5                      200         400        600          800            1000   1200
                                        WAC-10 Year Treasury Yield (%)                                                                               MBA Application Index


Data source: https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/2013/1113fust.html.




                                                                                                              3
A.3 FHA Mortgages

                           Figure A.5: Comparing Measures of Primary-Secondary Spread: FHA Market

                                    350
                                                     MBA
                                                     Optimal Blue Locks
                                                     Optimal Blue Insight
   Primary-Secondary Spread (bps)




                                    300




                                    250




                                    200




                                    150




                                    100
                                           9


                                                     19


                                                                  19



                                                                             9


                                                                                           9


                                                                                                      9


                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                          01




                                                                            01


                                                                                       01


                                                                                                    01


                                                                                                               02




                                                                                                                                                 02


                                                                                                                                                            02


                                                                                                                                                                         02


                                                                                                                                                                                    02
                                                   20


                                                              20




                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                   20
                                     n2




                                                                        l2


                                                                                      p2


                                                                                                 v2


                                                                                                          n2




                                                                                                                                             l2


                                                                                                                                                           p2


                                                                                                                                                                      v2


                                                                                                                                                                               n2
                                                ar


                                                             ay




                                                                                                                     ar


                                                                                                                                  ay
                                                                        ju




                                                                                                                                             ju
                                                                                               no




                                                                                                                                                                    no
                                     ja




                                                                                  se




                                                                                                          ja




                                                                                                                                                       se




                                                                                                                                                                               ja
                                               m




                                                                                                                    m
                                                                       01




                                                                                                                                            01
                                                          m




                                                                                                                               m
                                    01




                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                                 01


                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                                                      01


                                                                                                                                                                 01
                                           01




                                                                                                                01
                                                        01




                                                                                                                             01




Notes: Primary-secondary spread computed based on the methodology described in Section III.C. Vertical
line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency on March 13, 2020. Data sources: Optimal
Blue, J.P. Morgan Markets, MBA (via Haver Analytics).




                                                                                                          4
                                   Figure A.6: Comparing Measures of Gain-on-sale: FHA Market

                           8
                                         MBA
                       7.5               Optimal Blue Locks
                           7             Optimal Blue Insight

                       6.5

                           6
   Gain on Sale (%)




                       5.5

                           5

                       4.5

                           4

                       3.5

                           3

                       2.5

                           2

                       1.5
                               9


                                         19


                                                      19



                                                                 9


                                                                               9


                                                                                          9


                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                           20



                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                                                                         1
                            01




                                                                01


                                                                           01


                                                                                        01


                                                                                                   02




                                                                                                                                     02


                                                                                                                                                02


                                                                                                                                                             02


                                                                                                                                                                        02
                                       20


                                                  20




                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                       20
                        n2




                                                            l2


                                                                          p2


                                                                                     v2


                                                                                              n2




                                                                                                                                 l2


                                                                                                                                               p2


                                                                                                                                                          v2


                                                                                                                                                                   n2
                                    ar


                                                 ay




                                                                                                         ar


                                                                                                                      ay
                                                            ju




                                                                                                                                 ju
                                                                                   no




                                                                                                                                                        no
                       ja




                                                                      se




                                                                                              ja




                                                                                                                                           se




                                                                                                                                                                   ja
                                   m




                                                                                                        m
                                                           01




                                                                                                                                01
                                              m




                                                                                                                   m
                      01




                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                     01


                                                                                01




                                                                                                                                          01


                                                                                                                                                     01
                               01




                                                                                                    01
                                            01




                                                                                                                 01




Notes: Computed based on the methodology described in Section III.C. Vertical line represents the declara-
tion of a national state of emergency on March 13, 2020. Data sources: Optimal Blue, J.P. Morgan Markets,
MBA (via Haver Analytics).




                                                                                              5
A.4 Difference in Intermediation Markups between FHA and Conform-
    ing Market

                Figure A.7: Primary-Secondary Spread: FHA - Conforming
                                                             100
                                                                                 MBA
                                                                                 Optimal Blue

                      Primary-Secondary Spread Gap (bps)      80



                                                              60



                                                              40



                                                              20



                                                                 0



                                                             -20
                                                                      9

                                                                                9

                                                                                         9

                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                     01

                                                                            01

                                                                                     01

                                                                                               01

                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                   02




                                                                                                                                     02




                                                                                                                                                        02

                                                                                                                                                                  02

                                                                                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                                                                                     02

                                                                                                                                                                                               02

                                                                                                                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            02
                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                 p2

                                                                           t2

                                                                                    v2

                                                                                              c2

                                                                                                       n2

                                                                                                                 b2




                                                                                                                                    r2




                                                                                                                                                       n2

                                                                                                                                                                 l2

                                                                                                                                                                          g2

                                                                                                                                                                                    p2

                                                                                                                                                                                              t2

                                                                                                                                                                                                        v2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                          ar




                                                                                                                                             ay




                                                                                                                                                                ju
                                                                          oc




                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                ap
                                                                                no

                                                                                          de




                                                                                                                                                                                                    no

                                                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                             se




                                                                                                    ja

                                                                                                              fe




                                                                                                                                                   ju




                                                                                                                                                                      au

                                                                                                                                                                                se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ja
                                                                                                                      m




                                                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                      01




                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                                                  01




                                                                                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                               01
                                                            01




                                                                               01

                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                               01




                                                                                                                                                                                                   01

                                                                                                                                                                                                         01
                                                                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                                     01




                                                            Figure A.8: Gain-on-Sale: FHA - Conforming
                                                             2.5
                                                                                MBA
                      Gain-on-sale FHA-Conforming Gap (%)




                                                                                Optimal Blue



                                                                 2




                                                             1.5




                                                                 1




                                                              .5
                                                                     9

                                                                               9

                                                                                         9

                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                 01

                                                                           01

                                                                                     01

                                                                                              01

                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                   02




                                                                                                                                     02




                                                                                                                                                        02

                                                                                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                                                                                     02

                                                                                                                                                                                               02

                                                                                                                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            02
                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                             20
                                                              p2

                                                                          t2

                                                                                    v2

                                                                                             c2

                                                                                                       n2

                                                                                                                 b2




                                                                                                                                    r2




                                                                                                                                                       n2

                                                                                                                                                                l2

                                                                                                                                                                          g2

                                                                                                                                                                                    p2

                                                                                                                                                                                              t2

                                                                                                                                                                                                        v2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                                          ay




                                                                                                                                                             ju
                                                                      oc




                                                                                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                                ap
                                                                                no

                                                                                         de




                                                                                                                                                                                                    no

                                                                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                            se




                                                                                                   ja

                                                                                                              fe




                                                                                                                                                   ju




                                                                                                                                                                      au

                                                                                                                                                                                se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ja
                                                                                                                      m




                                                                                                                                                            01
                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                     01




                                                                                                  01




                                                                                                                                                  01




                                                                                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      01
                                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                               01
                                                       01




                                                                               01

                                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                                                           01




                                                                                                                                                                                               01

                                                                                                                                                                                                         01
                                                                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                                     01




Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency on March 13, 2020. Data
source: Optimal Blue, JP Morgan Markets, MBA (via Haver Analytics)




                                                                                                                                          6
B     Labor Market Frictions
B.1 Postings and Employment Growth
Table A.1 shows the relationship between job postings for mortgage loan officers and un-
derwriters and employment growth in NAICS codes 522292 (real estate credit at nonbank
financial intermediaries) and 52231 (mortgage and nonmortgage loan brokers). Model
1 estimates the relationship using pre-pandemic data only (March 2012 through Febru-
ary 2020). Model 2 adds the pandemic period (through December 2020) and includes a
pandemic time dummy.



      Table A.1: Mortgage Loan Officer Job Postings and Employment Change.
                                                  Employment Change
                                              (1)                   (2)
 Job postings per 100 employees t          0.0157               0.0163
                                           (0.0053)              (0.0043)

 Job postings per 100 employees t-1                  0.0118                   0.0119
                                                     (0.0044)                  (0.0035)

 Job postings per 100 employees t-2                   -0.0005                   -0.0001
                                                     (0.0055)                  (0.0038)

 Pandemic                                                                     -0.0152
                                                                               (0.0044)

 Constant                                        -0.0233                     -0.0242
                                                  (0.0062)                    (0.0053)
 N                                                   96                          106
 Mean Y                                            0.0023                      0.0037
 Adj. R2                                           0.2156                      0.3483
 Months included                            Mar. 2012 ­ Feb. 2020      Mar. 2012 ­ Dec. 2020
Data sources: Burning Glass Technologies and Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics
data. Newey-West standard errors with 4 lags in parentheses.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***
p < 0.001.




                                                 7
B.2 Personnel Expenses
Figure A.9 is based on the MBA Quarterly Performance Report and plots the relationship
between the number of loans the average mortgage bank originates in a quarter and its
personnel expenses, expressed in basis points of the total amount of loans originated.1
Since some personnel expenses are fixed, we expect a decreasing relationship, and the
black dots along with the grey line show that from 2015 through 2019, the relationship
was indeed strongly and approximately linearly decreasing.

    The first quarter of 2020 still appears closely in line with the relationship over the
previous years. However, from 2020:Q2 onward, and especially in Q3 and Q4, personnel
expenses appear unusually high: Despite large increases in loan originations relative to
Q2, personnel expenses increased over those two quarters. This is consistent with the
tight labor market for loan officers, underwriters, processors, etc. leading to increases in
compensation in order to attract new workers or prevent poaching by competitors.

    Quantifying the "excess" expense is not straightforward and depends on the func-
tional form assumption. In columns 1 and 2 of Table A.2, we control for originated loans
linearly (either based on the number of loans or the volume in USD), as in the figure. We
add four dummies for the four quarters of 2020, which measure the excess in a quarter
relative to what would be expected based on the 2015­2019 data. The coefficients for Q3
and Q4 are highly significant and range from 58 to 98 bp --a very large effect.

    In columns 3 and 4, we instead use a functional form that appears more appropriate
in a situation where part of the cost is strictly fixed, using the inverse of the loan volume
as a regressor. Coefficients on the Q3 and Q4 dummies are again strongly significant, but
they are of more modest (though still meaningful) size, ranging from 12 to 29 bp.




1 We incorporate data only from 2015 onward, since over the preceding years, there was a steady upward
trend in expenses for a given level of originations, suggesting cost increases in the wake of the financial
crisis (Fuster et al., 2017).


                                                    8
                                                        Figure A.9: Personnel Expenses vs. Origination Volumes

                                                      260.00
                                                                                          2015-2019
           Personnel Expense, in bps of Loan Volume




                                                                                          2020:Q1                 2020:Q2

                                                      240.00                              2020:Q3                 2020:Q4

                                                                                          Linear fit, 2015-2019


                                                      220.00




                                                      200.00




                                                      180.00
                                                           1000        2000             3000             4000         5000
                                                                           Avg. Total Loans Originated (#)

Data source: Mortgage Bankers Association Quarterly Performance Report.




                                                                                    9
Table A.2: Regression Evidence on Excess Personnel Expenses (in Basis Points) of Mort-
gage Banks in 2020
                                          (1)             (2)            (3)                 (4)
  Avg. originated loans                -0.036
                                        (0.005)
  Avg. originated loans ($m)                         -0.132
                                                      (0.016)
  -1/Avg. originated loans                                        -185283.904
                                                                    (25269.144)
  -1/Avg. originated loans ($m)                                                        -44101.600
                                                                                         (4743.749)
  2020:Q1                                 -2.563     5.987              -1.885             5.089
                                         (3.027)      (2.584)          (2.745)             (1.831)
  2020:Q2                               13.262      24.844              -2.576              2.869
                                         (6.417)      (6.091)          (3.676)             (2.586)
  2020:Q3                              57.994       71.610           14.272               18.113
                                        (11.620)     (10.864)          (4.904)             (3.454)
  2020:Q4                              77.473       97.695           24.756               29.208
                                        (13.169)     (12.977)          (5.186)             (3.739)
  Constant                            300.235       291.949          133.866             136.158
                                        (12.881)     (10.715)          (9.798)             (6.735)
  Avg. Y                                212.41        212.41           212.41              212.41
  SD Y                                  19.93         19.93            19.93               19.93
  Adj. R2                                0.68          0.71             0.68                0.74
  Obs.                                    24            24               24                  24
  Newey-West standard errors (3 lags) in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
  Data source: Mortgage Bankers Association Quarterly Performance Report. Sample period: 2015:Q1-2020:Q4.




                                                     10
C      Additional Evidence on Fintech Market Share
C.1 Analysis Including Banks in the Sample
Table A.3 repeats the analysis from Table 2 retaining mortgages originated by banks in
the sample (banks are identified by name in the eMBS data). As the table shows, fin-
tech lenders gain market share, particularly for purchase mortgages and low-credit-score
loans. The change in the fintech share is more positive than in our main analysis, because
of a substitution from banks to nonbanks during the pandemic.

    Table A.3: Fintech Lending During the Pandemic: Sample Retaining Bank Loans

  Dependent variable = 100 if mortgage originator is a fintech lender, zero otherwise
                          (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)

                           Purchase Mortgages                     Refinancings                        All Loans

  Pandemic              2.46      2.31      1.88          0.34      1.93         1.64      3.23        1.81       1.46
                         (0.23)    (0.21)    (0.20)      (0.57)      (0.23)       (0.26)    (0.33)      (0.20)     (0.22)

  Pandemic ×                                2.07                                 2.56                             2.14
  FICO<680                                   (0.25)                               (0.25)                           (0.23)

  Num obs.             7288633    7288633   7288633     9807494     9807494   9807494      17096127   17096127    17096127
  Mean of dep. var.      8.04       8.04      8.04       17.92       17.92     17.92         13.71      13.71       13.71
  Loan controls           N          Y         Y           N           Y         Y            N           Y           Y
  FICO<680 dummy          N          N         Y           N           N         Y            N          N            Y

Notes: Fintech lenders are identified based on the classification in Fuster et al. (2019). Pandemic dummy =
1 if estimated origination date is April 2020 or later. Loan controls include: state dummies; government
agency dummies (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, FHA, VA, RHS and Section 184 Indian home); dummies for
refinancing and cash-out refinancing; debt-to-income (DTI), DTI2 , loan-to-value (LTV), LTV2 , credit score,
credit score2 , loan principal, log(loan principal), number of borrowers, and a first-time homebuyer dummy.
Specifications including a FICO<680 interaction term also include an uninteracted FICO<680 dummy in
the controls. Sample period is January 2019 to December 2020. Linear probability model estimated using
eMBS loan-level data on mortgages securitized by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae. Standard
errors clustered by state.  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



C.2 Time-series of Fintech Market Share
Figure A.10 displays coefficients on a vector of monthly time dummies from a loan-level
linear probability regression of whether the mortgage is originated by a fintech lender.
Estimates are normalized so that the fitted value equals the actual value in January 2020.
The regressions used to generate the figures match the models in Table 2. The left-hand
panels reflect the unconditional share, while the right-hand panels control for loan and
borrower characteristics. The sample period is January 2019 through December 2020. The
eMBS sample for this analysis excludes bank loans.

                                                            11
                                                                                                          20                      Fintech share (with 95% CI)                              20                      Fintech share (with 95% CI)                                20                    Fintech share (with 95% CI)
                                                                                                              19        8        10       12       14       16    18                           19             15                  20                  25                          19        6            8               10        12
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    4                                                                                4                                                                                  4

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    7                                                                                7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                         20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                           19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                               m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                   10                                                                               10                                                                                 10

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                No controls




                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    4                                                                                4                                                                                  4

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    7                                                                                7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                         20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                           20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                               m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                   10                                                                               10                                                                                 10




errors clustered by state. Data source: eMBS.
                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              21                                                                               21                                                                                 21
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1



                                                                                                          20                      Fintech share (with 95% CI)                              20                      Fintech share (with 95% CI)                                20                    Fintech share (with 95% CI)
                                                                                                              19            10    11       12        13      14   15                           19        12        14        16         18       20                               19            6   7        8         9      10   11
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B. Refinancings




                                                                                                                                                                       C. All mortgages
                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    4                                                                                4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A. Purchase mortgages




                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    7                                                                                7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                         20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                           19                                                                               19                                                                                 19
                                                                                                               m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                   10                                                                               10                                                                                 10

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    4                                                                                4                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure A.10: Time-series of Estimated Fintech Market Share




                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    7                                                                                7                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Loan/borrower controls




                                                                                                         20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                           20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                               m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                   10                                                                               10                                                                                 10

                                                                                                          20                                                                               20                                                                                 20
                                                                                                              21                                                                               21                                                                                 21
                                                                                                                m                                                                                m                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                    1                                                                                1                                                                                  1




controls). Sample restricted to nonbank loans. 95% confidence intervals shown, based on standard
mies and, in the right-hand figures, a set of loan and borrower controls (see Table 2 for full list of
Estimates from linear probability regressions of a fintech lender dummy on a vector of time dum-
D Additional Evidence on Rate Differences across MSAs
  and Competition

  Figure A.11: Market Concentration in the Conventional/Conforming Loan Market

                                  60
                                                                   Top 25
                                  50
                                                                     Top 10
                                  40
                     Share in %




                                  30
                                                                         Top 5
                                  20


                                  10
                                                                            Top 1

                                  0
                                            2019                              2020




Figure shows the quarterly market share (based on dollar volumes of originations) of the top N firms from
2018:Q4 through 2020:Q3. Data source: Inside Mortgage Finance.




                                                   13
Figure A.12: Conforming Mortgage Rates for 20 CBSAs (Optimal Blue Insights Data)

                       4.5
                                                                                                                                           CBSA level rates
                                                                                                                                           Average across CBSAs



                        4
   Mortgage Rate (%)




                       3.5




                        3




                       2.5
                             10


                                       11


                                                 12


                                                            1


                                                                      2


                                                                                3


                                                                                          4


                                                                                                    5


                                                                                                              6


                                                                                                                        7


                                                                                                                                  8


                                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                           m


                                                                     m


                                                                               m


                                                                                         m


                                                                                                   m


                                                                                                             m


                                                                                                                       m


                                                                                                                                 m


                                                                                                                                           m
                            m


                                     m


                                              m




                                                                                                                                                    m


                                                                                                                                                             m


                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                       20


                                                                 20


                                                                           20


                                                                                     20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                       20
                        19


                                  19


                                            19




                                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                      20


                                                                20


                                                                          20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                              20


                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                      20
                       20


                                20


                                         20




                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                 20
Data source: Optimal Blue




                                                                                             14
Table A.4: Metro Area Differences in Conventional Conforming Mortgage Rates (%):
McDash Data.

                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Virus spread:
 COVID cases per capita           -0.0016
                                   (0.0006)

 Dummy: MSA in top quartile                   -0.0048                                         -0.0051
                                               (0.0025)                                       (0.0023)

 Unemployment:
 Year-over-year change in U.R.                             -0.0038                             -0.0024
                                                          (0.0048)                            (0.0048)
 Market concentration:
 COVID × top 4 share                                                   -0.0042                 -0.0043
                                                                      (0.0026)                (0.0027)

 COVID × HHI                                                                       -0.0002
                                                                                  (0.0028)
 Geographic FE                       yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 Loan controls × week FE             yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
 N                                1,007,250   1,007,250   1,007,250   1,007,250   1,007,250   1,007,250

Data sources: Black Knight McDash data, New York Times COVID data, Bureau of Labor Statistics
unemployment data, and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. Notes: Sample includes loans locked from
November 2019 to August 2020 in the 100 largest CBSAs. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
CBSA level. COVID cases per 1,000 are lagged one month. The top 4 lenders' market share, HHI, and
year-over-year unemployment are all standardized with mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. Mortgage
interest rates are adjusted for points paid by borrower (credits received from lender). Additional controls
include CBSA-level fixed effects, as well as lock week interacted with loan characteristics: binned credit
score, binned loan-to-value ratio, interest rate type (fixed-rate, 5/1 ARM, 7/1 ARM, or 10/1 ARM), and
loan purpose (purchase vs. refinance).  p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                    15
E     Mortgage Non-payment by Credit Score Bin
Figure A.13 below presents a binscatter plot of the proportion of mortgages that were
60-plus days past due as of January 2020 and May 2020. The figure is based on McDash
servicing data for mortgages originated since 2017. FHA loans are flagged based on the
static loan type field in McDash. Figure A.14 shows the change in the past-due rate from
January to June.

   As the figures show, non-payment rates have increased across the credit score distri-
bution for GSE, FHA, and portfolio loans. However, the rise in past-due rates is more
pronounced for low-credit-score loans, consistent with the expectation that the pandemic
has particularly amplified the credit risk for loans to less creditworthy borrowers. Note
that a large share of these borrowers took advantage of forbearance programs (An et al.,
2021).


        Figure A.13: Non-payment vs. Credit Score: Pre-pandemic vs. Pandemic

                                                       All Loans                                                                          GSE
         Proportion 60+ Days Past Due




                                                                                         Proportion 60+ Days Past Due
                 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                 .05 .1 .15 .2



                                                                    January 2020                                                                    January 2020
                                                                    June 2020                                                                       June 2020
           0




                                                                                           0




                                        600   640    680     720      760     800                                       600   640    680     720      760     800
                                                Credit Score at Origination                                                     Credit Score at Origination


                                                          FHA                                                                          Portfolio
         Proportion 60+ Days Past Due




                                                                                         Proportion 60+ Days Past Due
                 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                    January 2020                                                                    January 2020
                                                                    June 2020                                                                       June 2020
           0




                                                                                           0




                                        600   640    680     720      760     800                                       600   640    680     720      760     800
                                                Credit Score at Origination                                                     Credit Score at Origination



Data source: McDash Data. Note: FHA loans are all classified as FHA, regardless of ownership. Conven-
tional loans are categorized as GSE or portfolio based on the ownership status of the loan at the time of the
data snapshot. "All loans" includes FHA, GSE, and conventional loans in portfolio, as well as VA loans and
conventional loans held in private-label securities.


                                                                                    16
Figure A.14: Non-payment vs. Credit Score: Pre-pandemic vs. Pandemic (Percentage
Point Change)

                                                                Change (Jan. to Jun.)
                                              .15




                                                                                                   GSE
     Increase in Proportion 60+ Days Past Due




                                                                                                   FHA
                                                                                                   Portfolio
                 .05        0    .1




                                                    600   640     680           720          760   800
                                                                 Credit Score at Origination

Data source: McDash Data. Note: FHA loans are all classified as FHA, regardless of ownership. Conven-
tional loans are categorized as GSE or portfolio based on the ownership status of the loan at the time of the
data snapshot. "All loans" includes FHA, GSE, and conventional loans in portfolio, as well as VA loans and
conventional loans held in private-label securities.




                                                                         17
F Credit Score Distributions

              Distribution
             Figure          of Conforming
                    A.15: Credit                Originations
                                 Score Distribution:           by
                                                     Conventional  Credit Score
                                                                  Conforming

                                      Purchase < 720                   Refi < 720
                                      Purchase < 680                   Refi < 680
                                      Purchase < 640                   Refi < 640
       .4
       .3
     Share
      .2
       .1
       0




         2019m1               2019m7                2020m1                2020m7

Data source: McDash Data. Note: Includes originations of 30-year, fixed-rate conventional mortgages made
to owner-occupants, weighted by loan balance at origination.




                                                  18
                   Distribution  of Credit
                       Figure A.16: FHA Score
                                           Originations  by FHA
                                                             Credit Score
                                               Distribution:

                                    Purchase < 680                 Refi < 680
                                    Purchase < 640                 Refi < 640
        .7
        .6
        .5.4
      Share
     .3 .2
        .1
        0




          2019m1             2019m7              2020m1               2020m7

Data source: McDash Data. Note: Includes originations of 30-year, fixed-rate FHA mortgages made to
owner-occupants, weighted by loan balance at origination.




                                               19
                Distribution  of Jumbo
                     Figure A.17:          Originations
                                  Credit Score             by
                                               Distribution:   Credit Score
                                                             Jumbo

                                      Purchase < 760                   Refi < 760
                                      Purchase < 720                   Refi < 720
                                      Purchase < 680                   Refi < 680
        .4
        .3
     Share
      .2.1
        0




         2019m1                2019m7               2020m1                2020m7

Data source: McDash Data. Note: Includes originations of 30-year, fixed-rate conventional mortgages made
to owner-occupants, weighted by loan balance at origination.




                                                  20
G Additional Evidence on Jumbo Segment

                                      Figure A.18: Jumbo-conforming Spreads from Other Data Sources
                                          1.4


                                          1.2
        Jumbo-Conforming Spread (%)




                                             1


                                             .8


                                             .6


                                             .4


                                             .2


                                             0
                                                                                                                         Mortgage News Daily
                                          -.2                                                                            Mortgage Bankers Association
                                                  9




                                                                9




                                                                          9




                                                                                        9




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                               01




                                                            01




                                                                         01




                                                                                    01




                                                                                                      02




                                                                                                                 02




                                                                                                                              02




                                                                                                                                           02




                                                                                                                                                         02
                                           n2




                                                           r2




                                                                     l2




                                                                                   t2




                                                                                                 n2




                                                                                                                r2




                                                                                                                            l2




                                                                                                                                          t2




                                                                                                                                                    n2
                                                                     ju




                                                                                                                           ju
                                                                               oc




                                                                                                                                      oc
                                                       ap




                                                                                                            ap
                                          ja




                                                                                                 ja




                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                                                    01




                                                                                                                         01
                                        01




                                                                              01




                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                                   01
                                                      01




                                                                                                           01




Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency on March 13, 2020. Data
source: Mortgage News Daily, Mortgage Bankers Association (via Haver Analytics)




G.1 Time-series Evolution of Jumbo Share in McDash Data
Figure A.19 displays estimated coefficients on the vector of monthly time dummies from
a loan-level linear probability regression of whether a mortgage is a jumbo loan, along
with 95 percent confidence intervals (based on standard errors clustered by Zip code).
Sample includes loans within 10 percent of either side of the conforming limit applicable
to each loan (either the national or county-level limit). Jumbo loans are defined as mort-
gages exceeding the conforming loan limit. The data source is Black Knight McDash data
("McDash data").




                                                                                            21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Limit




Data source: McDash
                       Ja                      Coefficient (with 95% CI)                           Ja                     Coefficient (with 95% CI)                          Ja                     Coefficient (with 95% CI)
                            n             5   10           15         20   25                          n             5   10          15         20    25                         n             5   10           15         20   25
                                20                                                                         20                                                                        20
                                  19                                                                          19                                                                       19

                       Ap                                                                          Ap                                                                        Ap
                            r2                                                                          r2                                                                        r2
                                01                                                                         01                                                                          01
                                     9                                                                          9                                                                          9

                       Ju                                                                          Ju                                                                        Ju
                            l2                                                                          l2                                                                        l2
                                 01                                                                          01                                                                      01
                                     9                                                                          9                                                                         9

                       O                                                                           O                                                                         O
                        ct                                                                          ct                                                                        ct
                                20                                                                         20                                                                        20
                                     19                                                                         19                                                                        19

                       Ja                                                                          Ja                                                                        Ja
                            n                                                                          n                                                                         n




                      22
                                20                                                                         20                                                                        20
                                  20                                                                          20                                                                       20

                       Ap                                                                          Ap                                                                        Ap
                            r2                                                                          r2                                                                        r2
                                02                                                                         02                                                                          02
                                                                                                                                                           B. Refinancings
                                     0                                                                          0                                                                          0




                                                                                C. All mortgages
                       Ju                                                                          Ju                                                                        Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A. Purchase mortgages




                            l2                                                                          l2                                                                        l2
                                 02                                                                          02                                                                      02
                                     0                                                                          0                                                                         0

                       O                                                                           O                                                                         O
                        ct                                                                          ct                                                                        ct
                                20                                                                         20                                                                        20
                                     20                                                                         20                                                                        20

                       Ja                                                                          Ja                                                                        Ja
                            n                                                                          n                                                                         n
                                20                                                                         20                                                                        20
                                  21                                                                          21                                                                       21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure A.19: Time-series of Jumbo Share among Loans within 10% of Conforming
                                                  Coefficient (with 95% CI)                                         Coefficient (with 95% CI)                                            Coefficient (with 95% CI)
                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             19        20        25           30         35   40                     19        20     25               30        35                       19        25     30                35       40
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   4                                                                      4                                                                    4

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   7                                                                      7                                                                    7




 Data source: McDash.
                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                          19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                              m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                  10                                                                      10                                                                   10


                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   4                                                                      4                                                                    4

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   7                                                                      7                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a) National conforming limit




                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                          20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                              m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                  10                                                                      10                                                                   10


                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             21                                                                      21                                                                   21
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1




23
                                                 Coefficient (with 95% CI)                                           Coefficient (with 95% CI)                                            Coefficient (with 95% CI)
                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                                            10    15           20        25   30                               0    10           20         30    40                                10   15           20         25   30




                                                                                   All loans:
                             19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                       Refinances:
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Purchase mortgages:




                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   4                                                                      4                                                                    4

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   7                                                                      7                                                                    7

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                          19                                                                      19                                                                   19
                              m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                  10                                                                      10                                                                   10


                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Local limit




                                   4                                                                      4                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure A.20: Lending above National vs. Local Conforming limit




                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   7                                                                      7                                                                    7

                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                          20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                              m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                  10                                                                      10                                                                   10


                        20                                                                      20                                                                   20
                             21                                                                      21                                                                   21
                               m                                                                       m                                                                    m
                                   1                                                                      1                                                                    1
H The Non-QM Market
In this section, we study changes in the supply of credit for non-qualified ("non-QM")
jumbo mortgages with debt-to-income (DTI) ratios exceeding 43 percent, which expose
lenders to additional legal risk. Non-QM loans legally require the lender to properly
verify and document that the borrower is capable of repaying the mortgage, the so-called
"ability-to-repay" requirement. The non-QM market includes all jumbo mortgages with
a back-end DTI ratio exceeding 43 percent, as well as certain other contract types (for
example, mortgages not requiring tax returns for income documentation). DeFusco et al.
(2019) find that the ability-to-repay requirement reduces lending and increases mortgage
interest rates above the DTI = 43 percent threshold.

    We use Optimal Blue to analyze price and quantity for jumbos above and below a DTI
of 43, using a methodology similar to what is shown in the main text. Specifically, in the
Optimal Blue Insight data we compare rate offers on otherwise identical mortgages with
a DTI of 44 versus 43. In the locks data we restrict the sample to loans with DTI > 40,
and then include a vector of DTI > 43 × time fixed effects to trace out the conditional rate
premium associated with a non-QM mortgage. We also calculate the share of all jumbo
rate locks made to borrowers with a DTI > 43.

    The results presented in Figure A.21 show that the number of lenders serving the non-
QM market drops by about 90 percent in March 2020, and offered interest rates spike by
more than 100 basis points. The non-QM interest rate spread on jumbo rate locks remains
fairly stable over the course of the pandemic, however, as does the non-QM share of
all jumbo mortgage locks. Note that non-QMs represent only 3 percent of jumbos even
before the pandemic.

    One interpretation of this evidence is that specialist lenders remain active in the non-
QM market and continue to lend, but non-specialists either exit or raise their offered
interest rates. Non-QM lending drops in line with jumbo lending as a whole, but we find
only mixed evidence of an amplified legal risk premium for non-QM loans.




                                            24
                                                                                                                                                   No. Lenders                                                                                                                 Interest Rate (%)
                                                                                                                 01                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                      oc




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.75
                                                                                                                           t2                                                                                                                        t2
                                                                                                                01            0   19                                                                                                      01           01
                                                                                                                     no                                                                                                                        no          9
                                                                                                                           v2                                                                                                                        v2
                                                                                                                01            01                                                                                                          01              01
                                                                                                                     de            9                                                                                                           de              9
                                                                                                                           c2                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                 01           01                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                      ja           9                                                                                                       01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ja             9
                                                                                                                           n2                                                                                                                      n2
                                                                                                                 01             02                                                                                                         01             02
                                                                                                                      fe             0                                                                                                          fe          0




     source: Optimal Blue
                                                                                                                         b   20                                                                                                                      b2
                                                                                                                01                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                   m         20                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       ar                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                          2                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                   ap 0                                                                                                                      ap 20
                                                                                                                01 r20                                                                                                                    01 r20
                                                                                                                  m           2                                                                                                             m         2
                                                                                                                     ay 0                                                                                                                      ay 0
                                                                                                                          2                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                     01 02
                                                                                                                    ju         0                                                                                                              ju        0
                                                                                                                       n2                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                  01 020                                                                                                                    01 020
                                                                                                                     ju                                                                                                                        ju
                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                01 202                                                                                                                    01 l202
                                                                                                                   au          0                                                                                                             au        0
                                                                                                                      g2                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                01          0                                                                                                             01 202
                                                                                                                   se 20                                                                                                                     se         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Interest rates in Insight
                                                                                                                      p2                                                                                                                         p2
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                     01 02




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of Lenders in Insight
                                                                                                                    oc 0                                                                                                                      oc 0
                                                                                                                       t                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                01 202                                                                                                                    01 202
                                                                                                                   no          0                                                                                                             no        0
                                                                                                                       v2                                                                                                                        v2
                                                                                                                01          0                                                                                                             01         0
                                                                                                                   de 20                                                                                                                     de 20
                                                                                                                       c2                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                     01 02
                                                                                                                    ja         0                                                                                                              ja        0
                                                                                                                       n2                                                                                                                        n2




25
                                                                                                                                                                       Jumbo, DTI=44
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jumbo, DTI=36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jumbo, DTI=44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jumbo, DTI=36




                                                                                                                            02                                                                                                                      02
                                                                                                                               1                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                         Share                                                                                                                       Spread (%)
                                                                                                                 01                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                      oc




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                             .02
                                                                                                                                                   .04
                                                                                                                                                          .06
                                                                                                                                                                 .08
                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                .12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                           t2                                                                                                                        t2
                                                                                                                01            0   19                                                                                                      01           01
                                                                                                                     no
                                                                                                                           v2                                                                                                                  no          9
                                                                                                                01            01                                                                                                                     v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          01              01
                                                                                                                     de            9                                                                                                           de              9
                                                                                                                           c2                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                 01           01                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                      ja           9                                                                                                       01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                           n2                                                                                                                   ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n2
                                                                                                                 01             02                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                      fe             0                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fe          0
                                                                                                                         b   20                                                                                                                      b2
                                                                                                                01                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                   m         20                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                          2                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                     01            20
                                                                                                                   ap 0                                                                                                                        ap
                                                                                                                01 r20                                                                                                                    01         r2
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QM vs Non-QM Jumbo, LTV=80, FICO=750




                                                                                                                  m                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                     ay 0                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure A.21: Credit Availability for Non-QM Mortgages




                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                            01            20
                                                                                                                    ju                                                                                                                          ju
                                                                                                                       n2                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                  01 020                                                                                                                    01            02
                                                                                                                     ju                                                                                                                          ju    0
                                                                                                                        l                                                                                                                            l2
                                                                                                                01 202                                                                                                                    01        02
                                                                                                                   au         0                                                                                                                au      0
                                                                                                                      g2                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                01          02                                                                                                            01 202
                                                                                                                   se          0                                                                                                             se        0
                                                                                                                      p2                                                                                                                         p2
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                    01 02
                                                                                                                    oc 0                                                                                                                      oc 0
                                                                                                                       t                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Share of Jumbo locks with DTI>43




                                                                                                                01 202                                                                                                                    01 202
                                                                                                                   no          0                                                                                                             no       0
                                                                                                                       v2                                                                                                                        v2
                                                                                                                01          02                                                                                                            01        02




     Notes: Vertical line represents the declaration of a national state of emergency on March 13, 2020. Data
                                                                                                                   de          0                                                                                                             de        0
                                                                                                                       c2                                                                                                                        c2
                                                                                                                 01 02                                                                                                                    01 02
                                                                                                                    ja         0                                                                                                              ja       0
                                                                                                                       n2                                                                                                                        n2
                                                                                                                            02                                                                                                                      02
                                                                                                                               1                                                                                                                       1
