                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW DOES SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM INDECISION AFFECT YOUNGER COHORTS?

                                         John B. Shoven
                                           Sita Slavov
                                         John G. Watson

                                       Working Paper 28850
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28850


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




This paper was prepared for the volume "Overtime: America's Aging Workforce and the Future
of 'Working Longer'," edited by Lisa Berkman and Beth Truesdale. Overtime is supported by the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation's Working Longer project. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28850.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Social Security Reform Indecision Affect Younger Cohorts?
John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 28850
May 2021
JEL No. G5,G51,H55,J26

                                           ABSTRACT

The Social Security trust fund will be exhausted in the early 2030s. The U.S. government will
need to make a choice about how to address the impending trust fund exhaustion, but it is unclear
what it will choose to do. This indecision leaves young and middle-aged workers not knowing
whether they will face Social Security benefit cuts, payroll tax increases, or an increase in the full
retirement age. This uncertainty about what will happen in the future causes young and middle-
aged cohorts who are saving for retirement to make mistakes that could be avoided if the
government decided earlier what will happen when the trust fund runs dry. This paper examines
the cost of government indecision on Social Security reform. We calculate the value that people
in different income classes and different birth cohorts would receive if the government decided
now what it will do when the trust funds are exhausted. We find that the cost of indecision can be
large. In some cases, the value of knowing today what the policy change will be in 2035 is worth
more than two months of labor market earnings.

John B. Shoven                                    John G. Watson
Department of Economics                           Stanford University
Stanford University                               725 Magnolia Street
Landau Economics Building                         Menlo Park, CA 94025
579 Jane Stanford Way                             jgwatson@stanford.edu
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
shoven@stanford.edu

Sita Slavov
Schar School of Policy and Government
George Mason University
3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1
Arlington, VA 22201
and NBER
sslavov@gmu.edu
    I.       Introduction

         Social Security is the primary source of retirement income for many Americans. The Social

Security Administration (2020) estimates that around half of married couples and 70 percent of singles

receive at least half their retirement income from Social Security. The importance of Social Security is

even greater for a significant minority of households: 21 percent of married couples and 45 percent of

singles receive at least 90 percent of their retirement income from Social Security.

         Most realistic estimates suggest that the Social Security trust fund will be exhausted by the

early-to-mid 2030s. 1 Current law specifies that when the trust fund is exhausted, benefit payments must

be restricted to available revenue. Options to accomplish this include cutting benefits across the board

or delaying benefit payments. 2 The Social Security Trustees estimate that in 2035, the year in which

they project the trust fund to be depleted, revenues will be sufficient to cover 79% of promised benefits

(OASDI Board of Trustees 2020). However, some policy change is likely to be undertaken either before

or at this date. Frequently discussed options include cutting benefits in a way that increases the system's

progressivity, or raising payroll taxes, either across the board or at higher income levels. The funding

shortfall could also be financed by issuing more debt, which could delay the tax increases or benefit cuts

required to restore solvency to the system, perhaps beyond the lifetimes of today's adults.

         Each of these policy options has direct implications for Americans' financial well-being. For

example, our simulations suggest that an increase in the Full Retirement Age (FRA) to 70 costs an



1
  For example, the 2020 Social Security Trustees Report ­ which did not take into account the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic ­ projected that the trust funds for the retirement and disability programs would be exhausted in
2035 (OASDI Board of Trustees 2020). Similarly, the Congressional Budget Office's (2019) Long Term Budget
Outlook projected a trust fund depletion date of 2032 for the retirement program. Reflecting the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic, the Congressional Budget Office's September 2020 estimate moved that depletion date to
2031 (Congressional Budget Office 2020), while the Gladstone and Akabas (2020) presented alternative scenarios
with depletion dates as early as 2026. More recently, however, the Congressional Budget Office (2021) returned to
its projection of a 2032 trust fund depletion date for the retirement program, reflecting stronger than anticipated
economic growth.
2
  Huston and Morton (2019) provide a review of the legal issues and payment options.

                                                                                                                  2
average-earning woman $123,942 if she was born in 1970, and $147,750 if she was born in 1990. Other

reforms have different distributional impacts across income groups and birth cohorts. The direct cost of

the reforms required to close Social Security's financial shortfall is unavoidable. It can be distributed

across different income groups and birth cohorts, but it must be paid sooner or later. In contrast, the

main focus of our paper is on a cost that is entirely avoidable: the cost of government indecision

regarding which reform to implement. That indecision creates uncertainty for young and middle-aged

workers who are planning for retirement. An individual who assumes that a particular reform will occur

­ and is surprised by a different reform ­ has made a costly mistake. Knowing in advance which reform

will be implemented allows for better planning and therefore has value. The government could resolve

that indecision by deciding today what steps it will take to close Social Security's shortfall.

        We aim to calculate the value of having accurate information about which Social Security

reforms will be implemented in the future. We measure the value of early awareness by calculating the

amount of money an individual requires at the policy start date to compensate for not knowing the

policy in advance. That amount depends on an individual's birth cohort, gender, and earnings profile.

For example, consider a woman born in 1975 with average earnings who plans for no policy changes but

is surprised by a 20% cut in Social Security benefits in 2035. Now suppose the government instead

announced in 2020 that the 20% benefit cut would occur 15 years in the future. We find that the value

of becoming aware of the policy 15 years in advance is approximately $8,964 (measured in 2020 dollars)

or about 1.52 times her average monthly earnings. This awareness value is distinct from the cost of the

policy itself. The new policy ­ the 20% cut in benefits ­ directly reduces the individual's benefits by an

annuitized equivalent of $128,106. However, if the policy remains in flux until it is actually implemented

­ and the individual operates under the mistaken assumption that there will be no change ­ then there

is an additional indecision cost of $8,964. Although the early awareness value is modest compared to




                                                                                                             3
the direct impact of the reform, we emphasize that this cost is entirely avoidable (unlike the direct cost

of the reform, which can only be redistributed).

          A growing body of research examines how uncertainty over the form or timing of Social Security

reforms affects the well-being of younger individuals (Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira 2012, Benítez-Silva,

Dwyer, and Sanderson 2006, Bütler 1999, Kitao 2018, Nelson 2019, and Caliendo, Gorry, and Slavov

2019). The contribution of this chapter is to model the cost of indecision about specific, realistic reform

plans in a simple and transparent way, providing illustrative calculations that can be helpful to

individuals, financial planners, and policy makers. Individuals and financial planners can use the

information to determine which mistakes are most costly, or to rank changes that are most critical.

Knowing the cost of indecision can prompt policy makers to act sooner to avoid that cost. Moreover, it

can allow policy makers to assess the value of agreeing to a reform plan now versus hoping for a future

political path to a more preferred reform. It can also help policy makers understand which types of

indecision are most costly and how those costs are distributed across income groups and cohorts.

    II.       Current Law and Reform Options

              a. Current Law

          Social Security benefits are based on the average of the highest 35 years of earnings, indexed for

economy-wide average wage growth through age 60. (Additional years of earnings count at their

nominal value.) This measure, converted to a monthly amount by dividing by 12, is called Average

Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME). Monthly benefits are based on applying a progressive formula to

AIME. That formula establishes two bend points, or thresholds, for AIME. If benefits are claimed at full

retirement age (FRA, equal to 67 for the stylized individuals in our model), monthly Social Security

benefits are 90% of AIME below the first bend point, 32% of AIME between the first and second bend

points, and 15% of AIME above the second bend point. This amount is known as the primary insurance




                                                                                                              4
amount (PIA). 3 Cost of living adjustments are applied to PIA after age 62. These cost-of-living

adjustments are based on the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-

W). Social Security taxes are based on covered earnings, or earnings below a taxable maximum (the

"cap") that is also indexed for economy-wide wage growth. The total (employer plus employee) payroll

tax rate for old age and survivors insurance (OASI) is 10.6%. Actuarial adjustments are applied to PIA to

determine the monthly benefit amount for claims made either before (as early as 62) or after (as late as

70) full retirement age. For individuals in our model, claiming at age 62 results in a monthly benefit

equal to 70% of PIA, and delaying to age 70 results in a monthly benefit equal to 124% of PIA.

        What does this mean for Social Security benefits in dollar terms? To answer this question, we

turn to the stylized earnings profiles that we use throughout this analysis. We construct these earnings

profiles using the 2016 Outgoing Rotation Groups file from the Center for Economic Policy Research's

Uniform Current Population Survey (CPS) Extracts. This dataset contains a consistent hourly wage

variable (rw_ot) for each worker. (The construction of this hourly wage measure is detailed in Schmitt

2003.) To obtain a measure of full-time annual earnings, we multiply this hourly wage measure by 2,000.

We then calculate the mean, 10th, and 95th percentiles of earnings at each age. This gives us the 2016

age-earnings profile for three groups: low-income (10th percentile), average (mean), and high-income

(95th percentile). A worker whose earnings are in the 95th percentile at each age exceeds the taxable

maximum starting in his or her late 30s. We divide each of these earnings profiles by the mean

economy-wide earnings level (across all observations in the dataset). This gives us an age-earnings

profile for each group relative to the economy-wide average in 2016. These relative age-earnings




3
 The bend points in the PIA formula are indexed for economy-wide average wage growth. AIME and PIA are
calculated during the year in which the worker turns 62, using the bend points that are in effect for that year;
however, they can be subsequently updated to reflect additional years of work. In 2020, the bend points (applying
to workers who turned 62 in 2020) were $960 and $5,785, and the taxable maximum was $137,700.


                                                                                                                5
profiles are not smooth, so we fit a 5th degree polynomial to obtain the predicted relative wage at each

age. The relative age-earnings profiles are shown in Figure 1.

        We simulate the experience of stylized workers in multiple birth cohorts multiplying the

predicted relative wage at each level by the Social Security average wage index (AWI) for that year. 4

Thus, each worker's wage growth over his or her lifetime incorporates both relative shifts due to aging

and economy-wide wage growth. We use the historical values of AWI for years 1951--2018 and forecast

subsequent years assuming a 3% growth rate. Using the wage profile and AWI, we estimate a worker's

AIME. Note that Social Security's taxable maximum wage is a function of AWI, as are the bend-points of

the PIA formula. Hence, the wage profile and AWI are sufficient to calculate nominal wages, PIA, and the

nominal Social Security benefit a worker receives at any claiming age. Nominal wages and benefits are

converted to real dollars using the CPI-W and reported as 2020 dollars. It is important to note that while

these stylized earnings profiles are intended to allow simple illustrations about the cost of government

indecision, they do not capture all the realities of individual labor market experiences such as

differences in hours worked or labor force participation.



Figure 1: Relative Age-Earnings Profiles




4
  This assumption abstracts from the possibility that the earnings of different income groups may grow faster or
slower than the economy-wide average. In particular, it abstracts from growing earnings inequality driven by faster
growth at the upper end of the earnings distribution.

                                                                                                                 6
Notes: Authors' calculations based on 10th, mean, and 95th percentile earnings in CEPR's CPS Outgoing

Rotation Group Extracts.



        Table 1 shows monthly Social Security benefits ­ based on these earnings profiles ­ for the

stylized workers in our model under alternative claiming ages. All values are denominated in 2020

dollars. There are four important aspects of these values. First, monthly benefits are modest. Among

workers in the 1975 birth cohort who retire at the FRA, the monthly benefit is $1,356 for workers at the

10th percentile of the earnings distribution, $2,542 for workers at the mean, and $3,756 for workers at

the 95th percentile. Second, although the progressive AIME formula means that low-income workers see

a larger proportion of their earnings replaced by Social Security than high-income workers do, high-

income workers enjoy substantially greater Social Security benefits in absolute dollar terms. Third,


                                                                                                          7
promised Social Security benefits (setting aside potential future benefit cuts) have risen across cohorts

for workers at all income levels. Among workers at the 10th percentile who claim at age 62, the expected

monthly benefit has risen from $811 for the 1960 birth cohort to $1,088 for the 1990 birth cohort;

among workers at the 95th percentile who claim at age 70, benefits have risen from $4,072 to $5,473.

Finally, workers who are able to delay claiming to 70 receive benefits nearly twice as great as those who

claim at age 62. Delayed claiming ­ for those who can afford to wait ­ is a strong strategy for improving

retirement security (e.g., Shoven and Slavov 2014).




                                                                                                            8
    Notes: Authors' calculations based on wage profiles in Figure 1 (10th, mean, and 95th percentile

earnings) and Social Security benefit rules.



             b. Reform Options

        We consider a range of potential changes to benefits and taxes, and we assume that these

changes go into effect in 2035 when the trust fund is exhausted. 5

    (1) Issue debt (DBT): This option implies that our stylized workers escape reform. Any tax increases

        or benefit cuts are passed on to future generations.

    (2) Across-the-board benefit cut (CUT 20.0%): In this scenario, benefits are cut by 20% across the

        board once the trust fund is depleted in 2035.

    (3) Increase full retirement age to 70 (FRA 70): In this scenario, an individual can receive their PIA

        only if they claim at age 70. Actuarial reductions are applied for earlier claims. We assume that

        any benefits claimed early before age 70 are reduced based on the current formula (by 5/9 of

        1% for each month up to 36 months, and by 5/12 of 1% for each additional month). We apply

        this change to any individual claiming Social Security benefits in or after 2035.

    (4) Switch to chained CPI (C-CPI-U): In this scenario, the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) for

        benefits is calculated using the chained CPI, which grows more slowly than the CPI-W.

    (5) Across-the-board payroll tax increase (no change to cap) (TAX+3.1%): In this scenario, the

        payroll tax is increased by 3.1% of taxable wages. The taxable maximum remains unchanged.

    (6) Increase progressivity of PIA formula (PIA 5.0%): In this scenario, the benefit formula is altered

        to pay 5% (versus 15%) of AIME above the second bend point. This change cuts benefits only for

        high earners.



5
 Many of these reforms are based on the options available at the Congressional Budget Office's online calculator,
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54868.

                                                                                                                    9
    (7) Remove the payroll tax cap (CAP 10.6%): In this scenario, the taxable maximum ($137,700 in

         2020) is no longer in effect, and all earnings above the current maximum are subject to a 10.6%

         payroll tax. No additional benefits are paid on these earnings.



    Individually, many of these reforms do not restore actuarial balance, though there are various

combinations that do. In the analysis below, we assume that the government issues debt to finance the

remainder of the shortfall (and that the tax increases or benefit cuts necessary to pay off the debt occur

after our stylized workers die).



             c. Effect of Reform on Individual Benefits

         Setting aside option 1 ­ issuing debt ­ each of these reforms either reduces an individual's

Soccial Security benefits (options 2, 3, 4, and 6) or increases her pre-retirement taxes (options 5 and 7).

Reforms 2 through 5 affect individuals across the board. Reforms 6 and 7 target high-income individuals.

To calculate the impact of each reform on individuals, we project lifetime Social Security benefits for the

individuals in Table 1 using the historical values of CPI-W for years 1974--2019 and forecast subsequent

years assuming a 2% growth rate. We model chained CPI or C-CPI-U as CPI-W less 0.25%. Nominal wages

and benefits are converted to real 2020 dollars using CPI-W. To calculate the present value of these

benefit streams, individuals are assigned the mortality rates for their gender and birth cohort based on

the cohort mortality tables underlying the intermediate projections in the 2013 Social Security Trustees

Report. 6 The risk-free interest rate is set to 0%, reflecting the persistent low real interest rates

experienced during the past decade.




6
  In reality, mortality varies by income level (see, e.g., Chetty et al. 2016). Adjusting mortality by income level
would lower the lifetime value of Social Security benefits ­ as well as any changes to benefits ­ for low earners
relative to higher earners. However, we would not expect it to affect our main finding that the cost of indecision is
significant for those planning for retirement.

                                                                                                                   10
        Table 2 shows the reduction in lifetime benefits, or the increase in the lifetime taxes (both

discounted to the present), for stylized workers at different levels of earnings under reform options 2

through 7. The table shows results for women; results for men are similar but slightly lower due to

higher male mortality. The 20% benefit cut has the largest impact on the present value of benefits: a

low-income woman born in 1990 would need an extra $79,000 today to make up for a 20% cut in Social

Security, while her high-income counterpart would need an extra $218,000 today. Bhutta et al. (2020)

report that median net worth was $121,700 in 2019, and that mean retirement savings among

individuals with employer-sponsored defined contribution pensions or individual retirement accounts

was $269,600. Compared to these amounts, the impact of cutting Social Security benefits across the

board is large.




                                                                                                          11
    Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar

and available upon request.



      Raising the FRA to 70 is similar to a 20% benefit cut, in the sense that both policies have an almost

identical impact on affected individuals who claim at the full retirement age. The reason for this result is

illustrated in Figure 2. The solid line shows the relationship between monthly benefit and claiming age

under current law. Individuals claiming at age 62 get 70% of PIA, individuals claiming at the FRA (67) get


                                                                                                          12
100% of PIA, and Individuals claiming at age 70 get 124% of PIA. Increasing the FRA to 70 implies that

the "full" benefit ­ 100% of PIA ­ could be claimed only at age 70. This change is depicted by the

horizontal arrow. Benefits are then reduced according to the actuarial formula, depicted by the dashed

line, which shows that the benefit payable to age 67 claimers is 80% of PIA. A 20% across-the board-

benefit cut reduces benefits at every claiming age by 20%. This change is depicted by the vertical arrow.

For age 67 claimers, therefore, the 20% benefit cut results in the same monthly benefit as increasing the

FRA to 70. Thus, for affected cohorts (born in 1970 and later), the impact of raising the FRA is almost

identical to the impact of cutting benefits by 20%. Cohorts born in 1960 and 1965 are unaffected by an

increase in the FRA, as they will have retired by 2035.



Figure 2: Raising the FRA to 70 is Equivalent to Cutting Benefits by 20% for Cohorts Born in 1970 and

Later




    Notes: Authors' depiction based on Social Security benefit rules.


                                                                                                          13
        Table 2 also illustrates that the impact of other reforms is smaller, and that tax increases have a

disproportionate effect on younger cohorts while leaving older cohorts (who have already retired)

unaffected. In addition, average and low earners are not affected by the policies that cut benefits or

raise taxes for high earners.

        The dollar amounts shown in Table 2 reflect the direct impact of the policies. In Section III, we

examine the additional cost imposed on individuals when policy decisions are delayed.



            d. Effect of Reforms on Social Security Solvency

        These policies also have different impacts on the financial stability of the Social Security system.

Table 3 shows the effectiveness of seven policies analyzed by the Congressional Budget Office in

restoring the 75-year financial balance of the Social Security system. The seven CBO polices are not

precisely the same as the policies we evaluate, but they are closely related.



Table 3: Effects of Social Security Reform Options on 75-Year Actuarial Balance as Percentage of GDP

 Issue Debt (Do Nothing)                                           -1.5%

 Cut Benefits by 20%                                               0%

 Raise FRA to 70                                                   -1.1%

 Switch to Chained CPI                                             -1.3%

 Increase Payroll Tax by 1% of Wages                               -1.2%

 Reduce Top PIA Factor to 5%                                       -1.4%

 Impose Payroll Tax on Earnings above $250,000                     -0.5%




                                                                                                            14
    Source: CBO calculator, available at https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54868, and OASDI Board of

Trustees 2020. Assumes implementation in 2020 for changes to the benefit formula and 2023 for the

FRA increase.



    The first row of the table shows that the actuarial deficit of the Social Security system over the next

75 years is projected to be 1.5% of GDP over that period. The second row shows that an across-the-

board 20% cut in benefits in 2020 would roughly eliminate the 75-year shortfall. Under this change, all

current and future beneficiaries would immediately suffer a 20% reduction in benefits relative to current

law. This policy was not scored by CBO, as it is not something any politician has advocated. However, we

consider this option as a benchmark. The 2020 Social Security Trustees Report suggests that a 21%

across-the-board benefit cut in 2035 would bring payable benefits in line with revenues for that year.

While the benefit cut would need to be increased to 27% in the future to keep benefits in line with

revenues, we would expect a 20% benefit cut to reduce the actuarial balance to close to zero. We also

note the contrast with survey evidence, which suggests that individuals under the age of 35 anticipate

getting only around half the benefits promised to them under current law (Liebman and Luttmer 2018).

In other words, young workers are probably more pessimistic about their future Social Security benefit

than the system's finances suggest.

    Figure 2 showed that a 20% cut and an increase in the FRA to age 70 are essentially identical for new

beneficiaries. However, raising the FRA to 70 is much less effective in closing the 75-year shortfall than

an across-the-board 20% cut. The reason is that raising the FRA affects only new beneficiaries and leaves

existing beneficiaries unaffected.

    Switching to a chained CPI to calculate COLAs contributes a relatively small amount to alleviating the

financial shortfall. Similarly, raising the payroll tax by 1% of wages is far from sufficient, but raising the

rate by 3.1% would have a larger impact. The Social Security Trustees estimate that in 2035, the


                                                                                                             15
program's costs will exceed income by about 3.4 percent of payroll, with the difference growing

thereafter.

    The sixth row shows that changing the progressivity of benefits by lowering the top PIA factor to 5%

is relatively ineffective in solving the financial shortfall facing Social Security. There are three reasons for

this. First, relatively few beneficiaries have an AIME greater than the second bend point (the only ones

affected). Second, the conversion between AIME and PIA after the second bend point is already low

(15%) and lowering it further does not reduce benefits much. And, finally, this policy would only affect

new beneficiaries and not existing claimants, meaning that the total benefit reduction is not very large.

    Imposing payroll taxes on earnings over $250,000 would close about two-thirds of the money

shortfall, but only if there was not a corresponding increase in future benefits.



    III.       The impact of indecision

           We turn now to the main analysis of this paper: quantifying the cost of policy indecision. To see

the intuition behind our analysis, suppose an individual formulates a retirement plan under the

assumption that no policy change will occur. However, she is surprised by a policy change in 2035. How

does her well-being in this scenario compare to her well-being in an alternative scenario in which the

policy change is announced ­ for example ­ 15 years in advance? In other words, what is the value of

knowing about the policy change in 2020 versus 2035? This value is the cost to the individual due to

government indecision. Alternatively, suppose an individual formulates a retirement plan under the

assumption that benefits will be cut by 20% across the board in 2035. However, unexpectedly, the

government decides to issue debt and pass the cost of any adjustment on to future generations. That is,

the individual faces no benefit cut. Even though the surprise is a positive one from the individual's

perspective, knowing about it ahead of time is valuable as it allows advance planning.




                                                                                                             16
        To be more specific, we consider an individual who uses a life cycle model at the start of her

career (age 20) to formulate a financial plan based on a particular expectation about what will happen in

2035 when the trust fund is exhausted. We vary this expectation: in some cases, the individual assumes

that there will be no change to current law benefits (debt will be issued to pay full benefits). In other

cases, the individual assumes benefits will be cut. This baseline financial plan is represented in Figure 3

by the top timeline labeled "Individual's Plan." It shows that the individual's plan is formulated in 2020,

and the plan assumes current law will be in place until 2035, after which it will be replaced with "Policy

A." Policy A may be a continuation of current law, or it may be some alternative.

        However, the individual's expectation turns out to be wrong. We consider two alternative

scenarios. Under one scenario, the individual follows her plan and is surprised when a different policy ­

Policy B ­ is both announced and implemented in 2035. This scenario is represented by the second

timeline in Figure 3, labeled "Scenario 1." In Scenario 1, the individual is surprised by Policy B in 2035

and must adjust her plans accordingly. Under the second scenario, the government announces in

advance that Policy B will take effect starting in 2035. As soon as the announcement is made, our

individual can adapt her plan to these impending changes. This scenario is represented by the third

timeline in Figure 3, labeled "Scenario 2." In Scenario 2, the government announces at some date before

2035 that policy B will take effect in 2035. We refer to the date of this announcement as the "aware

date." Once the announcement is made, the individual adjusts plans.



Figure 3: Alternative Timelines for Individuals Planning for Retirement




                                                                                                             17
             We compare the individual's well-being under Scenarios 1 and 2. For example, consider an

individual who plans for no change to current law (in other words, Policy A is a continuation of current

law). However, there is actually a 20% benefit cut (Policy B) starting in 2035. In Scenario 1, the individual

does not learn of this change until 2035. In Scenario 2, she learns of the impending policy change ahead

of time, perhaps in 2020 or 2025.



       IV.       Model

             To model the value of this early awareness, we solve a standard life cycle model for stylized

individuals from different birth cohorts and with different earnings profiles. 7 We assume individuals

start work at age 20, retire and claim Social Security at age 67, and live for up to 110 years. Individuals

choose each period how much to save and consume. There is no labor supply choice; that is, individuals


7
    Details of the model can be found in Scott et al. (2019).

                                                                                                              18
work full time between ages 20 and 66 and are fully retired thereafter. Borrowing is restricted to one

year of income. We assume individuals have a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function with

a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3. (To test sensitivity, we also consider alternative levels of risk

aversion.) We assume a subjective discount rate for utility of 3%. Individuals earn the risk-free interest

rate, zero percent, on any wealth. We consider workers in different cohorts with different lifetime

earnings profiles, as introduced in Table 1, with Social Security benefits and mortality projected using

the methodology underlying Table 2. We assume individuals retire and claim Social Security at 67.

         We begin with a baseline in which individuals optimize under the assumption that there will be

no changes to Social Security for the rest of their lives; that is, they assume that Policy A (in Figure 3) will

reflect policy (1) from the list above, and the government will issue debt so that any cost of reform is

passed on to future generations. Under Scenario 1 (see Figure 3), they are surprised in 2035 by one of

the other reforms discussed above and must adjust their plan at that point. Under Scenario 2 (see Figure

3), they learn about the change in advance ­ at the "aware date." In this case, individuals can implement

a new plan that anticipates the new policy. We calculate the amount of additional wealth

("compensating wealth") that ­ if received at the policy start date ­ would leave individuals indifferent

between the scenario in which they are surprised and the scenario in which they know in advance (at

the aware date) what change will occur. We also consider alternatives in which an individual assumes

that a particular reform (e.g., a 20% benefit cut) will occur in 2035 and are surprised by either a different

reform or no change. Again, we calculate the value of knowing the correct reform at the aware date.



    V.       Results

             a. Cost of Indecision When Individuals Assume No Change

    We first consider an individual who assumes that no change will occur in 2035; in other words, the

government will issue debt and pay all promised benefits. Figure 4 shows the path of spending for an


                                                                                                                  19
average income female born in 1975 who assumes that there will be no changes to Social Security

during her lifetime. The first dotted vertical line indicates the year 2020, when the worker is aged 45.

Past consumption (before age 45) is somewhat bumpy as we have assumed the economy-wide average

wage grew in line with its historical levels; a smooth growth rate is assumed for the future. Starting at

age 45, there are two possible scenarios. In Scenario 1, illustrated by the dotted line, the worker

continues down the planned path and is surprised by a 20% benefit cut in 2035 (indicated by the second

vertical dotted line labeled "Policy Start"). At this point, her consumption decreases, reflecting the lower

benefits that she receives. In Scenario 2, illustrated by the solid line, the government announces in 2020

that benefits will be cut by 20% starting in 2035. In this case, the worker may be able to make an

immediate adjustment. The ability to make an immediate adjustment hinges on whether the individual

has already started saving for retirement ­ in which case saving can be adjusted in response to the

announcement. Our stylized 45-year-old began saving for retirement in 2017 and is therefore able to

adjust. Consumption drops in 2020 and continues along a smooth path even when the policy change

occurs in 2035. This decrease in consumption is subsequently followed by an increase in savings to

offset impending benefit cuts.



Figure 4: Annual Consumption Spending Under Alternative Policy Scenarios (Stylized Woman with

Mean Earnings Born in 1975)




                                                                                                            20
    Notes: Authors' calculations of consumption path for female with mean income under alternative

scenarios. Based on female mortality rates and mean earnings. Results for males are similar and

available upon request.




    Figure 5 shows compensating wealth by aware year for the four policies that affect women earning

the average wage in the 1965, 1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985 birth cohorts. The four panels correspond to

policies 2, 3, 4, and 5, i.e., cutting benefits across the board by 20%, changing FRA to 70, changing to the

chained CPI, and increasing payroll taxes by 3.1%. Generally, policies 6 and 7 ­ changing the PIA formula

and removing the Social Security wage maximum ­ do not affect average earners. Note that the vertical

scales of the top two panels (CUT and FRA) are multiples of $10,000 and the bottom two panels (C-CPI-U

and TAX+3.1) are multiples of $100. For an individual who retires at 67, a cut in benefits by 20% is nearly

identical to changing her FRA to 70. However, whereas a 20% cut affects all cohorts, changing the FRA to

70 affects only cohorts that begin claiming benefits in 2035 or later, i.e., cohorts born in 1968 or after.

                                                                                                              21
Similarly, changing to chained CPI for COLA affects all cohorts, but increasing payroll taxes only affects

cohorts that are still working in 2035--workers born in 1969 or after.



Figure 5: Compensating Wealth vs. Aware Year (Reforms Affecting Average Earner)




    Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar

and available upon request.



    For all curves in Figure 5, compensating wealth is a non-increasing function of the aware year and

goes to zero at 2035, the common start date for all new policies. Clearly, having more time to plan is

better than having less. However, if the knowledge doesn't have an immediate impact on spending or

                                                                                                             22
saving, then it doesn't increase compensating wealth. This is the explanation for the initial flat regions of

these curves, which begin for each cohort at the year the individual begins work at age 20 and remain

flat to around age 40. In these years, our cohorts' wages are relatively low, and they are borrowing as

much as they can. This inflexibility means that any information about future reform cannot be acted on

immediately. Indeed, Table 4 shows the earliest age and year at which information about reform would

affect consumption or saving choices in the life cycle model. This age/year is roughly the time when the

individual finds it optimal, given her anticipated future wages and Social Security benefits, to finish

paying down debt and start saving for retirement. 8 Any knowledge received in advance of these dates

does not have any additional value. The ages shown in Table 4 are roughly consistent with the

observation that participation in and contributions to employer-sponsored retirement plans increase

with age (see, e.g., Vanguard 2020). That is, many individuals ramp up saving during middle age when

incomes are higher. Variation across cohorts is driven by differences in income and mortality. Younger

cohorts generally have higher incomes and lower mortality (i.e., a longer retirement to plan for).




    Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar

and available upon request.



8
  To be more specific, in most cases, the individual begins to save for retirement in the year following the one
indicated in the table; for three cases (the low-income 1970 cohort, the average-income 1975 cohort, and the
average-income 1980 cohort) the individual begins saving for retirement in the same year.

                                                                                                                   23
    The cross-cohort patterns observed in Figure 5 can be explained by when the policies begin to affect

the cohorts. For example, consider the policy of changing the FRA to 70. This policy reduces an

individual's retirement benefit but isn't felt until an individual actually retires at age 67. Thus, the cohort

born in 1970 first feels the policy's effect in 2037, the cohort born in 1975 first feels the policy's effect in

2042, etc. Since the policy change affects cohorts at a certain age versus in a certain year, younger

cohorts have more time to prepare. In effect, the policy start date is extended and awareness is less

valuable. As a result, the compensating wealth curves for changing FRA to 70 are nested--the curve for

the cohort born in 1970 lies above that for 1975, which is above the curve for 1980, etc. The 1965

cohort is not affected as individuals born in this year have already retired. In contrast, consider the CUT

policy. The argument in the previous paragraph still applies to pre-retirement cohorts; indeed, the two

policies are essentially equivalent for them. However, the 1965 cohort is affected by this policy change.

    Figure 6 shows the impact of the two policies ­ 6 and 7 ­ that affect only high earners. The impact is

depicted for high-earning women in different cohorts. The reduction in the top PIA factor has a similar

pattern as the across-the-board benefit cut.



Figure 6: Compensating Wealth vs. Aware Year (Reforms Affecting High Earners Only)




                                                                                                             24
Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar and
available upon request.

                                                                                                       25
    We now present our primary results in tabular form, which gives us the space to add results for low-

and high-earners (in addition to average earners), and the 1960 and 1980 cohorts (in addition to those

depicted in Figures 5 and 6). Table 5 reports how valuable it would be to inform individuals of each

reform in 2020 rather than when the cut takes place in 2035. The top number in each cell indicates the

monetary amount (in 2020 dollars) that they would pay to be aware of the cut in 2020. The lower

number, in parentheses, indicates the monetary amount relative to their average monthly earnings

(AIME). We emphasize that Table 5 shows only the cost of government indecision (announcing the

policy in 2035 versus 2020) and goes beyond the direct impact of the policies on individuals (which was

shown in Table 2).

    The first column of Table 5 shows that an average-earning woman born in 1960 would pay $9,664,

or 1.9 months of earnings, to be informed of an impending 20% cut in 2020 rather than in 2035. For

low-income women born in 1960, the figure is $3,793, or 2.0 months of earnings. High-earning women

would pay more in absolute dollars to be informed early ($14,042), but the amount they would pay is a

smaller multiple (1.27) of their AIME. The compensating wealth of the 1965 birth cohort is higher than

that of the 1960 birth cohort. Both of these cohorts are already retired when the policy change goes into

effect. Thus, both cohorts first feel the change at the same time ­ in 2035 ­ but at different ages. The

younger cohort therefore makes better use of early awareness. For the remaining birth cohorts, which

have not yet retired, compensating wealth declines for younger cohorts, in line with the results in Figure

5. Becoming aware early has the lowest value for the 1990 birth cohort. Learning about Social Security

benefit cuts at age 30 instead of at age 45 is of marginal value because individuals have only recently

started to save for retirement (see Table 4).

    The second column shows results for raising the full retirement age in 2035. Individuals born before

1968 gain no value in learning about this change early since they will be retired before 2035 and


                                                                                                           26
unaffected by the policy. However, for those born after 1968, the effect of raising the full retirement age

to 70 is nearly the same as reducing benefits across the board by 20%. As discussed earlier, these

policies are equivalent for all cohorts affected by them. The equivalence of cutting benefits and raising

the FRA is well known among public finance economists. However, policy discussions more often focus

on raising the FRA than on cutting benefits, perhaps because the public is less aware of their

equivalence.

    The value of advance knowledge for the final four reforms is small. We saw in Table 3 that switching

to a chained index would close only a small portion of the financial shortfall of Social Security. The third

column of Table 5 shows that knowing about the switch 15 years in advance has similarly low stakes. A

sizable 3.1% increase in the payroll tax would reduce the net wealth of workers, but the fourth column

of Table 5 indicates that knowing about it in advance would not be that valuable. Older generations

would largely escape. The tax hike would cost the 1990 cohort the most (see Table 3). However, learning

about the change 15 years in advance appears to have only modest value given that individuals in that

cohort would not alter their behavior until sometime between 2029 (for the high-income group) and

2034 (for the low-income group). The fifth and sixth columns of Table 5 show results for the two policies

affecting only high-income individuals. The fifth column shows that knowing in advance about reducing

the top PIA factor is of considerable value to our high earners, but it is of less value than knowing about

a potential 20% across the board cut in advance. The sixth column shows that learning in advance about

removing the tax cap is not very valuable.




                                                                                                          27
   Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar

and available upon request.


                                                                                                      28
            b. Cost of Indecision When Individuals Assume Policy Change

        We now turn our attention to situations in which the individual assumes a particular reform

(Policy A) will occur in 2035 and is surprised by a different policy (Policy B). In each of these cases, we

hold initial wealth constant by starting the life cycle model in 2020 and endowing the individual with the

wealth they would have at their current age if they had initially optimized under the assumption of no

change. For this analysis, we focus on the 1975 birth cohort. Table 6 shows the compensating wealth for

an aware date of 2020 under each combination of assumed and actual policies. The rows of the table

represent the policies that individuals assume will be adopted in 2035. The columns represent the

policies that are actually adopted. The highlighted rows correspond to the case in which individuals

assume that debt will be issued and are surprised by one of the other policies. The compensating wealth

figures in this row are the same as those presented in Table 5. The other rows correspond to cases in

which individuals assume a policy change will occur in 2035 and are surprised by a different outcome.

For example, the number in the second row and third column ($5,198) represents the compensating

wealth of advance knowledge when a low-income individual assumes that benefits will be cut across the

board in 2035 (CUT) but is surprised by no change (debt, or DBT) Along the diagonal, all compensating

wealth amounts are zero because the actual policy adopted in 2035 is the same as the assumed policy

when the individual optimizes in 2020. The last column of the table indicates the maximum

compensating wealth in each row; that is, for the policy assumed in the row, it indicates the surprise

that that would be most valuable to know about in advance.

        The results in Table 6 suggest that advance knowledge about benefit levels is more valuable

than advance knowledge about taxes. For example, when the low-income or average-income individual

assumes a future in which benefit levels will not change (DBT, PIA, CAP, or TAX) or a future in which

benefit levels will change only slightly (CPI), being surprised by a large drop in benefit levels (CUT or FRA)


                                                                                                              29
is very costly relative to knowing in advance. Similarly, when the low-income or average-income

individual assumes that benefits will be cut significantly (CUT or FRA), being surprised by no change to

benefits (DBT, PIA, CAP, or TAX) or a small change to benefits (CPI) is very costly. Note that advance

information has value even for positive surprises that increase the present value of benefits because

knowing benefit levels in advance allows individuals to adjust consumption earlier.




    Notes: Authors' calculations. Figures based on female mortality rates. Figures for males are similar

and available upon request.




                                                                                                           30
       Thus far, we have assumed CRRA utility with a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3. While this

value is often used in modeling, some empirical evidence suggests that it could be significantly lower, on

the order of 1 (Gourinchas and Parker 2002; Hurd 1989). Our sensitivity analysis suggests that policy

indecision has a lower cost when individuals are less risk averse. For example, when the coefficient of

relative risk aversion is 1, an average-income female who assumes no change (DBT) values advance

knowledge of a benefit cut (CUT) at only $937, or about 16% of average indexed monthly earnings.

However, the pattern remains similar: being surprised by a change in benefits has a greater cost than

being surprised by a change in taxes. 9




       VI.      Discussion and Conclusions

       Knowing in advance about any benefit cuts or increases in the full retirement age that will be

enacted to address the depletion of the Social Security trust fund can be very valuable. The value of

receiving the information in 2020 rather than in 2035 can be as high as 2.5 months of earnings. Advance

knowledge about payroll tax increases is much less valuable. There are also important distributional

effects. If the value of advance knowledge is measured relative to earnings, then the stakes are actually

higher for low-income workers than high-income workers. Low earners rely more on Social Security, so it

comes as no surprise that advance information about future policies would be proportionately more

valuable to lower-income individuals.

       It is important to emphasize that the value of early awareness of future policy change represents a

pure efficiency gain. Policymakers are well aware that the trust fund will be exhausted in the early

2030s, and the policy options that will be available at that time are known now. Our findings suggest

that simply deciding now what policy will be followed when the trust fund runs dry, rather than waiting



9
    Full sensitivity analysis results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                                                              31
until 2035, can be the equivalent of giving people a bonus of between 1 and 2.5 months of earnings.

These gains represent a "free lunch" in the sense that they can be realized just by making a decision

about a problem that will have to be faced in the near future. Failing to do so complicates people's

retirement plans. Thus, government indecision has a real cost.

    We have shown that in the absence of an early policy announcement, people can make two kinds of

mistakes, both costly. They could assume that benefits will be maintained even after the trust fund

exhaustion and then be surprised that benefit cuts are enacted, or they could assume that they will face

benefit cuts only to find out in 2035 that they won't. Either mistake is possible in the absence of the

government making an early decision, and both mistakes are roughly equivalently costly. These costly

mistakes would be avoided if the government made a decision today about what it will do when the

trust fund is exhausted. The failure to realize the awareness gains that we calculate represent the cost of

Washington failing to come to grips with the Social Security solvency issue.



References

Benítez-Silva, H., Dwyer, D.S., Heiland, F., Sanderson, W.C., 2006. A Dynamic Model of Retirement and
        Social Security Reform Expectations: A Solution to the New Early Retirement Puzzle. Working
        Paper 2006-134. Michigan Retirement Research Center.

Bhutta, Neil, Jesse Bricker, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, Sarena Goodman, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B.
        Moore, Sarah Reber, Alice Henriques Volz, and Richard A. Windle. 2020. "Changes in U.S. Family
        Finances from 2016 to 2019: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Federal Reserve
        Bulletin." 106(5), September. Retrieved from
        https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/scf20.pdf.

Bütler, M., 1999. Anticipation Effects of Looming Public-Pension Reforms. Carnegie-Rochester
        Conference Series on Public Policy 50, 119­159.

Caliendo, Frank N., Aspen Garry and Sita Slavov. 2019. "The Cost of Uncertainty about the Timing of
       Social Security Reform." European Economic Review 118, 102 ­ 125.

Chetty, Raj Chetty, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
        Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2016. "The Association Between Income and Life
        Expectancy in the United States, 2001­2014." JAMA 315(16), 1750-1766.

Congressional Budget Office. 2019. The 2019 Long-Term Budget Outlook. June.

                                                                                                          32
Congressional Budget Office. 2020. The 2020 Long-Term Budget Outlook. September.

Congressional Budget Office. 2021. The 2021 Long-Term Budget Outlook. March.

Gladstone, Nicko and Shai Akabas. 2020. "COVID-19 May Deplete Social Security Trust Funds this
       Decade." Bipartisan Policy Center. April 22. Retrieved from
       https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/covid-19-may-deplete-social-security-trust-funds-this-decade/.

Huston, Barry F. and William R. Morton. 2019. "Social Security: What Happens If the Trust Funds Ran
       Out." Congressional Research Service. Retrieved from
       https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20190612_RL33514_2b2af643e13a629ce63c3fa0a0261b
       afdf366875.pdf.

Gomes, Francisco J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff and Luis M. Viceira. 2012. "The Excess Burden of Government
       Indecision." Tax Policy and the Economy, Jeff Brown, ed., Volume 26, 125-163.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Jonathan Parker, "Consumption over the Life Cycle,"
      Econometrica, Volume 70, Number 1, January 2002, pp. 47-89.

Hurd, Michael D., "Mortality Risks and Bequests," Econometrica, Volume 57, Number 4, July
       1989, pp. 779 ­ 813.

Kitao, S., 2014. Sustainable Social Security: Four Options. Review of Economic Dynamics 17 (4), 756­779.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P. and Andrew A. Samwick. 2018. "The Welfare Cost of Perceived Policy Uncertainty:
       Evidence from Social Security." American Economic Review 108(2), 275-307.

Nelson, Jaeger. 2019. Welfare Implications of Uncertain Social Security Reform. Unpublished Draft.
        Retrieved from https://storage.googleapis.com/wzukusers/user-
        29583895/documents/5ddaed71b435bnumpjoC/Chapter%202%20-%20OASI.pdf.

Schmitt, J. 2003. Creating a consistent hourly wage series from the Current Population Survey's Outgoing
        Rotation Group, 1979-2002. Working Paper. Center for Economic Policy Research. Retrieved
        from http://ceprdata.org/wp-content/cps/CEPR_ORG_Wages.pdf.

Scott, Jason, John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson. 2019. Retirement Implications of a Low
         Wage Growth, Low Real Interest Rate Economy. Working Paper 25556. National Bureau of
         Economic Research.

Social Security Administration. 2020. Fact Sheet: Social Security. Retrieved from
        https://www.ssa.gov/news/press/factsheets/basicfact-alt.pdf.

OASDI Board of Trustees. 2020. The 2020 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age
       and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Trust Funds.




                                                                                                        33
