                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE DATA PRIVACY PARADOX AND DIGITAL DEMAND

                                         Long Chen
                                        Yadong Huang
                                       Shumiao Ouyang
                                         Wei Xiong

                                     Working Paper 28854
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28854


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We appreciate comments and suggestions made by Alessandrop Acquisti, Cameron Peng, David
Yang, Liyan Yang, and seminar participants at Boston College, CUHK Shenzhen, the IMF, the
Kansas City Fed, Princeton, and SAIF. This study has received exemption from the Institutional
Review Board (IRB) of Princeton University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Long Chen, Yadong Huang, Shumiao Ouyang, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Data Privacy Paradox and Digital Demand
Long Chen, Yadong Huang, Shumiao Ouyang, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 28854
May 2021
JEL No. D03,D12,M15

                                         ABSTRACT

A central issue in privacy governance is understanding how users balance their privacy
preferences and data sharing to satisfy service demands. We combine survey and behavioral data
of a sample of Alipay users to examine how data privacy preferences affect their data sharing
with third-party mini-programs on the Alipay platform. We find that there is no relationship
between the respondents' self-stated privacy concerns and their number of data-sharing
authorizations, confirming the puzzling data privacy paradox. Instead of attributing this paradox
to the respondents' unreliable survey responses, resignation from active protection of their data
privacy, or behavioral factors in making their data-sharing choices, we show that this
phenomenon can be explained by a curious finding that users with stronger privacy concerns tend
to benefit more from using mini-programs. This positive relationship between privacy concerns
and digital demands further suggests that consumers may develop data privacy concerns as a by-
product of the process of using digital applications, not because such concerns are innate.

Long Chen                                       Shumiao Ouyang
Luohan Academy                                  Princeton University
Hangzhou, Zhej                                  Department of Economics
China                                           Bendheim Center for Finance
chenlong.chl@luohanacademy.com                  Princeton, NJ 08450
                                                United States
Yadong Huang                                    souyang@princeton.edu
Luohan Academy
yadong.huang@graduateinstitute.ch               Wei Xiong
                                                Princeton University
                                                Department of Economics
                                                Bendheim Center for Finance
                                                Princeton, NJ 08450
                                                and NBER
                                                wxiong@princeton.edu
    Sharing of personal data by consumers empowers the booming digital economy. However,
there are growing concerns about data privacy protections across the world, as reflected by the
enactments of the General Data Privacy Regulation (GDPR) by the European Union in 2018 and
the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) by the state of California in 2020. Despite the
importance of data privacy and protections, there are many open questions regarding consumers'
data privacy preferences and how their privacy preferences affect their data-sharing choices, as
discussed by the Luohan Academy Report of Chen et al. (2021). This lack of knowledge is
reflected by the "privacy paradox," a term used by policy makers and commentators to loosely
describe a general disconnect between consumers' self-stated privacy preferences and their actual
privacy-seeking behavior. As summarized by Acquisti, Brandimarte, and Loewenstein (2020),
consumers in a wide range of survey and experimental studies often say they care about privacy
but at same time choose to share their personal data either freely or for small rewards.

    The presence of this disconnect is often used as evidence to argue either that consumers'
privacy concerns are not credible or that privacy is no longer achievable in the age of data economy,
motivating a systematic examination of consumers' privacy preferences and data-sharing choices.
Does the privacy paradox exist in realistic settings when consumers are faced with choices to share
personal data with digital service providers? If so, what causes consumers to ignore their privacy
concerns in data sharing? Unless we can understand how consumers trade off their privacy
preferences with data-sharing needs to satisfy their service demands, privacy governance will not
have a solid foundation.

    We aim to address these issues in this study by conducting a survey of Alipay users about their
data privacy preferences and then matching their survey responses with rich administrative data
about their data-sharing choices on the Alipay platform to analyze how their data-sharing choices
are related to their stated privacy preferences. Alipay is a highly popular payment and lifestyle
platform with more than 900 million active users in China. In addition to its widely used payment
system, it also hosts over two million third-party mini-programs, which are lightweight apps that
run inside Alipay to offer a variety of digital services to Alipay users. To use a mini-program, a
user must first authorize sharing of certain personal data with the mini-program. The requested
data sharing varies across mini-programs from innocuous information, such as nickname, to highly
sensitive information, such as the national ID number and credit score.


                                                                                                   1 
 
    In policy discussions, a widely-held view is that the privacy paradox exists because users
simply cannot afford not to use popular digital applications. Because the mini-programs on Alipay
vary substantially in the importance of the provided services and the sensitivity of the requested
information, this setting provides an ideal opportunity to study how different users, when given
the options, balance their privacy preferences with their demand for digital services. Our rich
administrative data allow us to examine each user's data-sharing choices along multiple
dimensions (initial authorization and later cancellation) and connect these choices to the user's
demand for each specific mini-program.

    In July 2020, we worked with Alipay to conduct a survey of Alipay users, which included 12
questions about their preferences and concerns regarding data sharing with Alipay's mini-
programs. We received survey responses from 14,250 Alipay users. In response to a question that
explicitly asked whether they are concerned about their data privacy when sharing personal data
with mini-programs, 46% said they are very concerned, 39% are concerned, and only 15% are not
concerned. During the one-year period from July 2019 to July 2020, the "unconcerned" users on
average initially visited 14.3 mini-programs and authorized data sharing with 11.2 of them, the
"concerned" users initially visited 15.5 mini-programs and authorized 11.5, and the "very
concerned" users initially visited 16.3 mini-programs and authorized 11.3. To the extent that the
last group has rejected nearly 25% of data-sharing requests, these "very concerned" users did not
resign from active protection of their data privacy by blindly authorizing all requests.

    Even though one would expect users with stronger privacy concerns to be more reluctant to
share personal data, these three groups of users with different levels of privacy concerns, on
average, authorize data sharing with almost the same number of mini-programs, even after
controlling for user characteristics such as digital experience, age, gender, and city, as well as
mini-program fixed effects. This lack of difference in data-sharing authorizations is puzzling and
confirms the data privacy paradox in a setting that is highly relevant to the digital economy. Our
study is immune from the critique of Solove (2021) that the behavior involved in privacy paradox
studies involves people making decisions about risk in very specific contexts while their self-
reported privacy concerns are much more general in nature. Our survey questions specifically
target the respondents' concerns about data sharing with Alipay's mini-programs, and are nicely




                                                                                                2 
 
matched by our administrative data, which specifically measure their data-sharing choices with
Alipay's mini-programs.

    It is tempting to attribute the data privacy paradox to noisiness and unreliability of survey
responses. While survey responses are indeed noisy at the individual level, we find that at the
group level, the privacy concerns stated in survey responses are positively associated with the
respondents' propensity to take two privacy-seeking actions in Alipay: one is canceling previously
authorized data sharing with mini-programs, and the other is changing Alipay's default privacy
settings, which tend to make a user's information visible to other Alipay users. These findings thus
validate the survey-based measure of privacy concerns.

    What causes privacy-concerned Alipay users to ignore their privacy concerns in authorizing
data sharing? The privacy literature has suggested a number of psychological and behavioral
factors to explain the privacy paradox, including consumers' ignorance about the consequences of
data sharing (Pew, 2019), present bias which causes consumers to overweight immediate
convenience from using digital applications and underweight future cost of sharing personal data
(Acquisti, 2004), and illusion of control which causes consumers to feel more in control when
making data-sharing choices (Brandimarte, Acquisti and Loewenstein, 2013). In contrast to the
focus of this literature, our analysis uncovers a curious, positive correlation between Alipay users'
data privacy concerns and digital demands--that is, users with stronger privacy concerns also tend
to use their authorized mini-programs more frequently and more extensively. As the greater
demands of privacy-concerned users for digital services offset their privacy concerns about sharing
personal data with the mini-programs, this correlation helps to explain the data privacy paradox.

    The positive correlation between privacy concerns and digital demands is a new finding to the
literature and connects privacy preferences directly to demands for digital services, albeit in an
unexpected way. If privacy concerns are an innate preference like risk aversion, they would deter
users from extensively using digital services that usually require sharing of personal data, leading
to a negative correlation between privacy concerns and digital demands. Instead, our finding
suggests that privacy concerns are possibly a preference developed through the process of using
digital services. That is, as some users gradually develop enjoyment from using the powerful and
convenient services offered by mini-programs, they may also develop more concerns about the
potential risks from their extensive data sharing with those programs. Under this notion of privacy

                                                                                                    3 
 
as a developed preference, it is reasonable to conjecture that privacy concerns grow with the
personal data accumulated with mini-programs.

    To further explore this notion, we examine a hypothesis that more-active users of mini-
programs are more likely to cancel their data-sharing authorizations with mini-programs. While
this hypothesis is a direct implication of privacy concerns increasing with digital demands, it
counters our usual intuition that more-active users incur greater costs from canceling a mini-
program. To our surprise, by using two different measures of user activeness and after controlling
for various user characteristics and mini-program fixed effects, we find that more-active users of
mini-programs in our sample are more likely to cancel their data-sharing authorizations with mini-
programs. It is again difficult to explain this pattern without recognizing that privacy concerns are
positively correlated with user activeness.

    As more-active Alipay users were more likely to complete the survey, our sample of the survey
respondents is biased toward more-active users. To ensure that our findings are robust beyond this
particular survey sample, we have also examined a representative sample of Alipay users randomly
drawn from the full set of active Alipay users. By using an alternative, behavior-based measure of
privacy concerns through users' changes of their Alipay default privacy settings, we find results
that are fully consistent with those found from using the survey sample and the survey-based
privacy measure.

    Our paper adds to the literature on the data privacy paradox, including, Gross and Acquisti
(2005), Goldfarb and Tucker (2012), and Athey, Catalini and Tucker (2017). These studies have
designed creative surveys and experiments to measure individuals' privacy preferences. See
Acquisti, Brandimarte, and Loewenstein (2020) for a recent review of this literature. By combining
survey data with extremely extensive administrative data, our study not only confirms the paradox
in a highly relevant setting but also uses the paradox as an entry to analyze the nature of data
privacy concerns. We uncover data privacy concerns as a preference developed through the use of
digital applications, which, to our knowledge, is a new dimension not previously explored by the
literature. A question closely related to the data privacy paradox is how much a consumer values
her data privacy, as addressed by Acquisti, John and Lowenstein (2013) and Tang (2020). Our
analysis of data-sharing choices faced by consumers on a highly popular digital platform shows



                                                                                                   4 
 
that the value of data privacy crucially depends on the two sides of data sharing, and, interestingly,
is likely to increase over time with the deepening of the data economy.

    This finding also adds to the literature on privacy preferences. See Acquisti, Taylor and
Wagman (2016) for an extensive review. This literature has pointed to several sources of
consumers' privacy concerns. For example, while data sharing allows sellers to better match
consumers with their preferred products, it may also expose consumers to potential price
discrimination by sellers, e.g., Taylor (2004) and Acquisti and Varian (2005). Data sharing also
exposes consumers to greater risk that their personal data might be hacked or leaked (Fainmesser,
Galeotti and Momot, 2019). Data sharing may also expose consumers with weak self-control to
seductive advertising by temptation goods sellers (Liu, Sockin and Xiong, 2020). Our survey also
shows supportive evidence for these arguments. More importantly, our paper shows that regardless
of the sources of privacy concerns, they are likely to grow with the use of digital applications and
the accumulation of personal data shared with digital service providers.

    The emerging literature on the data economy has emphasized two important features of data
sharing--nonrivalry and increasing returns to scale, e.g., Jones and Tonetti (2020), Farboodi and
Veldkamp (2020), and Cong, Xie and Zhang (2020). Considering the implication of our analysis
that consumers' privacy concerns may grow with their data accumulated with digital service
providers, consumers may become more restrictive with their data sharing over time, preventing
the economy from realizing the full promise of data sharing and thus making privacy protection
even more important. This importance has motivated a growing body of literature to empirically
examine the impact of data privacy regulations, e.g., Goldberg, Johnson and Shriver (2019) and
Aridor, Che and Salz (2020). It has also motivated innovative designs of decentralized digital
platforms that are based on cryptographic technologies to prevent digital platforms' potential abuse
of their control of extensive consumer data, as argued by Sockin and Xiong (2020).

    The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides some institutional background about the
data-sharing arrangement between users and mini-programs in Alipay. Section II describes the
survey of Alipay users and reports some summary statistics of the data used in our analysis. We
analyze the data privacy paradox in Section III and further examine the relationship between
Alipay users' privacy concerns and demands for the digital services provided by the mini-programs
in Section IV. We conclude in Section V.

                                                                                                    5 
 
I. Institutional Background

    As this paper studies data sharing of Alipay users with third-party mini-programs on the Alipay
platform, this section provides some background information about the Alipay platform and the
data-sharing arrangement between users and mini-programs in Alipay.

    Alipay is a mobile application, owned by Ant Group, which has grown from offering online
payment services into the world's largest payment and lifestyle platform. Alipay has more than
900 million active users in China, which is more than 70% of the population. In addition to
providing a wide range of financial services, such as digital payments, micro-loans, credit cards,
insurance, and wealth management, Alipay is also an ecosystem that enables third parties to offer
mini-programs inside Alipay. These mini-programs are "subapplications" within the Alipay
application that provide users with advanced and extensive digital services, such as bike-sharing,
on-demand logistics, and food ordering, without requiring users to download or install separate
applications. By June 2020, over two million mini-programs had emerged on Alipay. The number
of mini-program users has increased from 21% of Alipay users in 2015Q4 to 49% in 2019Q2
(Chen et al., 2021).

    To use a mini-program in Alipay, users must authorize sharing of certain personal data with
the mini-program. When a user first visits the mini-program, the mini-program will ask the user to
authorize sharing of certain information necessary for its service, including but not limited to
nickname, gender, phone number, national ID number, and credit score. The requested information
varies across mini-programs. Some information is innocuous, such as a nickname, while other
information is more sensitive, such as one's national ID number and credit score. A user has two
possible choices, either agree to or reject the data-sharing request. Only after the user authorizes
the request, is she allowed to use the service offered by the mini-program. This setting makes the
data-sharing authorization an explicit exchange of the user's data for the mini-program's service.
This data-sharing authorization lasts for a certain time period; at the expiration of that time, the
mini-program will ask the user to authorize the data sharing again at her next entry to the mini-
program. After a user authorizes data sharing with a mini-program, the user also has the option to
cancel the data-sharing authorization at any time before the end of the authorization period. We
will examine both the authorization and cancellation decisions through a sample of Alipay users
in our study.

                                                                                                  6 
 
       For example, Hellobike is a widely used mini-program that offers a bike-sharing service. Users
can access Hellobike through either the separate Hellobike application or the Hellobike mini-
program inside the Alipay application. There were over 230 million registered users of Hellobike
in mid-2019 from the Hellobike application and from mini-programs inside other applications. The
Hellobike mini-program in Alipay requests three types of information at a user's initial visit: 1)
basic information, such as nickname, profile picture, gender, and location; 2) credit score, which
helps to evaluate trustworthiness of the user and determine whether to require a deposit; and 3)
identification information, such as real name, phone number, and national ID number. After the
user authorizes the sharing of the requested information, the user can use Hellobike's shared
bikes.1

       Also relevant to our study are Alipay's default settings for each user's data sharing with other
users; these settings allow users to take advantage of Alipay's social media functions. Alipay
allows each user to choose from a variety of privacy settings, such as whether to show one's real
name to friends in Alipay, whether to make ten recent posts visible to strangers, whether to allow
connection without permission, and whether to be searchable by phone number. These settings
enable users to personalize privacy preferences. The default privacy settings tend to make users
visible and easy to connect with. Some users have chosen to change the default settings, which is
an action that reveals privacy concerns about revealing their information to other Alipay users. In
our analysis, we use changing the default privacy settings as a behavior-based measure of a user's
privacy concerns as an alternative to our main survey-based measure.


II. Survey and Administrative Data

       We conducted a survey of Alipay users about their privacy preferences and then combined the
survey responses with the respondents' administrative data inside the Alipay application to study
how their stated privacy preferences are related to actual data-sharing choices. In this section, we
first describe the survey and then report summary statistics of data-sharing authorizations and other
administrative data of the survey respondents as well as a representative sample of Alipay users
                                                            
1
 Figure A1 in the Online Appendix provides three additional examples to illustrate the variety of data-sharing requests
by mini-programs in Alipay. The first one is a mini-program that searches for part-time jobs. It requests the user to
share a mobile number. The second one relates to social connections and requires users to share their nickname, profile,
gender, and location. The third one provides legal consulting services and requires sharing of the user's location.

                                                                                                                      7 
 
for comparison.

A. The Survey

       In July 2020, we worked with Alipay to conduct a survey of Alipay users. The survey consisted
of 12 questions about Alipay users' preferences regarding data sharing with third-party mini-
programs in Alipay. The survey was distributed through the message box at the center of the front
page of the Alipay application, a highly visible channel,2 to a random sample of 2.5 million active
Alipay users. In total, 27,597 users opened the survey link and 14,250 completed the survey. In
the middle of the survey, there is a question: "Have you ever used mini-programs in Alipay?" Only
those respondents who answered yes to this question would advance to see the rest of the survey
questions specifically related to privacy concerns about data sharing with mini-programs. In the
collected survey responses, 10,875 respondents indicated that they had used mini-programs in
Alipay, accounting for 76% of all respondents.3 These 10,875 respondents are the main sample for
our analysis.

       Due to the natural tendency that more-active users are more likely to pay attention to the
message box in the Alipay application and thus to open the survey link, this sample of survey
respondents is representative of more-active Alipay users rather than the whole population of
Alipay users. To focus on the data privacy paradox, a phenomenon that is revealed by survey
studies, we use this sample of survey respondents as the main sample of our analysis. For
robustness and comparison, we have also examined a representative sample of 100,000 Alipay
users, who were randomly drawn from the whole population of Alipay users.

       The survey was in Chinese; we provide an English translation of the survey questions in the
Appendix. Table 1 summarizes the responses to seven of the questions in the survey. In response
to a general question "Are you concerned about privacy issues while using digital services?" 93%
of the respondents were very concerned, 6% were concerned, and only 1% were not concerned.


                                                            
2
  See Figure A2 in the Online Appendix for a picture of the Alipay front page, which highlights the distribution channel
for the survey.
3
  Figures A3­A6 in the Online Appendix provide some characteristics of the survey respondents. It took most
respondents more than sixty seconds to complete the survey, indicating that they answered the questions in a serious
way (Figure A3). The geographical distribution of the respondents across the provinces in China lines up well with
the distribution of the population (see Figure A5), except that the share of respondents from the most populated
Guangdong province is about 17%, substantially higher than its population share of about 8.2%.

                                                                                                                      8 
 
The very high percentage of respondents either very concerned or concerned with data privacy is
consistent with other surveys regarding general privacy attitudes, which also find strong concerns
about data privacy. 4

       In response to a question specific to data sharing with mini-programs in Alipay, "Are you
concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared with mini-programs in Alipay?"
46% of the respondents were very concerned, 39% were concerned, and 15% were not concerned.
Relative to the earlier question about general concerns about data privacy, the respondents were
less concerned by data sharing with mini-programs in Alipay. The large difference between the
responses to these two questions confirms a concern raised by Solove (2021) about the importance
of closely matching consumers' privacy concerns with their data-sharing choices in analyzing the
data privacy paradox. As this latter question is directly related to our analysis of data sharing with
mini-programs, we will use the respondents' answers to this question as a key measure of their
privacy concerns in our later analysis. Specifically, we will compare the data-sharing
authorizations among respondents with different levels of privacy concerns about data sharing with
mini-programs.

       We also asked the respondents this specific question: "What privacy issues are you concerned
about when using mini-programs in Alipay?" This question allowed each respondent to select more
than one option from a list of four, including: 1) data leakage and security, 2) price discrimination
by merchants, 3) seductive advertising and temptation consumption, and 4) others. The first choice
represents potential concerns about insufficient protections provided by mini-programs to secure
user data and prevent hacking and other data leakage, as modeled by Fainmesser, Galeotti and
Momot (2019). The second choice represents a concern that extensive data sharing by consumers
may allow merchants to infer consumers' reservation prices and thus employ price discrimination.
There is a large body of economics literature analyzing this concern in the digital economy, as
reviewed by Acquisti, Taylor and Wagman (2016), Bergemann and Morris (2019), and Goldfarb
and Tucker (2019). The third choice represents a new concern that in the booming digital economy,
extensive data sharing by consumers may expose consumers' personal weaknesses, such as a lack

                                                            
4
 See Special Eurobarometer 431 (2015), available at
https://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoffice/publicopinion/archives/ebs/ebs_431_en.pdf; Pew Research (2015), available at
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2015/05/20/americans-attitudes-about-privacy-securityand-surveillance/; The
Chinese Consumer Association (2018); Global Privacy Enforcement Network (2018).

                                                                                                               9 
 
of self-control, to online advertisers and sellers, as recently emphasized by Liu, Sockin and Xiong
(2020). Interestingly, 86% of the respondents selected data leakage and security, 49% selected
seductive advertising and temptation consumption, and 21% selected price discrimination by
merchants. To the extent that only 5% of the respondents selected "others," the first three concerns
well captured the main privacy concerns of the respondents.

    In response to two related questions "Do you know how to change privacy settings in Alipay?"
and "Have you ever changed your privacy settings in Alipay?" 60% of the respondents indicated
they knew how to change privacy settings, and 39% of the respondents say they had changed their
privacy settings. We will use changing Alipay's default privacy settings as a behavior-based
measure of privacy concerns for users in our representative random sample.

B. Administrative Data

    The key strength of our study is that we are able to link the survey responses with the
respondents' extensive administrative data inside the Alipay application, which allow us to
examine how respondents' privacy preferences are related to their actual data-sharing choices and
use of the authorized mini-programs. For each Alipay user in our sample, we have access to three
sets of administrative data in Alipay: general information, information related to data-sharing
authorizations and cancellations with mini-programs, and the use of mini-programs. Table 2
reports summary statistics of these three sets of variables for the survey sample and the random
sample, both of which are used in our analysis.

The Survey Sample

    Table 2, Panel A provides the summary statistics of the key variables for our survey sample.
For the general information, also known as user profile, we have access to information on the
gender, age, and city of each user. We also include their digital experience, which is measured by
the number of months since a user first registered on Alipay. The average user age is 32.82 years
and the average digital experience is 74.97 months. We also construct dummy variables to measure
a respondent's privacy concerns based on the answer to the following survey question: "Are you
concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared with mini-programs in Alipay?"
The possible responses were "not concerned," "concerned," or "very concerned." We define the



                                                                                                 10 
 
Concerned Dummy variable as 1 if the answer was "concerned," and 0 otherwise; we define the
Very Concerned Dummy variable as 1 if the answer was "very concerned", and 0 otherwise.

    The information on data sharing with mini-programs consists of four variables at the user level.
The first two variables measure how users share their data with mini-programs over the July 2019
to July 2020 period, which is the one-year period before the survey. First, we count the number of
initial visits by a user to mini-programs; this is when a data-sharing request pops up. Second, we
count how many times the user authorizes the data-sharing requests. The other two variables
measure a user's cancellations of previously authorized data sharing with mini-programs. As we
mentioned earlier, an Alipay user can actively terminate personal data sharing with a mini-program
at any time. We define a dummy variable, has canceled, which takes a value of 1 if the user has
ever canceled data sharing with at least one mini-program during the measurement period of
January 2013 to July 2020 (a seven-year period before the survey), and 0 otherwise. The measure
# Cancellations is defined as the number of active mini-programs that a user canceled between
July 2019 and July 2020. We count a mini-program as active if the user has used it at least once,
which implies an outstanding data-sharing authorization by the user, during the July 2019 to July
2020 period (a one-year period before the survey). The Cancellation Rate is the number of
canceled authorizations from July 2019 to July 2020 divided by the total number of active mini-
programs.

    In our survey sample, a respondent, on average, initially visited 15.72 mini-programs with a
standard deviation of 12.06 and a maximum of 275 from July 2019 to July 2020. The number of
data-sharing authorizations has a mean of 11.37, a standard deviation of 7.63, and a maximum
value of 93. From January 2013 to July 2020, 48% of the respondents canceled at least one data-
sharing authorization. Despite that almost half of the respondents actively canceled data sharing,
the cancellation rate during the one-year period before the survey has an average value of 0.04.
This low cancellation rate shows that it is still relatively rare for Alipay users to cancel data-sharing
authorizations even if they know how to do it.

    The information on mini-program use includes monthly use of each pair of user and mini-
program (user × mini-program × month level). It comprises four variables: 1) the number of active
days; 2) the number of sessions; 3) the number of launches; and 4) the number of page visits. These
variables are different from each other by construction. A user might use a mini-program for

                                                                                                      11 
 
several sessions in a day. In each session, she might launch the mini-program multiple times. In
each launch, she might visit several pages inside the mini-program. We find that, on average, in
each month, a user in our survey sample is active in a mini-program on 0.57 days, with 0.81
sessions, 2.29 launches, and 5.20 pageviews.

The Random Sample

    For comparison, we have also constructed a random sample of 100,000 Alipay users, who we
randomly selected from all active Alipay users. We report their summary statistics in Panel B of
Table 2. The users in this random sample have an average age of 36.6 years and an average digital
experience of 60.7 months, confirming that our main survey sample tends to be younger people
with longer digital experience. During the period between July 2019 and July 2020, users in the
random sample initially visited, on average, 4.56 mini-programs and authorized data sharing with
3.72 of them. Furthermore, in each month, a user in the random sample was active in a mini-
program on 0.27 days, with 0.34 sessions, 1.10 launces, and 3.06 pageviews. As expected, the
survey sample indeed covers more-active users than the random sample, as reflected by their
greater number of data-sharing authorizations with mini-programs and more extensive use of these
mini-programs. Despite the difference in these samples, as we will show, the main results of our
analysis are robust across these samples.

    As the users in this random sample did not participate in our survey, we cannot use their survey
responses to measure their privacy concerns about data sharing with mini-programs. Instead, we
use whether a user has changed Alipay's default privacy settings as a behavior-based measure of
privacy concerns. Gross and Acquisti (2005) have used whether a Facebook user changes the
default data-sharing settings in Facebook as a key indicator of the user's privacy concerns. Note
that this measure is not directly comparable with the survey-based measure of privacy concerns
because the behavior-based privacy concerns are specifically related to sharing personal data with
other users in Alipay, while the survey-based privacy concerns are specifically related to sharing
data with mini-programs.

    Furthermore, as discussed by Liu et al. (2020) in a study of stock trading motives, behavior-
based measures also face another complication in that they are often related to multiple factors,
beyond the particular preference or bias that a behavior-based measure is intended to capture. In
our context, as some users may not know how to change Alipay's privacy settings, the behavior-

                                                                                                 12 
 
based privacy concern measure is also affected by a user's knowledge of and familiarity with the
Alipay application. In the survey sample, 49% of respondents had changed their Alipay privacy
settings, while only 9% of the random sample had done so. This contrast is likely because users in
the random sample tend to be less active and most of them may not know how to change the
privacy settings. Nevertheless, this alternative, behavior-based measure of privacy concerns allows
us to examine how privacy concerns are related to the users' data-sharing choices in the random
sample, after controlling for the users' digital experience and knowledge.


III. The Data Privacy Paradox

    By combining the survey responses of Alipay users with their administrative data in Alipay,
we can directly examine how their data-sharing choices are related to their privacy concerns.
Specifically, we examine whether users with stronger privacy concerns are more reluctant to share
personal data with mini-programs. In this section, we first describe a simple conceptual framework
to anchor our analysis and then present some empirical results, which confirm the data privacy
paradox. We also validate the survey-based measure of privacy concerns and discuss potential
explanations of the data privacy paradox indicated by the respondents in the survey.

A. Conceptual Framework

    To decide whether to share the requested personal data with a mini-program, an Alipay user
needs to compare the benefits from using the mini-program with the privacy costs of sharing the
requested data. Both the benefits and the costs may depend on both the user and the mini-program.
For simplicity, we suppose that the cost for user  to share personal data with mini-program ,  ,
can be linearly decomposed as

                                                           ,

where  represents the user's privacy concerns,  measures the sensitivity of the data requested
by the mini-program and its privacy protection practice, and  is a noise component independent
across the user and mini-program pair. Similarly, we assume that the benefit for the user to use the
mini-program,  , can be linearly decomposed as



                                                                                                 13 
 
                                                            ,
where  is the user component,  is the mini-program component, and  is a noise component,
which is independent across the user and mini-program pair.

    The user chooses to authorize the data sharing if the benefit is greater than the cost:

                                                                        0.

This condition is driven by the characteristics of the user and the mini-program. After controlling
for the mini-program's characteristics, the authorization choice is driven by the user's
characteristics through the term       .

    If  and  are independent, a user with stronger privacy concerns (i.e., larger  ) is less likely
to authorize data sharing, while a user with a greater benefit  is more likely to authorize it. This
implies a simple hypothesis that everything else being equal, privacy-concerned users are less
likely to authorize data sharing with mini-programs. This hypothesis is appealing and is also
consistent with the common wisdom reflected by the discussions of the data privacy paradox. We
will use this hypothesis to anchor our empirical analysis.

    Alternatively, the benefit  and the privacy concern  may be positively correlated across
users. If so, the users' data-sharing choices are not necessarily sensitive to their privacy concerns.
We will also examine this possibility in our later analysis.

B. Privacy Concerns and Data Sharing

    We now compare the number of data-sharing authorizations by Alipay users who have
expressed different levels of concern about data sharing in their responses to the survey question
"Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared with mini-programs in
Alipay?" Figure 1 shows that during the July 2019 to July 2020 period, "unconcerned" users on
average initially visited 14.3 mini-programs and authorized data sharing with 11.2 of them, users
who indicated they were "concerned" initially visited 15.5 mini-programs and authorized data
sharing with 11.5 of them, and users who indicated they were "very concerned" initially visited
16.3 mini-programs and authorized data sharing with 11.3 of them. There is an interesting pattern
that "concerned" and "very concerned" users tend to open more new mini-programs than
"unconcerned" users and eventually authorize data sharing with almost the same number of mini-

                                                                                                   14 
 
programs. It is surprising that there is almost no difference in the number of data-sharing
authorizations among "very concerned," "concerned," and "unconcerned" users. This simple
observation contradicts the aforementioned hypothesis that users with strong privacy concerns are
more reluctant to authorize data sharing.

    As users differ not only in their privacy concerns but also in other dimensions, we adopt a
cross-sectional regression to control for other characteristics:

                          a                   a                        a 

                                             a                                 ,        1

where the dependent variable  is a measure of certain behavior (either the number of data-sharing
authorizations or initial visits to mini-programs) by user  ; the dummy variable  is
defined to be 1 if user  answers "concerned" to the question about sharing data with mini-
programs in the survey, and 0 otherwise; the dummy variable   is defined to be
1 if user  answers "very concerned" in the corresponding question, and zero otherwise;  and
  are two control variables; and  represents fixed effects related to user
characteristics, including gender and city. Without including the controls, the sample size is 10,875.
As the characteristics of some users are missing, including the control variables slightly reduces
the sample size to 10,858.

    Panel A of Table 3 reports the user-level regression results. Columns (1) and (2) show that the
estimates of a and a are both insignificant, with or without the controls, confirming that
"concerned" and "very concerned" users do not authorize data sharing with fewer mini-programs
than "unconcerned" users. Columns (2) also shows that users with more digital experience tend to
authorize more data sharing, but older users tend to authorize less. Furthermore, columns (3) and
(4) show that the level of privacy concerns is positively correlated with the number of initially
visited mini-programs, even though it is uncorrelated with the number of data-sharing
authorizations. Specifically, privacy-concerned users, on average, initially visit 1.24 more mini-
programs, and "very concerned" users, on average, have 1.97 more initial visits; the coefficients
are both highly significant.




                                                                                                  15 
 
    As highlighted by our conceptual framework, a user's data-sharing authorization with a mini-
program may also depend on the services offered and the information requested by the mini-
program. To control for mini-program characteristics, we further expand our regression analysis
to the user-mini­program level for all possible pairs of users and mini-programs in our sample:

            a                  a                        a           a  

                                                                       .       2

For every possible pair of user  and mini-program , the dependent variable  equals 1 if the user
authorizes data sharing with or initially visits the mini-program, and 0 otherwise. Like the user-
level regression specified in Equation (1),  ,   , and  represent controls
for user characteristics. We also add  as mini-program fixed effects, which control for the
possible heterogeneity in the services offered and information requested by mini-programs. The
sample includes 25,414,875 user-mini­program pairs without any controls and 25,364,288 pairs
with controls.

    Panel B of Table 3 reports the user-mini­program level analysis. Even after controlling for
mini-program fixed effects, the results are very similar to that from the user-level analysis.
Columns (1) and (2) show that without and with the controls for user and mini-program
characteristics, there is no significant difference in the number of data-sharing authorizations
across "concerned," "very concerned," and "unconcerned" users, even though the level of privacy
concerns is positively correlated with the propensity to have an initial visit to a mini-program.

    Overall, Table 3 confirms the data privacy paradox--that there is no relationship between the
level of privacy concerns and the number of data-sharing authorizations. This finding contradicts
the aforementioned common wisdom that users with stronger privacy concerns should be more
reluctant to share personal data.

C. Validating Survey-Based Privacy Concerns

    It is tempting to argue that the data privacy paradox may simply reflect unreliability of survey
responses. That is, the survey responses may not truthfully or reliably reflect the respondents'
privacy preferences. This is a common concern about survey-based measures (see, e.g., Bertrand


                                                                                                    16 
 
and Mullainathan 2001). This argument also reflects a widely held suspicion that consumers may
not truly be concerned about their data privacy despite the commonly documented privacy
concerns in surveys of individuals across the world.

    To validate the survey-based measure of privacy concerns, we take advantage of our extensive
administrative data about the survey respondents to examine whether the survey-based measure of
privacy concerns is positively correlated with actions taken by users to protect their data privacy
other than the initial authorization of data sharing with mini-programs. We can observe two such
actions: canceling previously authorized data sharing with mini-programs and changing Alipay's
default privacy settings. Conceptually, we expect a more privacy-concerned user to be more likely
to cancel data sharing and change the default privacy settings.

    We again organize our analysis at both the use level and user-mini­program level. For the user-
level analysis, we adopt the regression specified in Equation (1) but replace the dependent variable
by a dummy variable that indicates whether a user has ever canceled any data-sharing authorization
in the period of January 2013 to July 2020 or whether the user ever changed Alipay's default
privacy settings between May 2017 and April 2020. Note that both actions require the user to not
only have privacy concerns but to have the knowledge necessary to cancel a data-sharing
authorization or to change Alipay's default privacy settings. As shown by Table 1, only 60% of
the respondents in our survey sample indicated that they knew how to change the default privacy
settings in Alipay. We include in the regression extensive controls, including the user's digital
experience and age, as well as city and gender fixed effects. These variables serve to control for
the user's digital knowledge.

    Panel A of Table 4 reports the results from the user-level regressions. In columns (1)­(2), the
dependent variable is the Has Canceled dummy. All else being equal, the respondents who
indicated they are "very concerned" or "concerned" about data sharing with mini-programs have
a significantly higher probability of having canceled data sharing with at least one mini-program
than "unconcerned" respondents under different regression specifications, with or without
including digital experience and age as control variables and including gender and city fixed effects.
Furthermore, the probability of having canceled data sharing is also higher in the "very concerned"
group than in the "concerned" group.



                                                                                                  17 
 
    In columns (3)­(4), the dependent variable is the dummy for Privacy Setting Changed. Without
including the controls, the respondents who indicate they are "very concerned" or "concerned"
about data sharing with mini-programs have a higher probability of having changed their Alipay
default privacy settings than "unconcerned" respondents. Interestingly, column (4) shows that this
higher probability remains highly significant among "very concerned" respondents, albeit not
among "concerned" respondents after including the extensive controls.

    Furthermore, across both cancellation of data sharing in column (2) and change of default
privacy settings in column (4), the probability of taking these protective actions significantly
increases with digital experience and decreases with age, consistent with a knowledge effect that
more-experienced users and younger users are more likely to have the knowledge necessary to
take these actions to protect their data privacy. These results thus confirm that digital experience
and age are useful controls for digital knowledge in these user-level regressions.

    In Panel B of Table 4, we further expand the analysis to the user-mini­program level for
cancellation of data sharing. The advantage of the user-mini­program level analysis is that we can
control for mini-program fixed effects, which allow us to compare the propensity to cancel data
sharing with the same mini-program by users with different privacy concerns. We adopt the
regression specification in Equation (2) for the sample of all existing data-sharing authorizations
between any pair of user and mini-program during the July 2019 to July 2020 period. The sample
size is 481,143. The dependent variable is a dummy that equals 1 if the user ever canceled the data-
sharing authorization, and 0 otherwise. The coefficients of Concerned and Very Concerned
measure the greater propensity of "concerned" and "very concerned" respondents, respectively, to
cancel an existing data authorization. We find that the coefficient is especially large and significant
for "very concerned" users. Thus, Panel B again confirms that users who are "very concerned"
about data privacy are more likely to cancel data sharing with a given mini-program than
"unconcerned" users.

    Overall, while survey responses are noisy at the individual level, Table 4 reports regression
results at both the user level and user-mini­program level to confirm that the survey-based measure
of privacy concerns is positively related to actions taken by Alipay users to protect their own data
privacy, thus validating the survey-based measure of privacy concerns at the group level. This
finding also confirms the recent studies of Liu et al. (2020) and Giglio et al. (2020), which show

                                                                                                    18 
 
that survey responses about trading motives and expectations are consistent with stock investment
behaviors.

D. What Determines Data Sharing Authorizations?

    In the survey, we asked the respondents whether they agreed with each of the following five
statements, which were motivated by public and policy discussions of consumers' data sharing:

    1. I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs since it is safe in Alipay.
    2. I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs since my information has already
        been shared in many platforms.
    3. I have to share my personal data in exchange for digital services even though I am
        concerned by my data privacy.
    4. I only authorize data sharing with a mini-program only when the requested information
        is not important.
    5. I tend to authorize data sharing with mini-programs that are used by my friends.

    The first statement considers that users' trust of Alipay's privacy protection might dominate
their decisions about privacy concerns. Interestingly, as shown earlier in Table 1, 48% of the
respondents in our survey sample regarded Alipay's privacy protection as "very good." The second
statement is motivated by the concern that users' extensive data sharing with many digital
platforms might substantially reduce the marginal concern of sharing data with another mini-
program. This statement is particularly relevant for heavy users of digital applications, who need
to share their personal data with many digital service providers. To some extent, this statement
reflects a general argument that privacy might be impossible under the attack of increasingly
powerful digital technologies in the age of data economy.

    The third statement represents a key consideration for our analysis that the decision to
authorizing data sharing with a mini-program involves a trade-off between the benefits from using
the services and the privacy costs of sharing the requested personal data. The fourth statement
addresses the concern that users might be ignorant about the consequences of sharing the requested
personal data with mini-programs and such ignorance might influence their data-sharing
authorizations. Finally, the fifth statement considered whether social influence, an important



                                                                                               19 
 
mechanism in the digital economy, might induce herding behavior among privacy-concerned users
and lead them to authorize data sharing, e.g., Acquisti, Brandimarte, and Loewenstein (2020).

    Each of these statements present a potential mechanism that helps Alipay users overcome their
privacy concerns when asked to authorize data sharing with mini-programs. For a statement to
explain the lack of any difference in the observed data-sharing authorizations between privacy-
concerned and unconcerned users, we expect the statement to be more agreeable for "concerned"
users than for "unconcerned" users.

    Table 5 summarizes the responses to these statements. We split the respondents into two
groups, one with "concerned" and "very concerned" respondents and the other with "unconcerned"
respondents. Panel A reports the percentage of the respondents in each group that agree and
disagree with each of the five statements. In response to the first statement, 80% of "unconcerned"
respondents agree, while only 42% of "concerned" or "very concerned" respondents agree. That
is, "concerned" or "very concerned" respondents are less likely to agree with Alipay being safe
than "unconcerned" respondents. As such, one cannot attribute the similar number of data-sharing
authorizations by these two groups to the greater confidence of "concerned" and "very concerned"
respondents in Alipay's privacy protection.

    The panel also shows that only 12% of "concerned" or "very concerned" respondents and 30%
of "unconcerned" respondents agree with the second statement that they choose to authorize data
sharing with mini-programs because their information has already been shared in many platforms.
These low fractions of endorsement indicate that these respondents are not yet frustrated with the
challenges in protecting their data privacy. The lower fraction of endorsement by "concerned" or
"very concerned" respondents than "unconcerned" respondents also invalidates this statement as
a possible explanation for the data privacy paradox.

    Similarly, neither ignorance about the consequences of data sharing nor social influence is an
likely explanation. Panel A of Table 5 shows that only 20% of "concerned" or "very concerned"
respondents and 30% of "unconcerned" respondents agree with the fourth statement that they
choose to authorize data sharing with mini-programs when the requested data are unimportant.
Furthermore, 44% of "concerned" or "very concerned" respondents and 58% of "unconcerned"
respondents agree with the fifth statement that they choose to authorize data sharing with mini-
programs that are used by their friends.

                                                                                                20 
 
        The only exception is statement 3: "I have to share my personal data in exchange for digital
services even though I am concerned by my data privacy." About 64% of "concerned" or "very
concerned" respondents agree with this statement, higher than the 55% of "unconcerned"
respondents. This difference indicates that the data privacy paradox might be driven by a trade-off
between the costs and benefits of data sharing.

        Panel B of Table 5 further examines the relationship between the respondents' agreement with
each of these statements and their privacy concerns in a regression with digital experience and age
as control variables, along with gender and city fixed effects. The regression results further confirm
the summary statistics in Panel A. In particular, even after including the control variables and the
user-characteristics fixed effects, "concerned" or "very concerned" respondents are 8.9% more
likely than unconcerned respondents to agree with statement 3, and this difference is highly
significant.

        Taken together, the responses from the survey point to a trade-off between the costs and
benefits of data sharing as a possible explanation for the puzzling data privacy paradox.


IV. Digital Demands

       According to the conceptual framework presented in Section III.A, it is possible to use the
trade-off between costs and benefits to explain the data privacy paradox if the privacy concerns of
sharing personal data with a mini-program are positively correlated with the benefits from using
it.5 In this section, we examine how privacy concerns are related to digital demands.  

A. Privacy Concerns and Digital Demands

        We first analyze the relationship between the respondents' privacy concerns and demands for
digital services provided by the mini-programs. As it is difficult to directly measure digital
demands, we use the respondents' actual use of the mini-programs they authorize in Alipay as a



                                                            
5
 While our analysis focuses on the relationship between digital demands and privacy concerns, another possible
explanation to the observed data privacy paradox is present bias. As suggested by Acquisti (2004), present bias causes
consumers to overweight the benefit in the present and underweight the privacy cost in the future. Such present bias
may provide an orthogonal mechanism to operate in parallel to the mechanism highlighted by our analysis.

                                                                                                                   21 
 
proxy, motivated by an intuitive argument that a user with greater demand for digital services is
likely to more extensively use their authorized mini-programs.

    Specifically, we examine whether privacy-concerned respondents use more or less of the mini-
programs they have authorized in Alipay by using the following regression specification:

          Y      a              a                       a           a  

                                                                            ,           (3)

where Y       is a measure of user  's use of mini-program  in month  ; the dummy variables
 and   are defined as before; Age and Digital Experience are
two control variables; and  ,  , and  represent fixed effects related to user characteristics, mini-
program, and time, respectively. This regression allows us to compare the use of the same mini-
program in the same month by respondents with different levels of privacy concerns.

    Table 6 reports regression results from using four different measures of a respondent's use of
a mini-program in a month: the number of active days, the number of sessions, the number of
launches, and the number of visited pages. Column (1) shows that without including the controls,
a user "unconcerned" about privacy, on average, uses a mini-program on 0.468 days in a month,
while a user "concerned" about privacy uses it on 0.102 more days per month than "unconcerned"
users, and a "very concerned" user uses it on 0.126 more days per month than an "unconcerned"
user, which represents a gap of 27% between "very concerned" and "unconcerned" users. After
including the controls in column (2), the difference between "concerned" and "unconcerned" users
remain positive and significant, and "very concerned" users also use the applications more than
"concerned" users. The results from the other three measures show the same monotonic pattern--
users with strong privacy concerns tend to use their authorized mini-program more frequently and
more extensively. Taken together, the regression results show a positive and robust relationship
between digital demands and privacy concerns.

    How can privacy-concerned users have greater demands for digital services? This question
appears puzzling because we tend to think of privacy concerns as an innate preference that is
independent of an individual's consumption and demand. If privacy concerns are like risk aversion,
it is difficult to perceive that individuals with strong privacy concerns will become intensive users
of digital services, similar to the logic that investors with greater risk aversion cannot have more

                                                                                                  22 
 
risky investments. However, as the digital economy is new and still undergoing rapid
developments, many consumers are still in the process of learning about their own demands for
digital services and concerns about data privacy. It is possible that during this learning process,
consumers gradually develop greater demands for digital services and stronger concerns about data
privacy at the same time.

    This learning process is likely to accompany a user's digital experience. It is easy to believe
that as users gain more digital experience, they develop more demand for digital services, even
though it may be less clear whether they also develop more concerns about data privacy. Figure 2
illustrates how privacy concerns vary across respondents in our survey sample with different
digital experience. Specifically, it sorts all respondents into 12 groups, with the length of digital
experience varying from one to 12 years. We measure the privacy concerns of each group by the
fraction of the respondents who indicate they are "concerned" or "very concerned" about data
sharing with mini-programs. The figure shows that privacy concerns indeed increase with digital
experience. Also note that digital experience is unlikely the only factor that drives the users'
process of learning about their digital demands and privacy concerns. To the extent that our
regression analysis reported in Table 6 has controlled for digital experience, the positive
relationship between digital demands and privacy concerns has to arise from learning beyond
digital experience.

    Another possibility is that privacy concerns grow with the accumulation of the data shared by
a user with digital service providers. The accumulation of the shared data exposes the user to
greater privacy risks. For example, the data might be hacked by or leaked to unauthorized parties;
the data allow digital service providers to infer the user's reservation utility for different products
and thus implement more-effective price-discrimination strategies; and the data allow firms to
analyze the user's behavioral weakness such as lack of self-control to certain temptation goods
and thus more effectively target their advertisements to the user. Regardless of the specific forms
of privacy concerns, the user's privacy concerns are likely to grow with the accumulation of the
shared data.

B. Activeness and Cancellation




                                                                                                    23 
 
    To firmly establish the notion that privacy concerns grow with digital demands, we examine
a further implication of this relationship. If individuals with greater digital demands are also more
concerned by data privacy, we would expect more-active users of mini-programs to have a greater
propensity to cancel previously authorized data sharing with mini-programs. One cannot take this
prediction for granted as it counters our usual intuition that active users should be less likely to
cancel data-sharing authorizations, which would require removing themselves from those mini-
programs.

    To test this hypothesis, we use two measures of a user's overall activeness in mini-programs.
The first is the Active-Month Ratio, which is defined as the weighted average fraction of months
that the user uses each of the authorized mini-programs, where the weight for a mini-program is
the number of months the user has authorized data sharing with the mini-program. The second
measure is log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions), which is the user-level average of the number
of active sessions in a mini-program in each month. Cancellation Rate is the number of canceled
active authorizations from July 2019 to July 2020 (a one-year period before the survey) divided
by the total number of outstanding authorized mini-programs during the period.

    Panel A of Table 7 reports the user-level regression results. Due to missing data of some of the
survey respondents, the sample size is 9,860. Column (1) shows that when Active-Month Ratio
increases by 1%, the cancellation rate increases by 0.04%. Column (2) shows that when log(1+ #
Avg. Monthly Active Sessions) increases by 1, the cancellation rate increases by 0.5%. These two
regressions both confirm that more-active users are more likely to cancel previously authorized
data sharing with mini-programs.

    One might argue that cancellation of data sharing requires knowledge of how to cancel a data-
sharing authorization and as a result, the positive relationship between cancellation and activeness
may reflect active users' being more knowledgeable about cancellation rather than their privacy
concerns. To address this argument, we restrict our sample to the respondents with at least one
cancellation between January 2013 and June 2019, which is right before our main sample period
started in July 2019. To the extent that these respondents all know how to cancel, the differential
cancellation rate among them reflects the difference in privacy concerns rather than knowledge.
In columns (3) and (4), we focus on this subsample of respondents with at least one cancellation
before the sample period. The sample size drops from 9,860 to 3,916. Despite the smaller sample,

                                                                                                  24 
 
the coefficients of the two activeness measures remain highly significant, with a 1% increases in
Active-Month Ratio leading to a 0.08% increases in the cancellation rate, and an increase of 1 in
log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions) leading to a 1.2% increase in the cancellation rate.

    Panel B of Table 7 shows the relationship between the user's activeness and the propensity to
cancel a mini-program in the user-mini­program level. The activeness measures are still at the
user level, and we control for mini-program fixed effects in all the regressions in addition to the
previously used control variables. The strong positive relationship between user activeness and the
propensity to cancel data-sharing authorization remains robust and highly significant, across the
two measures of user activeness and across either the full sample of all survey respondents or the
subsample of respondents who have previously canceled at least one data-sharing authorization.

    Taken together, Table 7 shows that more-active users are more likely to cancel data-sharing
authorizations, and this positive relationship is not driven simply by active users being more
knowledgeable about how to cancel a data-sharing authorization. Instead, this positive relationship
between user activeness and the propensity to cancel data sharing confirms the key notion that
users with greater digital demands tend to be more concerned about data privacy.


V. Robustness

    We acknowledge that our survey sample tends to include more-active users of Alipay, as they
are more likely to complete the survey. This bias raises a natural concern that our findings may
not hold in the general population of Alipay users. To address this concern, we also analyze a
random sample of all Alipay users. This random sample contains 100,000 users that were drawn
randomly from the whole population of all active Alipay users.

    We already summarized the basic characteristics of this random sample in Panel B of Table 2.
The random sample is indeed less active in using mini-programs than the survey sample. The
numbers of visited and authorized mini-programs in the random sample are only about one-third
of those in the survey sample. Of the users in the random sample, 12% canceled data sharing with
at least one mini-program, in contrast to 48% in the survey sample. As to the use of mini-programs,
the average values of the four measures in the random sample reduce to less than one-half of those
in the survey sample. These differences motivate us to examine whether our key findings of the

                                                                                                25 
 
data privacy paradox, the positive relationship between privacy concerns and use of mini-programs,
and the positive relationship between user activeness and cancellation of data-sharing
authorizations remain robust in the random sample.

    Because users in the random sample did not take our survey, we cannot use their responses to
the survey questions to measure their privacy concerns. Instead, we use Privacy Setting Changed,
a dummy indicating whether a user has changed the Alipay's default privacy settings, as a
behavior-based measure of the user's privacy concerns. Relative to the survey-based measure, this
behavior-based measure is more objective as it is immune to noise in the survey, but it is also
affected by the user's knowledge about how to change Alipay's default privacy settings. Despite
this potential weakness, we can still use this behavior-based measure, after suitable control for user
knowledge, to examine how privacy concerns are related to data-sharing authorization and
cancellation.

    In Table 8, we briefly report the results from using this behavior-based measure to re-examine
the three key results in the random sample. Panel A shows the results from user-level regressions
of the number of data-sharing authorizations or initial visits to mini-programs on users' privacy
concerns, using similar specifications as Panel A of Table 3. Interestingly, the more concerned
users, as measured by changing their default privacy settings, not only visit significantly more
mini-programs but also authorize data sharing with significantly more mini-programs, even after
controlling for users' digital experience and age (which are powerful controls for user knowledge)
as well as user gender and user city fixed effects. The greater number of data-sharing authorizations
makes the data privacy paradox even stronger in the random sample.

    Panel B reports how the use of mini-programs is related to privacy concerns by using
specifications similar to Panel A of Table 6, except that we use the privacy setting change dummy
as the measure of privacy concerns. We again find that in the random sample, more-concerned
users tend to use their authorized mini-programs more frequently and more extensively across the
four use measures.

    Panel C examines how the cancellation rate of data-sharing authorizations with mini-programs
is related to user activeness, using specifications similar to Panel A of Table 7. We again observe
that the cancellation rate is significantly and positively correlated with user activeness. Users with
higher Active-Month Ratio and log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions) have a higher probability

                                                                                                   26 
 
of canceling their data-sharing authorizations. This relationship holds in both the full sample and
the subsample of users who had previously canceled at least one mini-program before July 2019.

    Taken together, Table 8 confirms that the three key results of our analysis are robust in the
representative random sample of Alipay users.


VI. Conclusion

    In this paper, we examine how data privacy preferences affect data sharing of Alipay users
with third-party mini-programs in Alipay. Even though one would expect users with stronger
privacy concerns to be more reluctant to share data, we find that there is no relationship between
privacy concerns, measured by either survey responses or observed behaviors, and the number of
data-sharing authorizations, confirming the puzzling data privacy paradox. We attribute this
paradox to the trade-off faced by users between privacy costs and economic benefits of sharing
personal data with mini-programs, along with a curious finding that users with stronger privacy
concerns tend to benefit more from using mini-programs. This positive relationship between
privacy concerns and digital demands further suggests that data privacy concerns may not be innate
but instead, users may develop privacy concerns as a by-product of the process of using digital
applications. To the extent that economic benefits overcome consumers' privacy concerns in their
decisions to share their personal data with mini-programs in our sample, our analysis confirms that
data sharing is beneficial to consumer welfare.




                                                                                                27 
 
Figures

                           Figure 1. The Data Privacy Paradox

This figure presents graphical evidence for the digital privacy paradox by grouping the respondents into
three groups based on their answers to the question "Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by
information shared to mini-programs in Alipay?" We show the average number of visited and authorized
mini-programs in each of three groups.




                                                                                                     28 
 
                  Figure 2. Digital Experience and Privacy Concerns

This figure depicts the fraction of users indicating that they are "concerned" or "very concerned" about
negative impacts caused by information shared with mini-programs in Alipay, across groups with different
digital experience, measured by the length of time since a user registered on Alipay. For each group, we
also show the 68.3% confidence band of the mean estimate.




                                                                                                     29 
 
Tables

                      Table 1. Responses to Selected Survey Questions

This table summarizes responses to seven of the survey questions.


                                                                  Count         Total         Share
    A. Are you concerned about privacy issues while using online services?
                        Very concerned                            13284         14250          93%
                           Concerned                               882          14250           6%
                         Not concerned                              84          14250           1%
    B. What do you think about privacy protection in Alipay?
                           Very good                              6789          14250          48%
                            Ordinary                              5600          14250          39%
                            Not good                               679          14250           5%
                            No idea                               1182          14250           8%
    C. Do you know how to change privacy settings in Alipay?
                              Yes                                 8529          14250          60%
                               No                                 5721          14250          40%
    D. Have you ever changed your privacy settings in Alipay?
                              Yes                                 5557          14250          39%
                               No                                 5025          14250          35%
                            No idea                               3668          14250          26%
    E. Have you ever used mini-programs in Alipay?
                              Yes                                 10875         14250          76%
                               No                                 3375          14250          24%
    F. Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-programs in
    Alipay?
                        Very concerned                             5005         10875          46%
                           Concerned                              4244          10875          39%
                         Not concerned                             1626         10875          15%
    G. What privacy issues are you concerned about when using mini-programs in Alipay? (multiple
    choices)
    Data leakage and security                                     9377          10875          86%
    Price discrimination by merchants                              2314         10875          21%
    Seductive advertising and temptation consumption              5333          10875          49%
    Others                                                         500          10875           5%


 




                                                                                                      30 
 
                                   Table 2. Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics of the two samples of Alipay users used in our analysis. Panel A covers
the main sample of 10,875 users who finished the survey in July 2020 and indicated that they had used
mini-programs in Alipay, while Panel B covers a representative random sample of 100,000 Alipay users.
Each panel reports user information in three parts. First, Part I reports the general information. Concerned
Dummy and Very Concerned Dummy in Panel A are dummy variables that equal 1 if the answer to the
survey question "Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-
programs in Alipay?" is "concerned" or "very concerned." Privacy Setting Changed, a proxy measure for
privacy concerns, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a user changed their privacy setting at least once between
May 2017 and April 2020, and 0 otherwise. Digital Experience is the number of months since the user
firstly registered on Alipay, and Age is the user's physical age in July 2020. Second, for data sharing with
mini programs, Part II includes the number of authorized, entered, and canceled mini-programs over the
period of July 2019 to July 2020; the Cancellation Rate of used mini-programs between July 2019 and July
2020; and the Has Canceled status over the period of January 2013 to July 2020. Third, Part III reports
summary statistics of monthly use variables of Alipay users in each mini-program from July 2019 to July
2020, including number of active days, number of uses, number of launches, and number of visited pages.
Use variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.


                                 Panel A: Sample of Survey Respondents

                                        N        Mean      Std     Min     p25    Median     p75      Max
Part I. General information
Concerned Dummy                       10875       0.39    0.49     0.00   0.00     0.00     1.00      1.00
Very Concerned Dummy                  10875       0.46    0.50     0.00   0.00     0.00     1.00      1.00
Privacy Setting Changed               10875       0.49     0.5     0.00   0.00     0.00     1.00      1.00
Digital Experience (month)            10871      74.97    35.07    4.00 48.00      70.00    97.00   190.00
Age (year)                            10858      32.82    10.27   10.00 25.00      31.00    39.00    82.00
Part II. Data sharing with mini-programs
# Authorized Mini-Programs            10875      11.37    7.63     0.00   7.00     10.00    14.00    93.00
# Entered Mini-Programs               10875      15.72    12.06    1.00 10.00      13.00    19.00   275.00
Has Canceled                          10857       0.48    0.50     0.00   0.00     0.00     1.00      1.00
# Cancellations                       10612       0.26    0.98     0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00     23.00
Cancellation Rate                     10612       0.04    0.12     0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00      1.00
Part III. Use of mini-programs
Monthly Mini-Program Use
    # Active Days                    1521645      0.57    2.92     0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00     31.00
    # Uses                           1521645      0.81    5.01     0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00     75.00
    # Launches                       1521645      2.29    15.07    0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00    230.00
    # Visited Pages                  1521645      5.20    33.67    0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00    503.00



                                                                                                             31 
 
                                 Panel B: Random Sample of Alipay Users

                                        N       Mean    Std   Min   p25   Median   p75     Max
Part I. General information
Privacy Setting Changed               98679      0.09   0.28 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00     1.00
Digital Experience (month)            99600     60.69 36.81 0.00 32.00    55.00    82.00   190.00
Age (year)                            97876     36.61 12.89 1.00 27.00    34.00    46.00   120.00
Part II. Data sharing with mini programs
# Authorized Mini-Programs            100000     2.40   3.52 0.00 0.00     1.00    3.00    136.00
# Entered Mini-Programs               100000     3.02   4.59 0.00 0.00     2.00    4.00    248.00
Has Canceled                          99995      0.12   0.32 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00     1.00
# Cancellations                       57214      0.02   0.31 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00    38.00
Cancellation Rate                     57214      0.00   0.05 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00     1.00
Part III. Use of mini-programs
Monthly Mini-Program Use
    # Active Days                    3036555     0.27   1.59 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00    27.00
    # Uses                           3036555     0.34   2.21 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00    40.00
    # Launches                       3036555     1.10   6.90 0.00 0.00     0.00    0.00    123.00
    # Visited Pages                  3036555     3.06   19.96 0.00 0.00    0.00    0.00    342.00




                                                                                                   32 
 
                              Table 3. The Data Privacy Paradox

This table presents empirical evidence for the data privacy paradox. Concerned Dummy and Very
Concerned Dummy in Panel A are dummy variables that equal 1 if the answer to the survey question "Are
you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-programs in Alipay?" is
"concerned" or "very concerned." Panel A reports the results of the user-level regressions. Columns (1)­
(2) show results for the number of authorized mini-programs, and columns (3)­(4) for the number of
initially visited mini-programs. Panel B reports the results of the user-mini-program level regressions,
where we cluster the standard errors at the user level. Columns (1)­(2) show results for the authorization
dummy, which equals 1 if the user has authorized data sharing with a mini-program, and 0 otherwise; and
columns (3)­(4) show results for the initial visit dummy, which equals 1 if the user initially visited the mini-
program, and 0 otherwise. We denote ***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively.
We report standard errors in parentheses.
                                        Panel A. User Level Analysis

                                       # Authorized Mini-programs               # Visited Mini-programs
                                          (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)
    Concerned Dummy                      0.334                0.207            1.262***         1.243***
                                        (0.213)             (0.214)             (0.322)           (0.320)
    Very Concerned Dummy                 0.127               -0.007            1.990***         1.965***
                                        (0.209)             (0.211)             (0.331)           (0.336)
    Digital Experience                                     0.012***                                -0.002
                                                            (0.002)                               (0.004)
    Age                                                   -0.039***                             0.204***
                                                            (0.009)                               (0.015)
    Constant                          11.177***                                14.310***
                                        (0.178)                                 (0.274)          
    City FE                                N                    Y                   N                 Y
    Gender FE                              N                    Y                   N                 Y
    Observations                         10875               10858               10875             10858
    Adjusted R2                         0.0001                0.021              0.003              0.045




                                                                                                            33 
 
                                 Panel B. User-Mini­Program Level Analysis

                                              Authorized Dummy (0/1)            Visited Dummy (0/1)
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)
    Concerned Dummy (× E-4)                     0.862           0.386        2.897***      2.552***
                                               (0.745)        (0.735)          (0.848)      (0.836)
    Very Concerned Dummy (× E-4)                0.028          -0.465        3.755***      3.340***
                                               (0.736)        (0.728)          (0.846)      (0.840)
    Digital Experience (× E-6)                               5.517***                      3.806***
                                                              (0.800)                       (0.960)
    Age (× E-5)                                             -1.958***                      2.405***
                                                              (0.287)                       (0.367)
    Constant                                 0.004***                        0.005***
                                              (0.0001)                        (0.0001)
    Mini-program FE                               N               Y               N            Y
    City FE                                       N               Y               N            Y
    Gender FE                                     N               Y               N            Y
    Observations                             25414875       25364288         25414875      25364288
    Adjusted R2                                 0.000           0.105           0.000        0.129




                                                                                                      34 
 
                   Table 4. Validating Survey-Based Privacy Concerns

This table reports the relationship between the survey-based measure of privacy concerns and actions taken
to protect data privacy, including canceling data-sharing authorizations with mini-programs and changing
Alipay's default privacy settings. Concerned Dummy and Very Concerned Dummy in Panel A are dummy
variables that equal 1 if the answer to the survey question "Are you concerned about negative impacts
caused by information shared to mini-programs in Alipay?" is "concerned" or "very concerned." Panel A
shows results for user-level regressions. In columns (1)­(2), the dependent variable is a dummy that
indicates whether a user has canceled at least one data-sharing authorization in the period of January 2013
to July 2020. In columns (3)­(4), the dependent variable is a dummy that indicates whether a user has
changed the Alipay's default privacy settings the period of May 2017 to April 2020. Panel B shows results
for user-mini­program level regressions, where we cluster the standard errors at the user level. In each pair
of user-mini­program with existing data-sharing authorization, the dependent variable is a dummy that
indicates whether the user canceled the authorization in the period of July 2019 to July 2020. We denote
***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively. We report standard errors in
parentheses.


                                       Panel A. User Level Analysis

                                        Has Canceled (0/1)              Privacy Setting Changed (0/1)
                                        (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)
    Concerned Dummy                  0.060***       0.033***             0.028*               0.012
                                      (0.014)         (0.014)            (0.015)             (0.015)
    Very Concerned Dummy             0.082***       0.051***            0.060***            0.041***
                                      (0.014)         (0.014)            (0.014)             (0.015)
    Digital Experience                              0.004***                                0.001***
                                                    (0.0001)                                (0.0001)
    Age                                            -0.003***                               -0.001***
                                                    (0.0005)                                (0.0005)
    Constant                         0.420***                           0.454***
                                      (0.012)                            (0.012)
    City FE                              N               Y                  N                   Y
    Gender FE                            N               Y                  N                   Y
    Observations                      10,857          10,841             10,875              10,858
    Adjusted R2                        0.003           0.097              0.002               0.011




                                                                                                          35 
 
                                 Panel B. User-Mini­Program Level Analysis

                                                                     Canceled Dummy (0/1)
                                                                  (1)                    (2)
    Concerned Dummy                                             -0.001                 0.004
                                                               (0.003)                (0.003)
    Very Concerned Dummy                                         0.005               0.011***
                                                               (0.003)                (0.003)
    Digital Experience (× E-4)                                                       1.218***
                                                                                      (0.305)
    Age (× E-4)                                                                       2.547**
                                                                                      (1.141)
    Constant                                                  0.058***
                                                               (0.003)            
    Mini-program FE                                                N                      Y
    City FE                                                        N                      Y
    Gender FE                                                      N                      Y
    Observations                                               481,143                480,542
    Adjusted R2                                                0.0001                  0.107




                                                                                                36 
 
           Table 5. Determinants of Data-Sharing Authorizations in Survey

Panel A summarizes the responses of the respondents to five statements. The respondents are split into two
groups, one for those whose answers to the survey question "Are you concerned about negative impacts
caused by information shared to mini-programs in Alipay?" are "concerned" or "very concerned," and the
other group for those whose answers to this survey question are "not concerned." Panel B shows the
regression results. The dependent variable takes a value of 1 if a respondent agrees with a statement. We
denote ***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively. We report standard errors
in parentheses.
                          Panel A. Summary of Responses to Survey Statements

                                                   Count        Share       Count       Share      Total
                                                         Agree                   Disagree
    Q1: I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs because it is safe in Alipay.
           Concerned or very concerned              3918        42%         5331         58%       9249
                   Not concerned                    1308        80%          318         20%       1626
    Q2: I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs because my information has already been
    shared in many platforms.
           Concerned or very concerned              1083        12%         8166         88%       9249
                   Not concerned                     493        30%         1133         70%       1626
    Q3: I have to share my information in exchange for digital services even though I have concerns about
    my data privacy.
           Concerned or very concerned              6030        65%         3219         35%       9249
                   Not concerned                     913        56%          713         44%       1626
    Q4: I only authorize data sharing with mini-programs when the requested data are not important.
           Concerned or very concerned              1852        20%         7397         80%       9249
                   Not concerned                     485        30%         1141         70%       1626
    Q5: I tend to authorize data sharing with mini-programs that are used by my friends.
           Concerned or very concerned              4042        44%         5207         56%       9249
                   Not concerned                     942        58%          684         42%       1626




                                                                                                        37 
 
                              Panel B. Regression Analysis

Agree with                         Q1           Q2             Q3          Q4          Q5
                                   (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)
Concerned or very concerned     -0.320***    -0.203***   0.083***       -0.096***   -0.158***
                                 (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)
Digital Experience              -0.001***    -0.001***       0.0003**   -0.001***   -0.00001
                                (0.0002)     (0.0001)        (0.0001)   (0.0001)    (0.0002)
Age                             0.002***      0.001**         0.0005    0.004***     -0.001
                                 (0.001)     (0.0004)        (0.0005)   (0.0005)     (0.001)
City FE                             Y            Y              Y          Y           Y
Gender FE                           Y            Y              Y          Y           Y
Observations                      8,658        9,637          9,780       9,356       9,110
Adjusted R2                       0.070        0.052          0.013       0.019       0.014
 




                                                                                               38 
 
                                      Table 6. Demand for Digital Services

           This table examines the relationship between privacy concerns and demand for digital services. Concerned
           Dummy and Very Concerned Dummy in Panel A are dummy variables that equal 1 if the answer to the
           survey question "Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-
           programs in Alipay?" is "concerned" or "very concerned." We use four user-app-month­level variables
           from July 2019 to July 2020 to capture demand for digital services, namely, number of active days, number
           of uses, number of launches, and number of visited pages. We denote ***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and
           10% confidence levels, respectively. We cluster the standard errors at the user level and report standard
           errors in parentheses.



                                 # Active Days         # App Uses        # App Launches      # Visited Pages
                                (1)          (2)     (3)         (4)     (5)         (6)     (7)           (8)
Concerned Dummy              0.102*** 0.088*** 0.155*** 0.138*** 0.434*** 0.399*** 0.847*** 0.772***
                              (0.027)     (0.020)  (0.046)    (0.035)  (0.131)    (0.105)  (0.262)     (0.219)
Very Concerned Dummy         0.126*** 0.102*** 0.206*** 0.172*** 0.568*** 0.490*** 1.144*** 0.996***
                              (0.028)     (0.021)  (0.048)    (0.037)  (0.135)    (0.110)  (0.269)     (0.230)
Digital Experience                        -0.0001             -0.0003             -0.001                -0.001
                                          (0.000)             (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.003)
Age                                      0.020***            0.033***            0.080***             0.128***
                                          (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.005)              (0.011)
Constant                     0.468***             0.651***            1.864***            4.339***
                              (0.023)              (0.039)             (0.112)             (0.226)        
Mini-program FE                  N            Y       N           Y       N           Y       N             Y
Year-Month FE                    N            Y       N           Y       N           Y       N             Y
City FE                          N            Y       N           Y       N           Y       N             Y
Gender FE                        N            Y       N           Y       N           Y       N             Y
Observations                 1,521,645 1,519,020 1,521,645 1,519,020 1,521,645 1,519,020 1,521,645 1,519,020
Adjusted R2                   0.0002       0.119   0.0002      0.096   0.0001      0.086   0.0001        0.078




                                                                                                                 39 
            
                                 Table 7. Activeness and Cancellation

This table examines the relationship between user activeness and cancellation of previously authorized
mini-programs. The sample covers user-mini­program pairs that had been active between July 2019 and
July 2020. Cancellation Rate is the number of canceled mini-programs by a user from July 2019 to July
2020 divided by the total number of the user's active mini-programs. We use two user-level measures of
activeness. The first one is active-month ratio, which refers to the total number of months a user has been
active as a percentage in the total number of months from the beginning to the end of authorizations in all
mini-programs. The second one is the logarithm of the average monthly active uses. Panel A shows results
for the user-level regression. We use the whole sample in columns (1) and (2) and a subsample with users
who canceled at least one mini-program before July 2019 in columns (3) and (4). Panel B reports the results
of the user-mini­program level regressions, where we cluster the standard errors at the user level. We use
the whole sample in columns (1) and (2) and a subsample with users who canceled at least one mini-program
before July 2019 in columns (3) and (4). We denote ***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence
levels, respectively. We report standard errors in parentheses.


                                       Panel A. User Level Regression

                                                                    Cancellation Rate
                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)
    Active-Month Ratio                          0.042***                    0.080***
                                                 (0.008)                     (0.016)
    log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions)                  0.005***                         0.012***
                                                             (0.001)                          (0.003)
    Digital Experience (× E-4)                    -0.112      -0.203       -1.834***        -2.000***
                                                 (0.194)     (0.194)         (0.448)          (0.454)
    Age (× E-4)                                  -1.250*      -0.549         -1.666           -0.682
                                                 (0.746)     (0.689)         (1.896)          (1.823)
    City FE                                          Y           Y              Y                Y
    Gender FE                                        Y           Y              Y                Y
    Sample                                          All         All     Has Canceled       Has Canceled
    Observations                                   9,860       9,860          3916             3916
    Adjusted R2                                   0.012        0.005          0.027            0.014




                                                                                                        40 
 
                                 Panel B. User-Mini­Program Level Regression

                                                                  Canceled Dummy (0/1)
                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
    Active-Month Ratio                           0.038***                  0.072***
                                                  (0.007)                   (0.013)
    log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions)                   0.003**                     0.007***
                                                             (0.001)                      (0.002)
    Digital Experience (× E-4)                     -0.143     -0.221      -1.530***     -1.659***
                                                  (0.173)    (0.175)        (0.396)       (0.402)
    Age (× E-4)                                    -0.922     -0.097        -0.726         0.451
                                                  (0.636)    (0.601)        (1.489)       (1.437)
    Mini-program FE                                  Y           Y             Y             Y
    City FE                                          Y           Y             Y             Y
    Gender FE                                        Y           Y             Y             Y
    Sample                                           All        All      Has Canceled  Has Canceled
    Observations                                  64,611      64,611        28,034        28,034
    Adjusted R2                                     0.01       0.009         0.028         0.024




                                                                                                  41 
 
                                    Table 8. Robustness Tests

This table reports three sets of robustness tests from using the representative random sample of 100,000
Alipay users. Panel A presents the robustness test for the digital privacy paradox, where the regressions are
at the user level. Privacy Setting Changed is a behavior-based measure for privacy concerns, defined as a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a user changed the default privacy settings at least once between May 2017
and April 2020, and 0 otherwise. Columns (1) and (2) show results for the number of authorized mini-
programs, and columns (3) and (4) show results for the number of initially visited mini-programs. In
columns (2) and (4), we control for digital experience and age, along with gender and city fixed effects.
Panel B tests the positive relationship between privacy concerns and demand for digital services, where the
regressions are in the user-mini­program-month level, and the standard errors are clustered at the user level.
We use four variables from July 2019 to July 2020 to capture demand for digital services, namely, number
of active days, number of uses, number of launches, and number of visited pages. Columns (1), (3), (5), and
(7) show regression results without any controls, while columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) control for digital
experience and age, as well as user gender, user city, mini-program, and year-month fixed effects. Panel C
examines the positive relationship between user activeness and cancellation of mini-programs, where the
regressions are at the user-mini-program level, and the standard errors are clustered at the user level. The
sample covers user-mini­program pairs that had been active between July 2019 and July 2020. We use two
measures of user activeness. The first one is active-month ratio that refers to the total number of months
the user is active as a percentage of the total number of months from the beginning to the end of
authorizations in all mini-programs. The second one is the logarithm of the average monthly active uses.
We use the whole sample in columns (1) and (2) and a subsample of users who canceled at least one mini-
program before July 2019 in columns (3) and (4). In all the regressions, we control for digital experience
and age, as well as gender and city fixed effects. We denote ***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10%
confidence levels, respectively. We report standard errors in parentheses.


                        Panel A. User Level Analysis of the Data Privacy Paradox

                                               # Authorized Apps            # Visited Apps

                                                (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)
             Privacy Setting Changed         2.851***      2.443***      3.599***    3.158***
                                              (0.083)       (0.082)       (0.117)     (0.116)
             Controls                            N             Y            N            Y
             Observations                     98,679        96,596        98,679      96,596
             Adjusted R2                       0.023         0.094        0.022        0.068




                                                                                                           42 
 
     Panel B. User-Mini­Program-Month Level Analysis of Privacy Concerns and Digital Demand

                                                  # Active
                          # Active Days                                   # App Launches        # Visited Pages
                                                  Sessions
                          (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)         (7)            (8)
Privacy Setting
                       0.032*** 0.043*** 0.042*** 0.059*** 0.102*** 0.173*** 0.301*** 0.521***
Changed
                        (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.012)       (0.010)       (0.034)     (0.031)     (0.086)     (0.081)
Controls                   N        Y         N              Y             N          Y           N              Y
Observations           3,021,210 3,007,635 3,021,210 3,007,635 3,021,210 3,007,635 3,021,210 3,007,635
Adjusted R2             0.00005    0.061    0.00004       0.052         0.00003     0.046     0.00003        0.045



               Panel C. User-Mini­Program Level Analysis of Activeness and Cancellation

                                                                          Cancellation Rate

                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                   (4)
Active-Month Ratio                            0.006***                            0.022***
                                               (0.001)                             (0.008)
log(1+ # Avg. Monthly Active Sessions)                        0.002***                                  0.008***
                                                                 (0.0004)                               (0.003)
Controls                                            Y               Y                 Y                    Y
Sample                                              All             All          Has Canceled      Has Canceled
Observations                                    57,146            57,146            8,057                 8,057
Adjusted R2                                       0.003           0.002             0.042                 0.041




                                                                                                                       43 
 
References

Acquisti, A. (2004). Privacy in Electronic Commerce and the Economics of Immediate
       Gratification. Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 21-29.
Acquisti, A., Brandimarte, L., & Loewenstein, G. (2020). Secrets and Likes: The Drive for
       Privacy and the Difficulty of Achieving It in the Digital Age. Journal of Consumer
       Psychology, 30(4), 736-758.
Acquisti, A., John, L. K., & Loewenstein, G. (2013). What Is Privacy Worth? Journal of Legal
       Studies, 42(2), 249­274.
Acquisti, A., & Varian, H. R. (2005). Conditioning Prices on Purchase History. Marketing
       Science, 24(3), 367­381.
Acquisti, A., Taylor, C., & Wagman, L. (2016). The Economics of Privacy. Journal of Economic
       Literature, 54(2), 442­492.
Aridor, G., Che, Y. K., & Salz, T. (2020). The Economic Consequences of Data Privacy
       Regulation: Empirical Evidence From GDPR. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Athey, S., Catalini, C., & Tucker, C. (2017). The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small Money, Small
       Costs, Small Talk (Working Paper No. 23488). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bergemann, D., & Morris, S. (2019). Information Design: A Unified Perspective. Journal of
      Economic Literature, 57(1), 44­95.
Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2001). Do People Mean What They Say? Implications for
       Subjective Survey Data, American Economic Review 91, 67­72.
Brandimarte, L., Acquisti, A. and Loewenstein, G., (2013). Misplaced Confidences: Privacy and
      the Control Paradox. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(3), 340-347.
Chen, L., Bolton, P., Holmström, B. R., Maskin, E., Pissarides, C. A., Spence, A. M., Sun, T.,
       Sun, T., Xiong, W., Yang, L., Huang, Y., Li, Y., Luo, X., Ma, Y., Ouyang, S., & Zhu, F.
       (2021). Understanding Big Data: Data Calculus in the Digital Era. Luohan Academy
       Report.
Cong, W., Xie, D., & Zhang, L. (2020). Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy, and Growth in a
      Data Economy. Management Science, forthcoming.
Fainmesser, I. P., Galeotti, A., & Momot, R. (2019). Digital Privacy. Social Science Research
      Network.
Farboodi, M., & Veldkamp, L. (2020). Long-Run Growth of Financial Data Technology.
      American Economic Review, 110(8), 2485­2523.


                                                                                                44 
 
Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J., & Utkus, S. (2020). Five Facts about Beliefs and
        Portfolios, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Johnson, G., Shriver, S., & Goldberg, S. (2019). Privacy & Market Concentration: Intended &
      Unintended Consequences of the GDPR.
Goldfarb, A., & Tucker, C. (2012). Shifts in Privacy Concerns. American Economic Review,
       102(3), 349­53.
Goldfarb, A., & Tucker, C. (2019). Digital Economics. Journal of Economic Literature, 57(1),
       3­43.
Gross, R., & Acquisti, A. (2005). Information Revelation and Privacy in Online Social Networks
       (The Facebook Case). 11.
Jones, C. I., & Tonetti, C. (2020). Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data. American Economic
       Review, 110(9), 2819­2858.
Liu, H., Peng, C., Xiong, W., & Xiong, W. (2020). Taming the Bias Zoo. Journal of Financial
        Economics, forthcoming.
Liu, Z., Sockin, M., & Xiong, W. (2020). Data Privacy and Temptation. Working Paper,
        Princeton.
Pew Research Center (2019). Americans and Privacy: Concerned, Confused and Feeling Lack of
      Control Over Their Personal Information. Pew Research Center.
Sockin, M. & Xiong, W. (2020). A Model of Cryptocurrencies. Working paper, Princeton.
Solove, D. J. (2021). The Myth of the Privacy Paradox. George Washington Law Review, 89, 1-
       51.
Tang, H. (2020). The Value of Privacy: Evidence from Online Borrowers. Working Paper,
       London School of Economics.
Taylor, C. (2004). Consumer Privacy and the Market for Customer Information. RAND Journal
       of Economics 35 (4), 631­50.




                                                                                               45 
 
Appendix: The Survey Questionnaire

Q1. Are you concerned about privacy issues while using online services?

Q2. What do you think about privacy protection in Alipay?

Q3. Are you concerned about negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-programs in
Alipay?

Q4. Will you avoid visiting mini-programs in Alipay because of privacy concerns?

Q5. What privacy issues are you concerned about when using mini-programs in Alipay? (You may
select multiple choices.)
       A. Data leakage and security;
        B. Price discrimination by merchants;
        C. Seductive advertising and temptation consumption;
        D. Others

Q6. How many times will you agree if making authorization decisions for ten mini-programs?

Q7. How often do you regret authorizing information to mini-programs in Alipay?

Q8. Do you agree with the arguments below?

       1) I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs since it is safe in Alipay.

       2) I agree to authorize data sharing with mini-programs since my information has already
          been shared in many platforms.

       3) I have to share my personal data in exchange for digital services even though I am
          concerned about my data privacy.

       4) I authorize data sharing with a mini-program only when the requested information is
          not important.

       5) I tend to authorize data sharing with mini-programs that are used by my friends.

Q9. Do you know how to change privacy settings in Alipay?

Q10. Have you ever changed your privacy settings in Alipay?

Q11. Do you know how to opt out from mini-programs in Alipay?

Q12. Have you ever opted out from mini-programs in Alipay?




                                                                                             46 
 
              The Data Privacy Paradox and Digital Demand
                 Long Chen, Yadong Huang, Shumiao Ouyang, Wei Xiong
                                       Online Appendix



                    Figure A1. Examples of the Authorization Page

This figure presents three examples of the authorization page with different information requirements.
Users need to agree to share requested information before using mini-programs.
 




 




 




                                                                                                   47 
 
               Figure A2. The Alipay Platform and the Survey Channel

This figure shows the distribution channel of the survey conducted by Alipay in July 2020. The survey was
distributed through the message box of Alipay that is located in the middle of the main interface and visible
to all users.
 




                                                                                                          48 
 
                  Figure A3. Completion Time Distribution (Seconds)

This figure plots the completion time distribution (seconds) in the survey conducted in July 2020 by
Alipay. The vertical axis refers to the percentage of responses.




                            Figure A4. Age Distribution (Years)

This figure plots the age distribution of respondents from the survey conducted in July 2020 by Alipay.
The vertical axis refers to the percentage of responses.




                                                                                                          49 
 
                         Figure A5. Distribution Across Provinces

This figure plots the linear correlation between distribution of respondents in the survey and distribution
of the population across provinces. The vertical axis refers to the percentage of responses; the horizonal
axis refers to the percentage of resident population (2019).




 




                                                                                                          50 
 
                        Figure A6. Digital Age Distribution (Years)

This figure plots the digital age distribution of respondents from the survey conducted in July 2020 by
Alipay. The vertical axis refers to the percentage of responses; digital age is defined as the length of time
since a user registered with Alipay.




 




                                                                                                           51 
 
       Figure A7. Dissonance in Surveyed and Actual Authorization Rates

This figure present dissonance between behavioral and self-reported authorization rates in the survey
sample. In Panel A, the horizontal axis is grouped by answers to the question "Are you concerned about
negative impacts caused by information shared to mini-programs in Alipay?" In Panel B, the horizontal
axis is grouped by answers to the question "How many times would you agree in authorizing data sharing
with ten mini-programs?"
                                               Panel A




                                               Panel B




                                                                                                   52 
 
                     Table A1. Robustness: Concern and Cancellation

This table reports the relationship between privacy concerns and cancellation of mini programs in a random
sample. Privacy setting changed, a proxy measure for privacy concerns, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
a user changed their privacy setting at least once between May 2017 and April 2020, and 0 otherwise.
Columns (1)­(3) show results for canceled status, and columns (4)­(6) show cancellation rates. We denote
***, **, and * as the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively. We report standard errors in
parentheses.
 

                                         Has Canceled                          Cancellation Rate
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)              (6)
Privacy Setting Changed       0.218***    0.199***      0.197***    0.017***     0.017***      0.017***
                               (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)
Digital Experience                        0.002***      0.002***                   -0.000          -0.000
                                          (0.00003)     (0.00003)                (0.00001)     (0.00001)
Age                                       -0.001*** -0.001***                   -0.0001***    -0.0001***
                                           (0.0001)     (0.0001)                 (0.00002)     (0.00002)
Constant                      0.098***                              0.003***
                               (0.001)                              (0.0002)
City FE                           N           N            Y           N             N               Y
Gender FE                         N           Y            Y           N             Y               Y
Observations                   98,674      96,591        96,591      57,214        56,866          56,866
Adjusted R2                     0.036       0.072        0.075       0.010         0.010           0.010




                                                                                                             53 
 
