                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF SELECTION INTO THE LABOR FORCE ON THE GENDER WAGE GAP

                                      Francine D. Blau
                                     Lawrence M. Kahn
                                     Nikolai Boboshko
                                     Matthew L. Comey

                                     Working Paper 28855
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28855


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We thank Isaac Cohen for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Nikolai Boboshko, and Matthew L. Comey. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Selection into the Labor Force on the Gender Wage Gap
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Nikolai Boboshko, and Matthew L. Comey
NBER Working Paper No. 28855
May 2021
JEL No. C21,C24,J16,J3,J31,J71

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of selection bias on estimates of the gender pay gap, focusing on whether
the gender pay gap has fallen since 1981. Previous research has found divergent results across
techniques, identification strategies, data sets, and time periods. Using Michigan Panel Study of
Income Dynamics data and a number of different identification strategies, we find robust
evidence that, after controlling for selection, there were large declines in the raw and the
unexplained gender wage gaps over the 1981-2015 period. Under our preferred method of
accounting for selection, we find that the raw median wage gap declined by 0.378 log points,
while the median unexplained gap declined by a more modest but still substantial 0.204 log
points. These declines are larger than estimates that do not account for selection. Our results
suggest that women's relative wage offers have increased over this period, even after controlling
for their measured covariates, including education and actual labor market experience. However,
we note that substantial gender wage gaps remain. In 2015, at the median, the selectivity-
corrected gaps were 0.242 log points (raw gap) and 0.206 log points (unexplained gap).

Francine D. Blau                                Nikolai Boboshko
ILR School                                      Cornell University
Cornell University                              2250 N. Triphammer Rd.
268 Ives Hall                                   Apt U3A
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901                     Ithaca, New 14850
and NBER                                        nb562@cornell.edu
fdb4@cornell.edu
                                                Matthew L. Comey
Lawrence M. Kahn                                Department of Economics
ILR School                                      Cornell University
Cornell University                              443 Uris Hall
258 Ives Hall                                   Ithaca, NY 14853
Ithaca, NY 14853                                mlc349@cornell.edu
lmk12@cornell.edu
I. Introduction

       In one of the more dramatic labor market developments in the last several decades, the

observed gender pay gap in the United States has decreased substantially. Yet, there is

considerable debate about whether the convergence in the observed gap also represents

convergence in wage offers between men and women. The key problem is that we only observe

wages among the employed, a group that self-selects into the labor force (Heckman 1979). With

a self-selected sample, there is the possibility that the convergence in the observed gender wage

gap does not accurately measure convergence in wage offers due to non-random selection into

employment. The direction of this bias is unclear. For example, the recent pattern of labor force

exit among low-skill and likely low-wage men could artificially inflate the gender wage gap,

attenuating our estimates of convergence. Alternatively, the entry of high-skill and likely high-

wage women into the labor market could decrease the observed gender wage gap and exaggerate

the extent of convergence. Shifts in selection patterns over time are an especially salient

concern, since the labor force participation rates of men and women have converged at the same

time as the gender wage gap has declined. In this paper, we attempt to account for selection bias

using multiple methods to understand what has happened to the gender gap in wage offers.

       Previous papers in the literature have found divergent results across techniques,

identification strategies, data sets, and time periods. Consequently, as shown by the summary of

the main findings from this literature in Appendix Table A1, there is no consensus about

selection-adjusted trends in the gender wage gap. Among the methods employed to study

selection-corrected convergence of the gender pay gap are structural modeling of selection into

the labor force (Blau and Beller 1988; Mulligan and Rubinstein 2008; Maasoumi and Wang

2019); limiting to a sample men and women who have a very high employment probability and




                                                 1
for whom selection is unlikely to drive wage gaps--the identification at infinity approach

(Mulligan and Rubinstein 2008; Machado 2017); bounding techniques (Blundell, et al. 2007);

and imputing unobserved wage offers by assigning wages relative to the median based on

observables and employing median regression (Blau and Kahn 2006). On the extreme end of

recent findings, Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) find no evidence of a closing of the gender

wage gap between the 1970s and 1990s once selection and covariates are taken into account. In

contrast, for example, Blau and Kahn (2006) found that the selection- and covariate-adjusted

median wage gap fell substantially between 1980 and 1998

       While all of the above methods provide a possible solution to the selection problem, each

method has important drawbacks. Structural methods make strong identifying assumptions

about variables that affect employment but not wages. Techniques that impute individual wages

in relation to the median make a selection on observables assumption that might not hold. The

identification at infinity approach, while internally valid, is based on a highly selected sample

that may be unrepresentative of the general population, raising external validity concerns.

Bounding techniques require fewer assumptions but can easily generate uninformative estimates.

       In this paper, we advocate for a data-driven approach to correct for selection,

incorporating actual wage observations for individuals who are either not currently in the labor

force or not members of wage samples traditionally used in analyses of the gender wage gap.

We provide evidence on the raw and unexplained (i.e. covariate-adjusted) gender pay gaps in

wage offers across time by using a variety of techniques to adjust for selection, while always

limiting the scope for selection bias using our bolstered wage samples. To capture as many wage

observations as possible, we use the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to

obtain wages for full-time workers with at least 26 weeks of employment, but also part-time




                                                 2
workers and those with less than 26 weeks of employment. In addition, following Neal (2004),

we employ adjacent survey years to obtain wages for individuals who do not have observed

wages in the focal year. Together, these additional wage data create a substantial coverage

improvement compared to more traditional wage samples used in wage gap analyses, limiting the

ability for selection bias to affect the estimates.

        For individuals who still lack wage data after exploiting these features of the PSID --

never more than 10 percent of prime-aged men or 20 percent of prime-aged women -- our

preferred approach is to impute wages. To reduce the potential for bias stemming from these

imputations, we focus on the estimation of the wage gap at the median, but we also study mean

wage gaps and gaps at other quantiles of the wage distribution. We impute wages using what we

call the "probability weighting method." Extending insights from Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008),

instead of imputing specific wages we assign individuals without observed wages a set of

predicted probabilities of their wages falling into each wage decile based on their observed

characteristics. We use the unconditional quantile regression approach of Firpo, Fortin and

Lemieux (2009) to compute wage differentials at the median and Oaxaca-Blinder-style

decomposition (Oaxaca 1973; Blinder 1973) to identify the portions of the differentials explained

and unexplained by covariates.

        The probability weighting method has a number of advantages compared to other

estimation strategies that have been employed to study our question and which are described in

greater detail below. It avoids the strong identifying assumptions required to implement

structural methods (Heckman 1979) and produces results that are more stable and less sensitive

to small alterations in specification. The method also yields more precise estimates than

bounding techniques (Blundell, et al. 2007), although it does require more assumptions in order




                                                      3
to do so. Unlike the identification at infinity approach (Chamberlain 1986 and Heckman 1990), it

produces results for a sample that is representative of the full population. Moreover, as noted by

Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) for their median approach, our probability weighting method does

not assume positive selection, unlike some earlier research (Bayer and Charles 2018; Neal and

Johnson 1996). And it does not require an assumption about the exact level of an individual's

wage but rather their probabilities of being in particular portions of the distribution (Olivetti and

Petrongolo 2008). While our approach uses observables to predict these probabilities, as

discussed below, we implement some robustness checks that address the issue of unobservables.

Although we believe that this approach has considerable merit, we also implement the other

major methods used in the literature to correct for selection, including structural models,

bounding techniques, and identification at infinity.

       We make several contributions. First, we study the gender pay gap by implementing all

the major proposed selection-correction methods using a consistent data set and period. Previous

differences in conclusions about convergence in the gender wage gap could be due to different

techniques but also due to a myriad of choices that researchers make. Second, for each of the

methods, we leverage the longitudinal nature of the PSID to substantially improve wage

coverage as described above. Thus, while nearly every method that we use makes assumptions,

using additional actual wage data reduces the impact that those assumptions make. Indeed, we

find that as wage coverage increases, all the methods converge to the same result. Third, in all

our models we account for actual experience, an important variable in explaining the gender

wage gap given the greater likelihood of workforce interruptions among women than men

(Mincer and Polachek 1974; O'Neill and Polachek 1993; Blau and Kahn 1997) and a likely

source of omitted variable bias in analyses using the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the




                                                  4
American Community Survey (ACS), which do not include information on actual experience.

Moreover, the gender experience gap has declined sharply over the period, making this variable

important in analyses of trends (Blau and Kahn 2017). Fourth, in every method we employ, we

correct for sample selection of males as well as females, as is now appropriate given labor force

participation trends for both groups. As a final contribution, our preferred probability weighting

method implements a richer version of previous median approaches (Neal 2004, Blau and Kahn

2006, and Olivetti and Petrongolo 2008) by estimating predicted wage deciles rather than simple

above and below median probabilities.

       We find that, after controlling for selection, there are large declines in the raw and the

unexplained gender wage gaps over the 1981 to 2015 period. This conclusion largely holds up

across all of the methods for correcting for selectivity bias and is similar to what one would have

concluded without such corrections. In our preferred specification using the probability

weighting approach, the raw median gap declined by 0.378 log points, while the unexplained

median gap declined by a more modest but still substantial 0.204 log points. These declines are

larger than estimates that do not account for selection. These results are highly robust to a range

of alternative specifications, including varying the variables used to predict individual wages,

only using individuals with weak labor force attachment to predict wages (as they may be more

similar to those without wages on unobserved factors), and finally to adjusting our results based

on possible imputation errors. Thus, overall, our results suggest that women's relative wage

offers have increased over this period, even controlling for their measured covariates, including

education and actual labor market experience. However, we note that substantial gender wage

gaps remain. In 2015, at the median, the selectivity-corrected gaps were 0.242 log points (raw

gap) and 0.206 log points (unexplained gap).




                                                 5
II. Related Literature and Our Contribution

       Blau and Kahn (2017) present the trends in the gender wage gap for the 1980 to 2010

period based on observed wages and Oaxaca-Blinder-style decompositions of OLS regressions

(Oaxaca 1973, Blinder 1973). Using PSID data, and consistent with other evidence, they report

convergence in the raw gender wage gap over the 1980 to 2010 period, with substantial

narrowing in the 1980s and slower convergence thereafter. They find that improvement in

women's relative characteristics played a significant role in the decrease, but that much of the

substantial convergence during the 1980s was attributable to a fall in the unexplained gender pay

gap. However, there was no evidence of subsequent decreases in this measure after the 1980s

(see also Blau and Kahn 2006). Blau and Kahn (2017) also explore trends in the gender wage

gap at the 10th, 50th, and 90th quantiles of the male and female wage distributions, finding slower

convergence at the top, both in raw and adjusted gender gaps.

       As discussed above, adjustment for changing patterns in the selection of women and men

into the labor force could alter the conclusions based on simple OLS analyses of observed wages.

(Again, see Appendix Table A1 for a summary of findings.) The traditional method to account

for selection in wage equations uses structural methods initiated by Heckman (1979) where the

correlation between sample selection and wages is explicitly modeled and estimated, typically

with the use of an excluded instrument that affects employment probability but not the wage

itself. This technique has been employed to study trends in the gender wage gap by Blau and

Beller (1988); and Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008). Excluded instruments used include non-

labor income and age distribution of household members (Blau and Beller 1988), and marital

status interacted with number of young children (Mulligan and Rubinstein 2008). Notably,




                                                 6
Mulligan and Rubinstein find a complete lack of convergence in the selection corrected

unexplained wage gap between the late 1970s and late 1990s, while Blau and Beller (1988) find

selection-corrected convergence in the 1970s.

         Arellano and Bonhomme (2017) propose a selection correction method in a similar vein

to the Heckman (1979) approach that is applicable to quantile regression models. Maasoumi and

Wang (2019) employ this method to find broad convergence in the selection-corrected gender

wage gap at the mean and various quantiles, using the number of young children as an excluded

instrument.1 However, their year-by-year selection corrected results are highly volatile.

         Structural methods for selection bias correction provide estimates of structural parameters

that are of interest in themselves. However, potential drawbacks of the structural method for

selection bias correction are that the excluded instruments may not be valid and that the results

may be sensitive to small changes in specification. Instead of making the arguably strong

identifying assumptions needed in order to estimate a structural model, some authors have made

a priori assumptions about where workers without wages would place in the wage distribution.

For example, some assume that those without wages would place below the median, a perhaps

reasonable assumption for men, but less so for women. For examples of this, see Neal and

Johnson (1996) and Bayer and Charles (2018), who study black-white gaps among males. It also

may be valid to assume that individuals with high levels of education and experience would

place above the median, as do Neal (2004) in his study of black-white gaps among females, Blau

and Kahn (2006) in their study of male-female differences over the 1979 to 1998 period, and

Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) in some specifications of their study of international differences


1
 Maasoumi and Wang (2019) note that when they only correct for female selectivity, they find little evidence of
convergence; however, when they correct for male and female selectivity, some evidence of convergence emerges.
Also of note, they find that selection-corrected results show a substantial increase in the gender wage gap at the 10th
and 25th percentiles during the 1990s and 2000s.


                                                           7
in the gender wage gap. Blau and Kahn (2006) find that this approach generally leads to similar

conclusions about convergence patterns in the U.S. gender wage gap at the median as one would

conclude from observed wages, but in each wave the inclusion of individuals who do not have

observed wages substantially increases the unexplained portion of the median gap (and hence the

total gap).

        A modification of this method is to estimate the probability that a person without wages

would place above the median based on where observed workers with similar characteristics

place and impute wages on a probabilistic basis (Olivetti and Petrongolo 2008). Using the PSID

and the European Community Household Panel, Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) also generally

find in their cross-sectional data that estimates of the median wage gap increase as more wage

observations are added. In this approach, one need not make a priori assumptions about where

individuals with unobserved wages would place in the wage distribution. While this method

does not require the perhaps strong identifying assumptions needed for more structural

approaches, it does not fully address the issue of sample selection bias based on unobservable

factors. However, it is less demanding in that it involves placing individuals without observed

wages above or below the median with a certain probability, rather than assigning them an exact

wage. As discussed above, we expand this approach by imputing the wages for the remaining

individuals based on deciles of the wage distribution.

        A method relying on even fewer assumptions is to estimate bounds on the distributions of

male and female wage offers in the population, using methods devised by Blundell, et al. (2007),

who were motivated by the theoretical work of Manski (1994) and Manski and Pepper (2000).2

In the most extreme case, Blundell, et al. (2007) bound the "true" population wage distribution


2
 Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) conduct a bounding exercise to compare the gender pay gap across countries at a
point in time.


                                                        8
-- often by subgroup -- at various quantiles by first assuming all unobserved wages fall below a

given quantile of interest in the observed wage distribution and then assuming all unobserved

wages fall above the quantile of interest. They then show how to tighten these bounds by

layering on assumptions about the wage distribution, including stochastic dominance of the

observed wage distribution relative to the unobserved distribution and the existence of valid

instrumental variables that affect employment but not wages (or at least affect wages in a

monotonic fashion). Studying wages in the United Kingdom in 1978 and 1998, they find

evidence of a closing of the gender wage gap among the less educated and younger segment of

the population. While such analyses do not provide point estimates, if the bounds are relatively

tight, we may still be able to make conclusions about the size and convergence of the gender pay

gap.

       A further approach in the literature at the intersection of the gender wage gap and

selection is the identification at infinity method devised by Chamberlain (1986) and Heckman

(1990) and employed by Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008). This method involves finding a

segment of the population for which the probability of employment is particularly high -- ideally

approaching one -- and estimating the wage gap among this group. For such a sample, there will

not be a correlation between the unmeasured factors affecting employment and those affecting

wages. Using this approach on CPS samples from the late 1970s and late 1990s, Mulligan and

Rubinstein (2008) find almost no convergence in the gender wage gap among samples with high

probability of employment (that is, at least 80 percent). While such methods may be internally

valid, they may not yield results that are representative of the full population. For example, in

Mulligan and Rubinstein's sample of women with high predicted employment probabilities (i.e.

at least 80 percent), 76 percent were never married and fully 98 percent had an advanced degree.




                                                 9
As noted, research based on observed wages has found that the gender pay gap fell much more

slowly at the 90th percentile than at the median (e.g., Blau and Kahn 2017), and women with an

advanced degree are likely to be in the upper portion of the female wage distribution. Thus, the

degree of gender convergence among this group may not be informative about the population in

general.

        Finally, Machado (2017) proposes a kind of hybrid of the structural approaches and the

identification at infinity approach. She also analyzes a group with high labor-force attachment,

looking at the "always employed" -- a group analogous to "always takers" in the local average

treatment effect literature -- to estimate wage gaps on a group for which selection should not

matter. The group is defined with respect to an instrument for employment; she uses the presence

children under 6 as an IV. Hence her estimation of the gender wage gap pertains to employed

women with children. Unlike Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008), she does find evidence of

convergence.3

        While we focus on the gender wage gap at the median, this sort of comparison recently

faced scrutiny from Maasoumi and Wang (2019). They write: "Implicitly assumed and required

in the quantile comparisons is an assumption of rank invariance (or similarity); that is, one's

relative rank is preserved when endowed with each other's skill sets or market returns" (p. 2439).

They claim there is no reason to expect rank invariance to hold with respect to the male and

female wage distributions and reject the assumption using a test proposed by Frandsen and

Lefgren (2018). While this concern is certainly important to consider, we believe the median

wage gap to be an interesting and important descriptive statistic in itself: it is a measure of



3
 Machado (2017) also replicates the structural approach finding of Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) to contrast her
main results, and also finds evidence of convergence using a median bounding approach under a stochastic
dominance assumption.


                                                        10
central tendency free of influence from extreme values. However, we also briefly examine other

quantiles of the distribution.

        As noted, our preferred approach is to use multiple waves of the PSID to obtain wage

observations for those without wages in a given wave. Moreover, using our probability

weighting approach, extending Olivetti and Petrongolo's (2008) median approach, we then

assign decile probabilities for those still without wages in order to create a distribution of wages

for the population. Further, unlike Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008), we address the issue of

selection on unobservables in some of our robustness analyses. As noted in the Introduction, our

approach avoids the strong identifying assumptions required to implement structural methods

and does not impose positive selection. It also yields more precise estimates than bounding

methods, albeit with more assumptions, for which we will provide some evidence. And, unlike

the identification at infinity approach, it produces results for a sample that is representative of the

full population.



III. Data and Summary Statistics

a. Data Sources

        Our primary data source is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We compute

gender wage gap estimates using the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 survey waves, and we

use additional waves to provide supplementary wage information as discussed below. These

years were selected to illustrate trends in the gender pay gap during the previous four decades.4

As noted, the PSID can give insight into what wages might be in a given year if an individual is



4
 The PSID was collected annually through 1997 and biennially thereafter. Note, while the years through 2011
correspond to those used by Blau and Kahn (2017), there are some differences between the samples employed here
and in that study -- for example, the age range used -- so the OLS results are not expected to be identical.


                                                      11
currently out of the labor force, and can be used to construct actual labor market experience (as

opposed to a measure of potential experience based on age and years of education). We restrict

all analyses to individuals aged 25 through 54, allowing us to largely abstract from issues related

to working while in school (on the low end) and working while partially retired (on the high

end). We drop the PSID Latino and Immigrant samples as well as individuals for whom we do

not have information on key wage and employment determinants, such as work experience and

education.5 All wages are converted to 2010 dollars using the GDP Personal Consumption

Expenditures deflator and then log transformed. See the Data Appendix for additional sample

construction details.



b. Wage Samples

        As part of our main approach to correct for selection bias, we successively add

individuals and corresponding wage information to a basic sample of full-time workers

employed 26+ weeks so as to limit the incidence of unobserved wages. Specifically, we first add

part-time workers and those with less than 26 weeks of employment, then remaining individuals

with wage data in nearby PSID waves, and finally all other remaining individuals, for whom we

impute wage decile probabilities. This yields one base sample and three progressively more

inclusive wage samples for which we compute wage gaps. While each successive sample

includes all the wage information of the prior sample, we will reference from time to time

sample "entrants" to characterize features of individuals added to form the indicated sample.

        The basic sample consists of workers who are currently employed full time and who

worked at least 26 weeks during the previous year. This group is relatively homogenous with


5
 We drop the Latino and Immigrant samples because they do not exist for our entire sample period. The Latino
sample exists only for 1990 to 1995. The immigrant sample was only added in the 1997 and 1999 PSID waves.


                                                       12
respect to commitment to the labor force, and we denote them as Sample 1. Next, we add those

employed part time and those working less than 26 weeks, as long as they have worked at least

100 hours in the previous year. 6 We term the union of Sample 1 and this additional group Sample

2. While Sample 2 is likely to be less homogeneous than Sample 1 with respect to labor force

commitment, it has the advantage of covering a larger portion of the population and of course

still contains information on earnings. We believe that it is legitimate to include part-time

workers, since previous research has found little evidence of a part-time wage penalty once

selection is taken into account (Blank 1990; Hirsch 2005). The one exception is a penalty for

men who are of retirement age, a group that we exclude from our sample (Aaronson and French,

2004).

         We then augment Sample 2 by using the longitudinal nature of the PSID to find wages

for individuals for whom we do not have a valid current wage, i.e., who do not satisfy the

restrictions to be in Sample 2. Specifically, for such individuals, we assign wages from an

adjacent wave of the PSID. Prior to 1997, the PSID was fielded annually and thereafter

biennially. In the earlier years, we first assign wages from the surveys that are one year before or

one year after the PSID sample wave, if available, and if wages are available in both years, we

take the mean. If still no wage has been assigned, we repeat the process using wages two years

before or after.7 In years after 1997, we perform a similar procedure focusing solely on the

adjacent surveys (which are two years apart.) We call the union of Sample 2 and these new

individuals Sample 3.




6
  We use a 100 hour cutoff in order to increase our confidence in the computation of hourly earnings. Wage gap
estimates are robust to completely eliminating the 100 hours restriction and to increasing the restriction to 300
hours.
7
  These additional individuals must still meet the 100 hours restriction in the year from which wage data are taken.


                                                         13
       Finding additional wage information from nearby PSID waves may be informative, since

we have actual wage observations on individuals rather than imputations. However, a potential

drawback of this approach is that past or future wage offers may not be indicative of the current

wage offer. For example, on the one hand, a person may have been dismissed from a high wage

job, implying that the wage from one or two years ago may be an overestimate of a current wage

offer. On the other hand, a wage offer from one or two years ago may be an underestimate of

his/her current wage offer if those years coincided with additional human capital formation via

education or training. Moreover, a prior or future wage may have resulted from different market

conditions, again potentially compromising the accuracy of this method of retrieving wage

offers. Hence, we tested several versions of this method, including assigning only past wages or

only future wages to individuals without a current wage. Our main results are robust to such

alternatives, suggesting that this method of finding wages for those without current jobs has

merit. We note that a version of this technique was previously used by Neal (2004), Blau and

Kahn (2006), and Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008).

       Finally, for any individual still without wage data, we impute wages based on covariates

using our probability weighting method. We call the union of Sample 3 and this final group

Sample 4. We impute Sample 4 entrant wages in three steps: 1) We use Sample 3 to estimate an

ordered probit model relating individual covariates to the probability of inclusion in each decile

of the PSID wave-by-sex wage distribution; 2) We use the resulting model to assign each Sample

4 entrant a set of ten probability-weighted wage observations constructed from each entrant's set

of predicted decile inclusion probabilities and a corresponding set of within-decile median

wages; and 3) We iterate on steps 1 and 2 by updating the wage decile thresholds used for the

ordered probit until the final probability-weighted decile assignment of Sample 4 entrants results




                                                14
in an approximate convergence in the decile thresholds. Specifically, this iteration procedure

continues until the wage decile end points from the current iteration are each within 25 cents of

the corresponding deciles from the previous iteration.8

           We estimate decile probabilities (rather than, for example, the probability of being above

median) in order to more accurately assess each Sample 4 entrant's likely placement in the

resulting wage distribution. Since our primary estimation strategy involves estimating median

wage gaps, if one were only interested in describing the gender wage gap at the median rather

than estimating the effects of explanatory variables, it would not matter in which decile we

placed a Sample 4 entrant conditional on being above or below the median. However, we are

also interested in ceteris paribus gender pay gaps at the median. For such analyses it may matter

how far above or below median an individual is, and for this reason, we assign individuals decile

probabilities rather than merely probabilities of being above or below median.

           In the wage decile prediction model, we include the following covariates: years of

schooling, indicator variables for attainment of undergraduate and advanced degrees, quadratics

in years of actual full-time and part-time experience, Census region indicators (omitting the

Midwest), and race/ethnicity indicators (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and

omitting Non-Hispanic other races). We refer to this set of variables as our "human capital

specification" and use it throughout the paper. From the estimated probit, Sample 4 entrants are

assigned a probability of having a wage in each decile. As noted earlier, Sample 4 entrants are

then included in the analysis sample ten times assigning a wage equal to the median of each

decile. These ten observations are then reweighted using the predicted decile probabilities from




8
    Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) use a similar iteration procedure to assign wages above or below the median.


                                                           15
the probit so as to keep each entrant's aggregate weight identical to his or her original sample

weight. As noted, we iterate this procedure until the decile cutoffs approximately converge.

       We note that this method of assigning Sample 4 entrants to wage deciles is based on

observed characteristics. It is also possible that results could be sensitive to the exact

specification of the ordered probit used to predict wages. In Section V, below, we test the

robustness of our main results using a variety of alternative imputation specifications aimed at

addressing these concerns. These checks include: varying the wage sample used to estimate the

ordered probit (i.e. using Sample 3 entrants, who may be more similar to Sample 4 entrants on

unobserved factors); varying the predictor variables used in the ordered probit; varying the exact

within-decile wages used as imputation values; varying the number of wage quantiles used as

outcomes in the ordered probit; and using Sample 3 entrants to estimate error rates for our wage

assignment procedure, and then using those error rates to correct our imputations. We discuss

these tests in more detail below, but our results are robust to each.



c. Summary Statistics

       Table 1 presents basic sample size and wage summary information by PSID wave and

wage sample (Samples 1-4). First, note the degree to which each successive wage sample

increases the fraction of individuals with observed wages in each wave-by-sex PSID sample.

This fraction is denoted in the table as coverage. In Sample 1, the most traditional of our wage

samples, only between 74.4 and 86.1 percent of men and 42.6 and 60.1 percent of women are

covered, depending on the PSID wave. Men's coverage was steady through 1999 and then fell

sharply through 2011, likely reflecting the Great Recession and its aftermath. While coverage

subsequently rebounded somewhat, it remained noticeably below its 1990s levels in 2015.




                                                  16
Women's coverage rose sharply through 1999, fell moderately through 2011, and mostly

recovered by 2015. These data indicate that while inclusion in the most committed wage sample

(Sample 1) is a larger issue for women than men, it has always affected both men and women to

some extent. Moreover, due to opposing male-female employment trends, the gender gap in

coverage between men and women has decreased substantially, declining from 42.9 percentage

points in 1981 to 19.8 percentage points in 2015.

        Adding part-time and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment for Sample 2

increases coverage substantially -- by at least 4 percentage points per wave for men and at least

15 percentage points per wave for women. Adding individuals with wages in nearby waves to

create Sample 3 provides another substantial increase in coverage -- at least a 6 percentage point

increase for men in each wave and at least a 13 percentage point increase for women in each

wave. In Sample 3, male coverage exceeds 92 percent in each wave and female coverage

exceeds 81 percent, dramatically reducing the scope for selection bias relative to traditional wage

samples (e.g. Sample 1).

        In each wave of the PSID, adding the additional wage observations increases the

observed raw gender log wage gap at the median, defined as the male median log wage minus

the female median log wage. Further, adding these wages increases the observed convergence in

the raw gap with each successive sample. That is, the raw median gap declines by 0.297 log

points from 1981 to 2015 in Sample 1, but by 0.326 log points in Sample 2, 0.363 log points in

Sample 3, and 0.380 log points in Sample 4.9 By comparing entrant median wages to incumbent

median wages, we can see that there is positive selection into sample incumbency for both men



9
 Male and female mean and median log wages were very similar when we experimented with different methods of
locating wages for Sample 3, including looking only two years backward or looking only two years forward, as
opposed to our basic approach of finding the nearest wage regardless of whether it was in the past or the future.


                                                        17
and women, on average. For example, for Sample 2 entrant men, the median 2015 log wage was

2.636, while the median incumbent (i.e., Sample 1) log wage was 3.143. In fact, in every wave

and for both sexes, the median entrant log wage is less than the incumbent median, a pattern that

will be useful in assessing the degree of selection bias using a bounding approach (see below). In

some instances, the entrant-incumbent gap is larger for men than women, while in other cases,

the gap is larger for women. However, the overall gender gap in wages increases each time we

expand the sample, reflecting the higher incidence of entrants among women than men.

       Table 2 provides basic summary statistics on key human capital measures: education and

full-time work experience. Similar to earlier research (Blau and Kahn 2017), Table 2 shows over

our sample period female education catching up to and overtaking male education and the male-

female experience gap sharply narrowing. The table indicates that this is the case in each of the

four (increasingly inclusive) samples.

       By studying education and experience among entrants relative to incumbents in the

successive samples, we can assess the human capital characteristics of those not included in most

standard wage analyses (such as Sample 2, 3, and 4 entrants) compared to incumbents. For

women, the successive wage sample entrant groups are always less educated (with respect to

years of schooling) than incumbents on average and nearly always so for men. A similar pattern

characterizes full-time experience: for women, entrants always have less full-time experience

than incumbents, while for men, this outcome occurs in almost every case. Also of note,

women's levels of schooling and full-time experience relative to men's are lower the more

inclusive the sample. Thus, just as the gender pay gap is higher for each successive sample

(Table 1), so is the human capital gap. Our regression analyses will help us determine whether




                                                18
these human capital differences fully account for the larger gender pay gaps in the more

inclusive samples.



IV. Primary Analysis of the Gender Wage Gap at the Median

a. Methods

         Our primary analysis consists of estimating the median gender wage gap via

unconditional median regression (Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux 2009 and 2018), and then

implementing a Oaxaca-Blinder-style decomposition (Oaxaca 1973; Blinder 1973) to identify the

sources of the differential.10 We begin our analysis in 1981 because this is the first year in which

data are available on actual experience for both household heads and partners. Fortunately, this is

a reasonable starting point because 1980 marks the beginning of convergence in the raw gender

wage gap in observed wages as measured in published government statistics (Blau and Winkler

2018).11 We focus on the median because it is more robust than the mean to our imputation

procedure, as described above. When we focus on the adjusted gender gap, the regression

coefficients themselves may be sensitive to exactly how far above or below the median one is

placed (i.e., the estimated decile probabilities), and we will examine the robustness of our

procedures to different methods of imputation. 12 As with the standard Oaxaca-Blinder




10
   An alternative approach would be to estimate conditional quantile regressions and determine the ceteris paribus
gender gap. However, our imputations involve placing people in the unconditional distribution of wages. We are
more confident, for example, in saying that one is below the sample median than that one is below the median
among people with his or her measured characteristics. Other authors using unconditional quantile regression
techniques to study the gender wage gap include Kassenboehmer and Sinning (2014), Töpfer (2017); and Meara,
Pastore, and Webster (2020).
11
   See Figure 7-2, p.173.
12
   For example, Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2009) show that the unconditional quantile regression coefficient at, say,
the median, is the ratio of the derivative of the probability of being above median and the density of wages at the
median. In implementing this technique, the denominator is approximated by a kernel density function, and this can
clearly be affected by how far above or below the median an individual is placed. In robustness checks, we replace
deciles with octiles, quartiles and halves of the distribution, and find very similar results.


                                                         19
decomposition of the mean gender wage gap, we can report the component of the median wage

gap explained by observed characteristics and the component of the gap that is unexplained (i.e.,

the gap adjusted for observed characteristics). The latter is sometimes taken as an indicator of

discrimination but, as is widely acknowledged, may also reflect the impact of unmeasured

characteristics. Beyond the issue of measuring discrimination, it is of interest to know the extent

to which observed characteristics account for the gender pay gap at a point in time, as well as

any changes in the gender wage gap over time. For comparison purposes, we also present results

using a similar approach applied to the mean gender wage gap; results are quite similar.

       The Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) unconditional quantile regression method is

computed using a recentered influence function (RIF). At the median, this function is defined as:

                   ( | 0.5 ,  ) = 0.5 + (0.5 - {  0.5 }) /  (0.5 )                            (1)

where 0.5 is the median of random variable , {  0.5 } is an indicator function that is equal

to one if  is below the median, and  (0.5 ) is the density of  evaluated at the median. Firpo,

Fortin and Lemieux (2009) show that unconditional quantile regression can be implemented by

regressing the RIF on explanatory variables using ordinary least squares. Coefficients can then

be interpreted as the effect of a change in the distribution of covariates on the median, though

Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2018) caution this interpretation is an approximation that holds well

only for small changes. In equation form, this regression is:

                                ( | 0.5 ,  ) =  +  +                                          (2)

       We calculate the RIFs separately for each PSID wave-by-sex grouping. The

decomposition is then estimated within each PSID wave using the same human capital




                                                20
specification variables listed in the previous section, denoted here by  .13 In practice,

estimating the determinants of the numerator of the fraction in equation (1) is equivalent to

estimating a probability (of being above median) equation, which we estimate separately for men

and women. Combining these results with the denominator (estimated by kernel density

methods) and with the male and female distributions of personal characteristics gives us the raw

material for a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition.



b. Results

        Table 3A shows our estimates for the median wage gap and Oaxaca-Blinder-style

decomposition using the RIF approach described above, successively for each wage sample. For

comparison, we also present results for an ordinary least squares (OLS) version of the analysis

along with the traditional mean Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition, and, in Table 3B, we repeat both

analyses using potential experience instead of actual experience to show the importance of actual

experience in the decomposition of the gap.14 We focus on results for the median analysis but

results for the mean are very similar. Unless otherwise noted, the discussion below refers to

models using actual experience. Standard errors are computed using 599 iterations of a bootstrap

procedure that randomly draws PSID observations by wave and recomputes all RIF

computations and decomposition results in each iteration. Generally, standard errors are quite

small compared to gap estimates and long-term convergence estimates (i.e., from 1981 to 2015),

so we largely refrain from discussing inference in this section.




13
   Note that we do not include employment-related variables such as industry, occupation, or union status because
these do not exist for those whose wages we impute and because they are endogenous with respect to human capital.
We also do not include marital status or children because these are also likely endogenous.
14
   In the potential experience specification, wage imputations for Sample 4 use potential rather than actual
experience.


                                                       21
        As discussed, Sample 1 focuses on wages for full-time workers with substantial

employment (at least 26 weeks) in the previous year. This is the sample most similar to that used

in the bulk of research on the gender wage gap. In this sample, we replicate the finding of a

declining raw (unadjusted) gender wage gap at both the mean and the median. The gap has fallen

by about 0.28 log points at the mean and by about 0.30 log points at the median between 1981

and 2015, with the largest decrease occurring in the 1980s. Nonetheless, in 2015, there was still a

substantial wage gap of 0.165 log points at the mean and 0.178 log points at the median. The

explained gender gap (due to differences in measured characteristics) fell gradually over the

1981 to 2015 period, by 0.15 log points at the mean and 0.13 log points at the median, and has

been statistically insignificant since 2011. The unexplained gender gap (adjusted for gender

differences in measured characteristics) fell sharply in the 1980s -- 0.12 log points at the mean

and 0.15 log points at the median. At the mean, the unexplained gap subsequently decreased very

little; at the median, it also fell substantially in the 1990s, but has since risen back to about the

1990 level.

        As noted in our discussion of Table 1, the raw gender wage gap increases as we add more

wage observations through Sample 2 (adding wages for part-time and <26 weeks), Sample 3

(adding wages from nearby PSID waves), and Sample 4 (adding imputed wages). We saw in

Table 2 that the gender gap in human capital also rose across samples. The results in Table 3

indicate that these human capital differences across samples are important in accounting for

differences across samples in the gender wage gap. We may see this by comparing the raw

gender wage gap to the unexplained gap. The results indicate that the differences across samples

are considerably less for the unexplained gap than for the raw gap. Indeed, by 2011 and 2015,

the unexplained gap was very similar across the four samples. Thus, differences across samples




                                                  22
in human capital are an important factor but, prior to 2011, do not fully account for the wage gap

differences across samples.

         Turning to our findings for Sample 4, which fully takes selection into account, we see the

median wage gap falling by 0.38 log points between 1981 and 2015, larger than the convergence

of 0.30 log points for Sample 1, settling at 0.24 in 2015 (compared to 0.18 log points for Sample

1). The unexplained gap also converged more in Sample 4 than in Sample 1 (0.20 log points

compared to 0.17 log points), although the differences between Sample 4 and Sample 1

unexplained gap convergence are not statistically significant and smaller than for the raw gap.

Regardless, our finding of substantial convergence in the unexplained wage gap after correcting

for selection stands in stark contrast to Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008). Another finding is that,

in Sample 4, the pace of convergence in the raw median is now virtually the same in the 1980s

and the 1990s, although the unexplained gap fell more sharply in the 1980s.15 As with the

Sample 1 analysis, the explained portion of the gap fell gradually between 1981 and 2015 and is

now close to 0 although still statistically significant.

         Overall, our results suggest that selection does not account for the convergence of the

measured gender wage gap among full-time workers with at least 26 weeks of employment over

the 1981-2015 period and if anything understates it. This conclusion holds for both the raw gap

and the unexplained gap, as we find stronger convergence for both after adjusting for selection.

Moreover, our results suggest that selection does not account for the gender wage gap in any

given year, but rather that selection results in the magnitude of the gender wage gap being




15
  Blau and Kahn (2006) also report faster convergence in both the raw and unexplained gender wage gaps in the
1990s after correction for selection. They suggest this may reflect the large entry of relatively low-skilled female
single-family heads during this period.


                                                          23
understated, again for both the raw gap in all years and the unexplained gap in years prior to

2015.

         This analysis of selection bias combines the effects of male selection and female

selection, and it is instructive to separate out these two components. We focus on the

unexplained gap because of its relevance to the role of unobservables. To do so, we first

compute the unexplained gender gap in log median wages using men in Sample 1 (the selected

sample of male full time workers with at least 26 weeks) and women in Sample 4 (the full

population of women). We then compare this gap with the unexplained gap using both men and

women from Sample 1. This comparison gives us the effect of female selection. The effect of

male selection is then just the difference between the total selection effect and the female

selection effect.16

         The results of correcting for selection separately for women and men are shown in Figure

1. For comparison, the Figure also shows results when we do not correct for selection and when

we correct for both male and female selection. Figure 1 indicates that both men and women

were positively selected into Sample 1 in every year, with the exception of a near zero effect for

men in 1999 (-0.005). This positive selection is indicated by the unexplained wage gap falling

relative to the unadjusted gap when we only correct for male selection and rising when we only

correct for female selection. The total selection effect is the net impact of positive female

selection reducing the unexplained gap and positive male selection increasing it. Taking 1981 as

an example, the uncorrected gap is 0.371 log points. When we control for only female selection,

it rises to 0.441 log points, implying that positive female selection into Sample 1 lowers the


16
  This definition of the male selection effect is equal to the difference between the unexplained gap for the Sample 1
men vs Sample 4 women comparison and the unexplained gap for the Sample 4 men vs Sample 4 women
comparison. We also used the alternative counterfactual gap (men from Sample 4 and women from Sample 1) to
perform the decomposition, with similar results. Findings for mean regression were also similar.


                                                         24
unexplained gap by 0.070 log points. Men are also positively selected, with a selection effect of

0.031 (i.e., 0.441-0.410), working to increase the unexplained gap. The net effect of male and

female selection, then, is to reduce the unexplained gap by 0.039 log points (i.e., 0.070-0.031).

Performing a similar calculation for 2015 yields smaller selection effects for both men and

women: a reduction in the unexplained gender pay gap of 0.022 log points due to female

selection and an increase of 0.022 log points due to male selection, resulting in a zero overall

selection effect. Women and men are both less positively selected in 2015 than in 1981, with a

larger change for women.

       Combining these male and female selection estimates for 1981 and 2015, we can

calculate the role of female and male selection in the convergence of the unexplained gender pay

gap. When we take account only of female selection, we find that the unexplained pay gap fell

by 0.213 log points between 1981 and 2015. Recall that in Sample 1 the unexplained gender pay

gap fell by 0.165 log points, while the unexplained gap in Sample 4 fell by 0.204 log points.

Thus, changes in female selection are more than sufficient to account for the faster convergence

obtained when we correct for both male and female selection vs. correcting for neither. The

impact of the correction for male selection is actually to slightly reduce convergence.

       Figure 1 is also helpful in studying trends in selection within each subperiod. Beginning

with the 1980s, we see that both men and women became more positively selected, possibly due

to rising returns to skills, with a slightly larger effect for women than men. The latter may be

due the loss of some high wage jobs for men during a period of deindustrialization and

deunionization. The net effect resulted in slightly slower convergence in the selection-corrected

gap vs the uncorrected gap. In contrast, in the 1990s, the degree of positive selection decreased

for both men and women, possibly reflecting the booming economy and, for women, the impact




                                                 25
of welfare reform. Again, the changes for women were slightly larger than those for men,

resulting in somewhat faster convergence in the selection-corrected gap. Between 1999 and

2011, the degree of positive selection again increased for men and women, possibly reflecting

the impact of the Great Recession, this time with a larger effect for men. Thus, while the

uncorrected gap rose during this period, when we correct for selection bias, the gap stayed

roughly constant. Correcting for selection bias thus virtually eliminates a somewhat implausible

increase in the uncorrected gap during this period. Finally, the recovery from the Great

Recession (2011-2015) reduced the degree of positive selection among both men and women,

with a slightly larger effect for women. The result was a roughly constant unexplained gap over

this time period when we correct for selection, in contrast to a slight increase when do not.

        We note that, like the bounding approach discussed below, our method of correcting for

selection combines the possible effects of the relative size of Sample 4 vs Sample 1 and

differences in wages between the two groups. Convergence could represent the effects of

changes in both factors. However, our results were virtually identical when we applied constant

frequency weights to our regression coefficients so as to fix the share of Sample 1 vs Sample 4

observations in each year used in computing the unexplained gaps (see Appendix Figure 1).17

        Table 3B presents results for potential experience. This is of interest because, as noted,

data sources used in analyses of the gender wage gap often do not have data on actual

experience. Moreover, if actual experience is endogenous to wage offers then the potential

experience specification may be considered a reduced form. The results indicate that we

continue to find greater convergence in the raw and unexplained gap after correcting for


17
   Specifically, after estimating each year's regressions, we reweighted each year's data, so that the weighted
frequency of Sample 1 observations in Sample 4 was set to the 1981 level. For comparison, we also reweighted
based on the 2015 frequency of Sample 1 observations. Changes in the unexplained gaps for these reweighted
samples thus only reflect wage differences and not the relative share of Sample 1 observations.


                                                        26
selection bias (i.e., in Sample 4 compared to Sample 1) using potential experience rather than

actual experience. However, a comparison of the results for potential and actual experience

highlights the fact that actual experience is a crucial factor in accounting for levels and changes

in the gender wage gap. Measured factors explain relatively little of the levels or changes in the

gender gaps when potential experience is employed.

       Finally, in Appendix Table A2 we present our unconditional quantile results for a

selection of additional quantiles: the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th. As a word of caution, the rationale

for our Sample 4 wage imputation strategy is stronger for population gaps at the median than for

additional quantiles for reasons discussed above. However, the results are still instructive.

       In Sample 1 we find that convergence in the raw gender wage gap is larger for the 10th

and 25th percentiles than for the 75th and 90th, with the 50th percentile (our primary results from

Table 3A) comprising an intermediate case. Convergence in the unexplained gap tends to fall as

we move up the male and female distributions, and the 90th percentile, in particular, exhibits little

convergence in the unexplained gap. Adjustment for selection bias (Sample 4) raises our

estimates of the levels of the raw and unexplained wage gap in the earlier years in each

percentile. As was the case for the median in Table 3A, convergence is larger for the selectivity

corrected sample for each percentile, with the exception of the unexplained gap in the 25th

percentile. As with the median, this again implies that selection cannot account for the

convergence in either the raw or the unexplained gender wage gap, since convergence is if

anything larger in the selection corrected sample. The pattern of convergence is broadly similar

to that obtained for Sample 1, with convergence in the raw and unexplained gaps tending to be

larger at the 10th and 25th percentiles than at the 75th and 90th, with the 50th comprising an

intermediate case. Again, an exception is that the convergence in the unexplained gap at the 25th




                                                  27
is relatively small. It is interesting to note that there is now more substantial evidence of

convergence in the Sample 4 unexplained gap at the 90th than was the case for Sample 1.



V. Robustness of Our Imputation Procedure

       A potential concern with our research design is that our imputed Sample 4 entrant wages

may not accurately reflect actual wage offers. We thus test the robustness of our results to

several alternatives that probe sensitivity to functional form and explore the possibility of

selection into Sample 4 entrant status based on unobservables. We find that our conclusions are

highly robust. These results are shown in Appendix Tables A3-A6.

       First, we evaluate alternate forms of the wage assignment probit. In our baseline

approach (Table A3 Panel A), we use variables from our primary human capital wage equation

specification, but the results could in principle be sensitive to changing right-hand side variables.

We test the sensitivity to this specification in Table A3 Panel B by augmenting the wage

assignment probit with additional predictors of labor force participation: marital status and

dummy variables for having exactly one child under 6 and two or more children under 6. Results

are nearly identical to our primary specification.

       Next, we test robustness to changes in the estimation and prediction samples. A concern

with our main approach may be that the use of Sample 3 in its entirety could result in incorrect

estimates due to a preponderance of individuals who are highly attached to the labor force and

who may differ in unobserved characteristics from the Sample 4 entrants for whom we are

imputing decile probabilities. Hence, as a further check on the selection issue, we use the Sample

3 entrants (rather than the full Sample 3) to estimate the ordered probits. This group has

relatively weak labor market attachment, like the Sample 4 entrants, and may thus be a good




                                                 28
comparison group on both observed and unobserved dimensions.18 These results are shown in

Table A3 Panel C. The obvious disadvantage of this approach is the small number of Sample 3

entrants, possibly generating unreliable results. Nonetheless, results are remarkably similar to

our baseline model.

        In Table A3 Panel D, we test how results change when we limit Sample 4 entrants to

observations that we can confidently place above or below the median. These are observations

whose combined probability of being above or below the median is greater than or equal to 80

percent. While increasing confidence in our imputation, this approach reduces the coverage of

Sample 4.19 Here, as with our other checks, results are nearly identical to our primary

specification.

        Next, we test robustness to adjusting the wage assigned conditional on being in a

particular decile, with results shown in Table A3 Panel E. In our baseline specification, we

assign to each of the ten duplicate observations the median wage within each decile along with

the assigned probability weight. As a robustness check, we instead assign each duplicated

observation a random wage drawn from a uniform distribution with end points corresponding to

the minimum and maximum of each wage decile. These results are nearly identical to our

primary approach. Next, in Table A4, we check robustness to alternatives to our wage decile

assignment approach by using octiles, quartiles, or halves of the wage distribution. Comparing

the new results (Panels B through D) to our baseline (Panel A) shows only minor differences,

with our overall conclusions unchanged.




18
   Juhn (1992) similarly used a group of workers with weak labor market attachment to simulate wages of those
without jobs in her analysis of male labor supply.
19
    About 29% to 57% of original Sample 4 entrants (depending on wave-by-sex group) are included under this
approach.


                                                        29
         Our wage assignment approach uses observed variables of Sample 4 entrants to impute

decile probabilities based on Sample 3 incumbents. However, it is possible that Sample 4

entrants differ from Sample 3 incumbents in unmeasured characteristics. If so, then our

predicted decile probabilities for Sample 4 entrants may have systematic errors. To examine this

issue, we explore possible errors in our wage assignment approach by calculating how it

performs for individuals for whom we do observe wages. Specifically, we calculate an error rate

by estimating our wage assignment probit model on the lower-coverage samples (e.g., Sample 1)

and then use the model to predict wages for other observations with observed wages (e.g.,

Sample 2 entrants). As we observe both the actual wages and the predicted wage, we can

calculate an error rate.

         Since our focus is on the gender pay gap at the median, our measure of the error rate is

the difference between the actual fraction of observations with an above-median wage to the

fraction predicted by the model.20 While the actual errors in assigning deciles to Sample 4

entrants are unknown, the resulting estimated errors from Samples 2 and 3 will be instructive

about the performance of the probit model, especially when applied to other low labor-force

attachment individuals such as Sample 3 entrants. The error rates are shown in Table A5. In

almost all cases, the predicted share of entrants above median is greater than the actual share.

These patterns suggest that there is positive selection on unobservables into each sample.

Individuals who are more attached to the labor force in most wave-sex cells have better

unobserved characteristics than those who are less attached.




20
  These predicted probabilities are based on the probabilities of being in each of the ten deciles based on the ordered
probit we described earlier. Specifically, the predicted probability of being above median is the sum of the
probabilities of being in the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth deciles.


                                                          30
        To explore the consequences of this exercise, we correct our Sample 4 results under the

assumption that the error rates obtained from using Sample 2 to estimate Sample 3 entrants are

identical to the unobserved error rates in our construction of Sample 4.21 Intuitively, we use

those observed error rates to adjust our probability weights so that the average error becomes

zero. To do this, we generate a reweighting factor, which is the actual fraction of individuals

belonging to a wage decile divided by the predicted fraction. That is, if the average Sample 3

predicted probability of being in decile  from the Sample 2 ordered probit is  , ( = 1, ... ,10),

and the actual Sample 3 incidence of being in decile  is  , we create a Sample 4 entrant

adjustment factor of  / . If, for instance, the Sample 2 workers are positively selected on

unobservables relative to the Sample 3 entrants, then 1 /1 (corresponding to the first decile) for

Sample 3 will likely be greater than one, while 10 /10 (corresponding to the tenth decile) will

likely be less than one. 22 We then multiply the probability weights in our baseline model by the

reweighting factor and rescale the new weights for Sample 4 entrants to sum to their original

PSID weight. This adjustment addresses possible selection on unobservables into Sample 4

entrant status by assuming that the extent of this selection relative to Sample 3 is the same as that

of Sample 3 entrants relative to Sample 2.

        The results for this correction are shown in Table A6, with our baseline results in Panel A

and the corrected results in Panel B. Overall, correcting for possible errors in assigning Sample 4

entrants to deciles in this way has little effect on either the raw gender pay gap, the explained




21
   We use the error rates from Panel B in Table A5. In that panel Sample 2 is used to predict the wages of Sample 3
entrants.
22
   More formally, the adjustment procedure is as follows: 1) For each Sample 4 entrant  , compute the predicted
decile probabilities 1 , ... , 10 from the Sample 3 ordered probit; 2) Across all Sample 3 entrants, compute the
average predicted probabilities and actual incidence for each decile,  and  ; 3) Scale the Sample 4 entrant
probabilities by the adjustment ratio, giving a new weight of  × ( / ); 4) Adjust the new weights such that
they sum to one for each Sample 4 entrant.


                                                        31
gap, or the unexplained gap, and does not affect our overall conclusions about convergence. In

fact, the convergence in the gender wage gap is actually slightly higher after these potential

errors are taken into account.23

         Finally, although we believe there are considerable gains to fully utilizing all available

wage data, we also considered the robustness to more restricted samples. Specifically, we

applied our imputation technique to all those not included in Sample 1 and then to all those not

included in Sample 2 (i.e. to those without strong labor market commitment or without current

year wages). Our results (available on request) were very similar to our baseline estimates.

Thus, our conclusion about convergence is not an artifact of our procedure that utilizes data from

less committed workers and retrieves wages from nearby waves of the PSID.

VI. Alternative Treatments of Selection

         To complement the unconditional quantile regression analysis from above, we next show

how the wage information gleaned from the successive wage samples can be combined with

other selection correction methods to produce alternative estimates of the gender wage gap and

its trends.



a. Structural Selection Bias Correction Models

         The first alternative approach we consider is to explicitly account for the correlation

between unmeasured factors affecting employment and those affecting wages. We use two

alternative methods to implement such an approach. First, we estimate a traditional Heckman

(1979)-style selection bias correction model. This involves estimating a wage sample inclusion



23
  When we used Sample 2 entrants to compute the error rates (instead of the full Sample 2), the results were very
similar. We use the full Sample 2 to estimate the prediction errors because the sample size is much larger than that
of the Sample 2 entrants.


                                                         32
probability model and then a wage model that includes a selection adjustment term derived from

the first stage model. Identification of the first equation is aided by the use of instrumental

variables, and following the literature, we use variables related to the presence of children under

6 in the family -- specifically, a dummy variable for having exactly one child under 6 and a

dummy variable for having two or more children under 6.24 We note that in addition to

functional form, the validity of this application rests on this exclusion restriction. Both equations

include a vector of controls from our human capital specification. We estimate this model

separately for each wave and gender using the Full Information Maximum Likelihood

estimator.25

         Second, we estimate a selectivity bias correction model where the wage equation is a

median regression model, using methods developed by Arellano and Bonhomme (2017). 26

Specifically, this method estimates a selection-corrected conditional quantile regression model,

which we use to simulate the male and female wage distributions to back out unconditional

median gaps. Use of median regression provides a better comparison to our preferred estimates

of the gender pay gap using the probability weighting method. In addition, median regression

may have more favorable properties than OLS since it is more robust to alternative distributional

assumptions about wages (Koenker and Bassett 1978).




24
   We experimented with various forms of the children variable, including using only one dummy variable for
having any children under 6. In addition, we implemented models with a continuous variable for the number of
children under 6 as the instrument. The results, available on request, were similar to those in Tables 4 and 5.
25
   In two instances in Sample 3, we do not obtain convergence in this estimator and instead estimate the gap and
decomposition using a traditional two-step approach. In our bootstrap procedure, again based on 599 resamples, we
prioritize the FIML estimator, but defer to the two-step approach when that fails to converge, and finally do not
correct wages at all in cases when the probit in the first stage of the two-step does not converge. In practice, failure
of the first-stage probit to converge is only an issue when wage sample coverage approaches 1, and hence the
selection correction is not very relevant. Specifically, this only affected men (largely in earlier waves) and occurred
in just 36 instances out of the 8985 male selection correction models that were estimated during the bootstrap
procedure.
26
   As mentioned earlier, Maasoumi and Wang (2019) also use these methods in their study of the gender pay gap.


                                                           33
         Tables 4 and 5 show results for the selection bias corrected gender wage gaps at the mean

and median, respectively.27 Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.28 While there are

some similarities in the results for both methods, the findings differ along important dimensions

as well, illustrating the sensitivity of selectivity bias corrections to functional form. The first

column of each table provides the non-selection adjusted raw gender wage gap for reference. As

previously discussed, there are large declines over the period in all three samples for both the

mean and the median.29 The pattern of large declines in the raw gender wage gap generally

holds when selection is accounted for (column 2 of each table). At the median, the gap decreases

at roughly the same rate as the uncorrected raw gap and by comparable amounts across the three

samples -- 0.346 to 0.374 log points. At the mean, although the sample gap does decline in each

sample, it does so by less than the uncorrected raw wage gap in Samples 1 and 2.30 We observe

more convergence in Sample 3, where the decrease is roughly the same as for the uncorrected

raw wage gap.

         The difference between the selection adjusted and the unadjusted raw gap is the selection

bias (column 3 of each table). The results appear to be sensitive to functional form and to vary

across samples. For Samples 1 and 2, we find that estimated selectivity bias increases over time



27
   We also estimated our selection corrected models using potential experience. The results for both the mean and
the median, available on request, are broadly similar to those in the paper, which use actual experience.
28
   As with our primary results, we draw bootstrap samples by PSID wave and recompute all estimated gaps and
decompositions in each iteration. We use 599 iterations in the mean selection model, but only 299 iterations in the
median selection model due to computational burden. The 299 iterations in the median selection model matches
Maasoumi and Wang (2019). Further, in the quantile selection model, again for computational ease, we follow
Maasoumi and Wang (2019) in fixing the wave-by-sex copula parameter rho to the value computed in the main
sample. While we do not fix any of the selection parameters in the mean selection correction bootstrap, we find that
standard errors are similar when we do so.
29
   Note that the uncorrected gaps in Table 5 differ slightly from those in Table 3. They are not identical because the
raw median gaps in Table 5 are calculated by simulating unconditional wage distributions via the conditional
quantile regression model (Chernozhukov, Fernández-Val, and Melly 2013) and thus does not exactly equal the true
median gap. This is done to facilitate comparison to the quantile selection model, which uses this same method of
backing out the unconditional distribution. It is encouraging that the estimates are very close.
30
   Standard errors are somewhat large in Sample 1 and the convergence is not significant at traditional levels.


                                                         34
at the mean but that it decreases over time at the median. However, the only case that is

significant at traditional levels is the change at the median in Sample 2. As we move to the more

inclusive Sample 3, selection bias becomes smaller both at the mean and at the median and

estimated selectivity bias has small effects on the levels and trends in the gender wage gap in

both cases.

       Turning to column 5 of each table, we see that, as was the case for selectivity bias, the

unexplained gap shows markedly different changes over time at the mean vs. the median. At the

median (Table 5), we find substantial and highly significant convergence in the unexplained gap

of roughly similar magnitude for all three samples. In contrast, at the mean, there is virtually no

convergence in the unexplained gap for Samples 1 and 2, though standard errors are very large.

These results are very similar to the lack of convergence in Mulligan and Rubinstein's (2008)

results. However, there is robust evidence of convergence for Sample 3 at roughly the same

magnitude as for the median.

       The differences in the selectivity bias corrected results at the mean and those at the

median illustrate the sensitivity of these structural methods to functional form, with stronger

evidence of convergence at the median. Since analysis of the median is more robust to outliers

than the mean, and since our results for Sample 3 indicate convergence at the mean as well, it

seems reasonable to conclude that the preponderance of the evidence using structural selection

bias correction methods shows convergence in the unexplained pay gap. The magnitudes of the

declines at the median and in Sample 3 at the mean are strikingly similar to those we obtained for

the unexplained gaps in Table 3 for the corresponding samples using our probability weighting

method.




                                                 35
b. Bounding

        Blundell, et al. (2007) establish theoretical "worst case" bounds on the wage distribution

in the presence of selection and show how the bounds can be shrunk by layering on assumptions.

An implication of the Blundell, et al. (2007) bounding formulae is that bounds become tighter

the larger the proportion of observations for which wages are available, allowing us to get more

informative bounds through our additional wage samples (S2 and S3). This insight was also

exploited by Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008), though we extend their exercise by examining

trends in the median wage gap in the US, and by using results in Blundell, et al. (2007) to further

tighten the bounds.

        To derive worst case bounds on the gender wage gap, first consider bounds on each

gender-specific wage distribution. Without complete sample coverage for wage data, the true

gender-specific wage distribution is unknown. However, the true distribution can be decomposed

as follows:

                    ( | ) = ( | ,  = 1)() + ( | ,  = 0)[1 - ()]                                              (3)

where (  | ) is the wage CDF given gender   ,  , () is the probability of observing a

wage for gender g, and   0,1 represents no observed wage and observed wage, respectively.31

Each element of the above decomposition can be observed with the exception of ( | ,  =

0). However, since a CDF must, by definition, fall between 0 and 1, the population wage

distribution can be bounded above by

                                    ( | ,  = 1)() + [1 - ()]                                                 (4)

and bounded below by



31
  To fix ideas, E can be thought to represent "employed," though we extend this model to bound wage distributions
when wages are obtained from our Sample 3 construction, which does not exclusively consist of the currently
employed.


                                                       36
                                      ( | ,  = 1)()                                           (5)

Blundell et al. (2007) note that bounds on quantile q of the gender-specific wage distribution can

be obtained by finding the wages that solve

                              = ( | ,  = 1)() + [1 - ()]                                      (6)

and

                                     = ( | ,  = 1)()                                          (7)

where equation (6) corresponds to the lower bound on the quantile and equation (7) corresponds

to the upper bound on the quantile. Note that the lower bound is only identified if   1 - ()

and the upper bound is only identified if   () unless we are willing to impose an

assumption on the bounds of the wage distribution. In everything that follows, we focus on q =

0.5, or the median. We obtain an upper bound on the median gender wage gap by subtracting the

lower bound of the female median wage from the upper bound of the male median wage.

Similarly, we obtain a lower bound on the median gender wage gap by subtracting the upper

bound of the female median wage from the lower bound of the male median wage. These are

"worst case" bounds because we impose no assumptions on the nature of selection. However,

because the width of the bounds is decreasing in (), we can shrink the bounds by simply

adding additional wage information through our wage samples.

       Table 6 presents bounds on the gender wage gap for the whole population. The table

includes estimates for convergence bounds for the 1981-2015 period calculated as follows.

Recall that convergence is indicated by a reduction in the gender wage gap over the period and

thus by a negative sign on the difference between the 1981 and 2015 gender gaps, with a more

negative number indicating more convergence. Bearing this in mind, the algebraically lower

bound for convergence (the most convergence) is the 2015 upper bound gender gap minus the



                                                37
1981 lower bound gender gap. The algebraically upper bound for convergence (the least

convergence) is the lower bound gender gap for 2015 minus the upper bound gender gap for

1981. We compute 95 percent confidence regions for the bounds of the gender wage gaps and

their convergence using a bootstrap procedure with 599 replications.32

         Table 6 begins by showing the results for the worst case bounds. For Sample 1, the

bounds are wholly uninformative: they are consistent with very large gender wage gaps in either

direction and consistent with both increases and decreases in the gap over time.33 However, by

Sample 3, the worst case bounds become informative. The point estimates suggest at least some

degree of a gender wage gap in favor of men in every PSID wave. The point estimates further

imply a decrease in the gap between 1981 and 2015, since the lower bound in 1981 is greater

than the upper bound in 2015. While the 95 percent confidence region on convergence slightly

overlaps zero (no overlap would rule out no convergence at the 5 percent significance level), the

preponderance of the 1981 interval lies well above the maximum of the 2015 interval: in 78

percent of our bootstrap iterations, the lower bound of the gender gap in 1981 is greater than the

upper bound in 2015.

         Next, we present results using two of the assumptions suggested by Blundell, et al.

(2007) for shrinking the bounds on wage distributions: first-order stochastic dominance (FOSD)



32
   For a given year and sample, we create 599 replications. We then compute a 95 percent confidence region for the
gender pay gap in that year by computing the 5th percentile of the lower bound estimates among the 599 replications
and the 95th percentile of the upper bound estimates. To create a confidence region for convergence, we compute the
lower bound and the upper bound for convergence for each replication. The 95 percent confidence region for
convergence is then the interval between the 5th percentile for the lower bound of convergence and 95th percentile of
the upper bound for convergence. We use the 5th and 95th percentiles (instead of, for example, the 2.5 and 97.5
percentiles) in light of Imbens and Manski's (2004) reasoning that when a parameter can only be identified in a
region with positive width, the "true parameter can be close to at most one of the region's boundaries...Then,
asymptotically the probability that the estimate for the lower bound exceeds the true value can be ignored when
making inferences on the true parameter" (p. 1845).
33
   For 1981 we are unable to provide assumption free bounds on the median wage in Sample 1 because fewer than
half of the women have observed wages. We report bounds in this wave using the assumption that unobserved
female wages are bounded by the highest and lowest observed female wage in 1981.


                                                         38
and exclusion restrictions. Under the assumption of first-order stochastic dominance of the

observed wage distribution relative to the unobserved wage distribution, the median wage of the

unobserved distribution can be no higher than the median wage of the observed distribution. This

assumption has no effect on the lower bound for each gender-specific median wage but reduces

the upper bound on the unobserved median wage to be exactly that of the observed median wage.

Table 1 shows that this assumption is plausible: in every case, the median wage of sample

entrants is no greater than the median of the incumbents and in most cases is substantially

lower.34 Note that this does not assume that every entrant's wage is below the incumbent median,

but merely that the median wage of entrants is no greater than the median wage of incumbents.

Table 6 shows that a FOSD assumption substantially shrinks the bounds on the wage gap,

especially the lower bound. Now, in Sample 2, there is some evidence of convergence, since the

upper bound of the 2015 pay gap at 0.466 log points is only slightly above the lower bound of

the 1981 pay gap at 0.464 log points. We note, however, that the 95 percent confidence region on

convergence crosses zero.

         When we turn to the more inclusive Sample 3, we find that both the point estimates and

confidence region strongly suggest convergence. Specifically, the upper bound in 2015 is 0.336

log points, and the lower bound in 1981 is 0.583 log points. Moreover, the 95 percent

confidence region on convergence is far from crossing zero, and in 100 percent of the bootstrap

iterations the lower bound in 1981 is greater than the upper bound in 2015.

         Blundell, et. al (2007) show that another method for shrinking the bounds beyond the

worst case scenario can be devised if one is willing to assume that there is a variable, z, that



34
  Maasoumi and Wang (2019) implement a test of FOSD and reject it in many years of CPS data, but their test
relies on a valid instrumental variable. They use children under 5 as an instrument, but if this variable is itself
endogenous, then the rejection of FOSD may not be valid.


                                                          39
affects the probability of employment without affecting the wage -- i.e., an exclusion restriction.

Under this assumption, the bounds on the population wage distribution become

                     max{( | , ,  = 1)(, )}  (  | )                                                       (8)
                        


                                         min{( | , ,  = 1)(, ) + [1 - (, )]}
                                             

To implement the exclusion restriction, we use a three-valued instrument indicating the number

of children under 6, with values for zero, one, or two or more.35 We apply this to both men and

women. Table 6 shows the bounding results for imposing this exclusion restriction, as well as

results for imposing it in combination with FOSD. The exclusion restriction shrinks the bounds

by similar proportions to the FOSD assumption. Using either the exclusion restriction alone or

the exclusion restriction with FOSD, we continue to find strong evidence of convergence in

Sample 3, and strong evidence of convergence in Sample 2 when we use both FOSD and the

exclusion restriction. However, when combining the exclusion restriction with FOSD, some of

the bounds are invalid: in some cases, the lower bound exceeds the upper bound. This implies

that one or both of the assumptions fail in the years in question. Given our confidence in the

FOSD assumption discussed above, we suspect this result implies a violation of the exclusion

restriction. Nonetheless, the bounding exercise shows considerable evidence of convergence

when using Sample 3, with some evidence for Sample 2 as well.

           One downside of this exercise is that we cannot obtain bounds on a measure directly

comparable to the unexplained wage gap. However, we can provide some indirect evidence on

this matter by showing bounds for segments of the population with similar covariates.

Specifically, we categorize individuals into four mutually exclusive groups divided by education

and experience: first by whether they have more than eight years of full-time experience, and


35
     We create one instrument with the three values, rather than two dummy variables, for tractability.


                                                           40
then by whether they have any college education. We present these results in Table 7 and do

find considerable evidence of convergence within groups.36 We only present results for bounds

under the assumption of first order stochastic dominance but show full bounding results for each

category in Appendix Tables A7A and A7B.37

          As with the bounding results from the entire sample, the bounds become much more

informative as we move through wage samples, and we concentrate on the results for Sample 3.

In all four groups, the Sample 3 point estimate for the lower bound on the gap in 1981 is greater

than the Sample 3 upper bound on the gap in 2015, meaning the point estimates imply

convergence. Only in the low experience-low education group are these two bounds close in

magnitude. For the other three groups (low education-high experience; high education-low

experience, and high education-high experience), the upper bound in 2015 is 0.10 to 0.12 log

points less than the lower bound for 1981. The 95 percent confidence regions on convergence

suggest that we can rule out no convergence on both high experience groups, with almost all of

the confidence region indicating convergence within the remaining two groups. Moreover, for

these latter two groups, the lower bound for the gender pay gap in 1981 is greater than the upper

bound in 2015 in 92 percent of the bootstrapped iterations for the high education-low experience

group and 64 percent of the iterations for the low education-low experience group. Overall, then,

our bounding exercise shows strong evidence of convergence in the gender pay gap within skill

groups.




36
  We use 299 bootstrap iterations and the same procedure outlined earlier to compute confidence regions in Table 7.
37
  Using the exclusion restriction or the exclusion restriction combined with FOSD also leads us to conclude
convergence within skill groups. However, in several instances, the bounds were invalid (i.e., the lower bound was
in some cases larger than the upper bound within a given sample). This suggests that the exclusion restriction may
be invalid, an assessment that also calls into question the structural selection bias correction methodology discussed
above.


                                                         41
c. Identification at Infinity

        The selection bias problem in wage equations arises when the unmeasured factors

affecting employment also affect wages. Drawing on work by Chamberlain (1986) and

Heckman (1990), Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) point out that if we can isolate a subsample of

workers who have characteristics such that virtually all of them will be employed, then there will

be no unmeasured factors affecting employment. If the expected and actual probability of

employment are exactly one, there can be no correlation between omitted factors and the error

term in a wage equation. This is the identification at infinity method of correcting for selection

bias. A drawback of the method is that the sample of workers who have an employment

probability near one may not be representative of the broader population. For example, among

Mulligan and Rubinstein's (2008) 1970-99 female sample of workers who had at least an 80

percent probability of employment, fully 76 percent were never married, 98 percent had graduate

degrees, and the raw gender pay gap was only 0.045 log points (Mulligan and Rubinstein 2008,

p. 1104). Note that these women were being compared to a more heterogeneous group of men

with, for example, much lower education levels than the women. The authors find little

convergence in the gender wage gap among this group and thus conclude that the gender wage

gap overall has not fallen. We should point out, however, that this is an elite group of women in

the labor force, and earlier research has found suggestive evidence that the gender pay gap has

fallen much more slowly at the top of the distribution than elsewhere (e.g., Blau and Kahn 2017).

Of course, unlike Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008), such analyses compare high earning women

to high earning men.

        With these caveats in mind, we implement the technique by first estimating a probit

separately for each wave and gender where the dependent variable is employment full-time and




                                                42
26+ weeks and the independent variables are from our baseline human capital specification. We

estimate separate employment probit regressions for each wave because the determinants of

employment may have changed over time. For comparison, we also present results using fixed

1981 employment probits. Ideally, we would only include groups whose employment

probability is close to 100 percent, as this would lead to the least bias. Practically, this results in

small and unworkable sample sizes. Following Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008), we set the

threshold for being included in the identification at infinity sample at 80 percent.38

        The estimates using the identification-at-infinity method are shown in Table 8. In Panel

A, we present results where the sample is obtained using a probit model estimated separately for

each wave. The raw mean gender wage gap was 0.305 log points in 1981, while the median gap

was 0.296 log points. However, by 2015, women in the infinity sample actually outearned men

by 0.062 log points at the mean and 0.055 log points at the median. The fact that women earned

more than men in 2015 in this sample is related to the construction of the identification at infinity

samples. By 2015, virtually all (98.4 percent) of women with high predicted employment

probabilities had a BA or advanced degree, in comparison to 60.9 percent of men; women also

had more years of full-time work experience than men did. While these descriptive statistics for

the infinity sample suggest that this group is not representative of the labor force, we nonetheless

note that there is strong, statistically significant convergence in the raw gender wage gap.39 The

unexplained gap also decreases, from 0.375 log points in 1981 to 0.231 in 2015 at the mean (a

statistically significant reduction), and from 0.357 to 0.254 at the median (although this reduction

is not significant). Thus, even among a group with very high predicted employment rates, there


38
  We also restrict the wage sample to those who satisfy Sample 1 inclusion restrictions.
39
  Not surprisingly, the explained gap favors women in each year, since women in the infinity sample have more
education and full-time experience than men do; women's advantage in the explained gap grows over time as their
relative education levels rise.


                                                       43
is a substantial unexplained gender pay gap, and it appears to have fallen over time, as our basic

approach also showed in Table 3.

        In Panel B, we test the robustness of our infinity results to obtaining the infinity sample

using an employment probability probit estimated only on the 1981 wave. The results are

qualitatively similar to those in Panel A, except that by 2015, there is still a raw gender pay gap

favoring men, although it is small and not significant: 0.080 log points at the mean and 0.089 at

the median.40 The unexplained gap is very similar to that in Panel A in each year. Most

importantly, using a constant 1981 probit to populate our infinity samples, we continue to see

convergence in raw and unexplained gender pay gaps over time. 41

        Thus, all specifications of identification at infinity show convergence in the raw and

unexplained gender gaps at both the mean and the median. In terms of magnitude, the resulting

estimates of convergence are somewhat lower than in our preferred probability weighting

method (Table 3). This may suggest slower overall convergence using this method. However, it

could, and more likely does, reflect the slower progress of the sample of elite women who, as

noted, other evidence suggests had slower progress than women overall during this period.

        Our finding of convergence in the unexplained gender pay gap among the infinity sample

contrasts with that of Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008). They used the CPS and of course did not

have data on actual experience. Ideally, we would explore the role of specification by

implementing our specification on the CPS and Mulligan and Rubinstein's (2008) specification

on the PSID. Unfortunately, this is not possible. We obviously cannot calculate actual experience

in the CPS since that information is not collected in that data set. Moreover, as the PSID is a


40
  As in Panel A, the explained gap favors women in each year and grows more favorable to women over time.
41
  Out of concern that the sex-specific regression may not perform well given the small number of women in the
identification at infinity sample, in Appendix Table A8 we instead estimate a single wage regression including a
female dummy variable. Our decomposition results are highly robust to this procedure.


                                                        44
smaller dataset, we cannot obtain reasonable sample sizes of women in the identification at

infinity sample using potential rather than actual experience (and other covariates).42 By

including actual experience as an explanatory variable, we are better able to predict strong labor

force attachment (at least an 80 percent probability of employment) and generate sufficient

samples of women who meet this cutoff in the PSID. While it is unfortunate that we cannot

replicate Mulligan and Rubinstein's (2008) specification in the PSID, we would again point out

that, whether or not the identification at infinity method reveals convergence, this group is not

likely to be representative of the labor force. While conclusions about the infinity sample may

be internally valid, they are likely to differ from those for the whole labor force.



VIII. Conclusions

         In this paper, we have studied the impact of selectivity bias on the gender pay gap, with

special attention to the question of whether the gender pay gap has fallen since 1981, as raw data

and ordinary least squares regression analyses without selection bias correction have indicated.

Selection bias arises when unmeasured factors affecting employment also affect wages given

employment. If this is the case, then the measured gender pay gap among the employed may not

be representative of the gender gap in wage offers for the population. Moreover, if selection bias

changes over time in particular ways, the apparent reduction in the gender pay gap since 1981

may be an illusion caused by selectivity bias.

         Using data from the PSID, we employ a variety of techniques to address the selection

issue. The PSID has two important advantages for our purposes that standard data sources such

as the CPS or ACS do not. First, it is longitudinal, allowing us to retrieve wage offers for those


42
  This is hardly surprising in that even with the large CPS samples at their disposal, Mulligan and Rubinstein obtain
only about 300 female observations per five-year CPS cross section.


                                                         45
who are not currently employed. 43 Second, it has information on actual labor market experience.

These two features of the PSID greatly reduce the scope for selectivity bias to influence wage

analyses because with the additional wage data, fewer individuals have unobserved wages, and

actual experience is an important omitted variable in other data sets likely affecting both wages

and employment. For those still without observed wages, in our preferred probability weighing

approach, we probabilistically assign them to wage deciles and then compute and analyze the

resulting gender gaps. This method does not require restrictive identification assumptions. We

find that the gender gap in the population is somewhat larger than that among full-time workers

with substantial labor force commitment. However, we find strong convergence since 1981 in

both the raw gender pay gap (0.378 log points) and the unexplained gender pay gap (0.204 log

points). Indeed, our results suggest, if anything, that correction for sample selection bias

increases our estimates of convergence on both measures. We subject our findings to a variety

of robustness checks and find our conclusions unchanged.

           We then use our data to explore the implications of alternative methods of correcting for

selectivity bias. These include structural models of employment and wages, bounding exercises,

and the identification at infinity method. The results for these methods almost always also show

convergence in the gender pay gap since 1981. While each method has advantages and

disadvantages, the overall similarity of the findings across methods gives us considerable

confidence that women today receive higher relative wage offers than in 1981.

           Nonetheless, women continue to earn substantially less than men. In 2015, based on our

main selection corrected estimates, the raw (unadjusted) gender wage gap was 0.242 log points at

the median and the unexplained gender wage gap (adjusted for gender differences in covariates



43
     While a short panel can be constructed from the CPS, it can only cover two years.


                                                           46
including education and experience) was 0.206 log points. In considering policies to further

narrow the gender wage gap, it is important to know whether there has been convergence in

gender gaps. Our results strongly suggest that there has.




                                                47
                                         References

Arellano, Manuel and Stéphane Bonhomme (2017). Quantile Selection Models with an
       Application to Understanding Changes in Wage Inequality. Econometrica, 85(1): 1-28.

Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin Kofi Charles (2018). Divergent Paths: A New Perspective on
       Earnings Differences Between Black and White Men Since 1940. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, (133(3): 1459-1501.

Blank, Rebecca M. (1990). Are Part-Time Jobs Bad Jobs? In A Future of Lousy Jobs? The
       Changing Structure of U.S. Wages, edited by Gary Burtless. Washington, D.C.:
       Brookings Institution Press, pp. 123-155.

Blau, Francine D. and Andrea H. Beller (1988). Trends in Earnings Differentials By Gender,
       1971­1981. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 41 (4): 513­29.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (1997). Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender
       Wage Differential in the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics, 15(1, Part 1): 1-42.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2006). The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s:
       Slowing Convergence. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 60(1): 45-66.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2017). The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and
       Explanations. Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3): 789-865.

Blau, Francine D. and Anne E. Winkler (2018). The Economics of Men, Women, and Work,
       Eighth Edition. Oxford, UK and New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Blinder, Alan S. (1973). Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates. Journal
       of Human Resources, 8(4): 436-55.

Blundell, Richard, Amanda Gosling, Hidehiko Ichimura, and Costas Meghir (2007). Changes in
      the Distribution of Male and Female Wages Accounting for Employment Composition
      Using Bounds. Econometrica, 75(2): 323-63.

Chamberlain, Gary (1986). Asymptotic Efficiency in Semi-Parametric Models with Censoring.
     Journal of Econometrics, 32(2): 189-218.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Iván Fernández-Val, and Blaise Melly (2013). Inference on
      Counterfactual Distributions. Econometrica, 81(6): 2205-2268.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux (2009). Unconditional Quantile
        Regressions. Econometrica, 77(3): 953-973.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux (2018). Decomposing Wage Distributions
        Using Recentered Influence Function Regressions. Econometrics, 6(2).



                                             48
Frandsen, Brigham R. and Lars J. Lefgren (2018). Testing Rank Similarity. Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 100(1): 86-91.

Heckman, James J. (1979). Sample Selection Bias as Specification Error. Econometrica, 47(1):
     153-161.

Heckman, James J. (1990). Varieties of Selection Bias. American Economic Review Papers and
     Proceedings 80(2): 313-318.

Hirsch, Barry T. (2005). Why Do Part-Time Workers Earn Less? The Role of Worker and Job
       Skills. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 58(4): 525-551.

Imbens, Guido W. and Charles F. Manski. (2004). Confidence Intervals for Partially Identified
      Parameters. Econometrica 72(6): 1845-1857.

Jacobsen, Joyce, Melanie Khamis, and Mutlu Yuksel (2015). Convergences in Men's and
       Women's Life Patterns: Lifetime Work, Lifetime Earnings, and Human Capital
       Investment. Research in Labor Economics, 41: 1-33.

Juhn, Chinhui (1992). Decline of Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining
       Market Opportunities. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 79-121.

Kassenboehmer, Sonja C. and Mathia G. Sinning (2014). "Distributional Changes in the Gender
      Wage Gap. ILR Review, 67(2): 335-361.

Koenker, Roger and Gilbert Bassett, Jr. (1978). Regression Quantiles. Econometrica 46(1):
      33-50.

Maasoumi, Esfandiar and Le Wang (2019). The Gender Gap between Earnings Distributions.
      Journal of Political Economy, 127(5): 2438-2504.

Machado, Cecilia (2017). Unobserved Selection Heterogeneity and the Gender Wage Gap.
      Journal of Applied Econometrics 32(7): 1348-1366.

Manski, Charles F. (1994). The Selection Problem. In Christopher Sims, ed., Advances in
      Econometrics, Sixth World Congress, Vol. 1. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
      Press, 143-170.

Manski, Charles F. and John V. Pepper (2000). Monotone Instrumental Variables: With
      Application to the Returns to Schooling. Econometrica, 68(4): 997-1010.

Meara, Katie, Francesco Pastore, and Allan Webster (2020). The Gender Pay Gap in the USA: A
       Matching Study. Journal of Population Economics, 33(1): 271-305.




                                              49
Mincer, Jacob, and Solomon Polachek (1974). Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings
       of Women. Journal of Political Economy, 82 (2 Part 2): S76­108.

Mulligan, Casey B. and Yona Rubinstein (2008). Selection, Investment, and Women's Relative
       Wages over Time. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3): 1061-1110.

Neal, Derek (2004). The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women Is Too Small.
       Journal of Political Economy 112 (1, Part 2): S1-S28.

Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson (1996). The Role of Pre-Market Factors in Black-White
       Wage Differences. Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 869-895.

Oaxaca, Ronald L. (1973). Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.
      International Economic Review, 14(3): 693-709.

Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo (2008). Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A
        Cross-County Analysis of Gender Gaps. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(4): 621-654.

O'Neill, June and Solomon Polachek (1993). Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the
       1980s. Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1, Part 1): 205-228.

Töpfer, Marina (2017). Detailed RIF decomposition with selection: The gender pay gap in Italy.
       Hohenheim Discussion Papers in Business, Economics and Social Sciences 26-2017,
       University of Hohenheim, Faculty of Business, Economics and Social Sciences.




                                              50
Appendix

A1. Data Construction

       Our main PSID sample consists of individuals aged 25 to 54, who are the household head

or the spouse of the household head. We drop those who are in the military, the self-employed,

and those with non-credible wages. Non-credible wages are either less than or equal to $2 an

hour or more than $250 an hour. We also drop the Immigrant and Latino subsamples of the

PSID. Using this main sample, we then construct the Samples 1 to 4 referenced in the text. The

computation of certain PSID variables, particularly actual experience and educational attainment,

is non-trivial. For these, we follow Blau and Kahn (2017), who detail this process in an appendix

section.




                                               51
        Figure 1: Unexplained Median Pay Gaps Correcting and Not Correcting for Selection
0.500

0.450
            0.441
            0.410
0.400
            0.371
0.350                            0.346
            0.341

0.300
                                 0.274                                             0.260
0.250
                                 0.220                    0.197                    0.208      0.228
0.200                                                                                         0.206
                                                          0.192                    0.191      0.184
                                                          0.157
0.150
                                                          0.153                    0.139
                                 0.148
0.100

0.050

0.000
         1981                1990                     1999                      2011       2015
                            Unexplained Gap, Uncorrected for Selection
                            Unexplained Gap, Only Women Corrected for Selection
                            Unexplained Gap, Only Men Corrected for Selection
                            Unexplained Gap, Both Men and Women Corrected for Selection


                                                    52
Notes for Figure 1

Entries are based on the unconditional median regression models of Table 3A. The Unexplained Gap, Uncorrected for Selection is the
unexplained gap comparing men in Sample 1 and women in Sample 1. The Unexplained Gap, Only Women Corrected for Selection
is the unexplained gap comparing men in Sample 1 with women in Sample 4. The Unexplained Gap, Only Men Corrected for
Selection is the unexplained gap comparing men in Sample 4 with women in Sample 1. The Unexplained Gap, Both Men and Women
Corrected for Selection is the unexplained gap comparing men in Sample 4 and women in Sample 4.




                                                               53
Table 1: Wage Characteristics by Wage Sample
                                                                                                               Whole Sample Median             Whole Sample Median
                      Sample Count                    Entrant Count                     Coverage                      Wage                          Wage Gap                  Entrant Median Wage          Entrant Median Wage Gap
                                                                                                                                                                               Male        Female
                  Men       Women                  Men           Women            Men           Women           All Men       All Women        Log Gap          Ratio         Entrants    Entrants           Log Gap           Ratio
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981              2207        1413                   -               -            0.845           0.426          3.091           2.615           0.476          62.141             -               -              -               -
1990              2619        1999                   -               -            0.859           0.533          3.081           2.777           0.304          73.771             -               -              -               -
1999              2384        2087                   -               -            0.861           0.601          3.056           2.843           0.213          80.797             -               -              -               -
2011              2038        2070                   -               -            0.744           0.551          3.163           2.976           0.187          82.953             -               -              -               -
2015              2192        2154                   -               -            0.787           0.589          3.143           2.964           0.179          83.626             -               -              -               -
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981              2381        1912                  174            499            0.906           0.599          3.083           2.550           0.534          58.645          2.913           2.396           0.517         59.610
1990              2760        2637                  141            638            0.906           0.716          3.063           2.694           0.369          69.132          2.725           2.353           0.372         68.905
1999              2507        2617                  123            530            0.909           0.768          3.056           2.796           0.260          77.123          3.054           2.584           0.470         62.500
2011              2252        2626                  214            556            0.816           0.705          3.145           2.925           0.220          80.251          2.733           2.708           0.025         97.500
2015              2382        2665                  190            511            0.841           0.742          3.126           2.918           0.208          81.220          2.636           2.662          -0.026         102.623
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981              2642        2698                  261            786            0.978           0.818          3.050           2.452           0.597          55.023          2.530           2.192          0.338          71.314
1990              3044        3368                  284            731            0.981           0.891          3.024           2.589           0.435          64.752          2.478           2.103          0.375          68.724
1999              2707        3142                  200            525            0.974           0.905          3.045           2.746           0.299          74.178          2.549           2.317          0.232          79.323
2011              2636        3334                  384            708            0.937           0.864          3.094           2.851           0.243          78.446          2.636           2.503          0.133          87.569
2015              2631        3228                  249            563            0.928           0.874          3.086           2.852           0.234          79.167          2.589           2.442          0.147          86.331
Sample 4 (Adds imputed wages)
1981              2701        3307                   59            609            1.000           1.000          3.047           2.426           0.621          53.745          2.853           2.224          0.629          53.329
1990              3112        3838                   68            470            1.000           1.000          3.018           2.555           0.462          62.991          2.587           2.287          0.300          74.092
1999              2780        3476                   73            334            1.000           1.000          3.036           2.724           0.312          73.221          2.681           2.499          0.183          83.311
2011              2815        3869                  179            535            1.000           1.000          3.066           2.815           0.251          77.769          2.833           2.572          0.261          77.052
2015              2821        3722                  190            494            1.000           1.000          3.062           2.820           0.241          78.580          2.604           2.596          0.008          99.159
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers and
workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100 hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and Sample 4 imputes remaining missing wages using
education, experience, and marital status. Coverage is defined as the fraction of the wage sample represented in the entire wave-by-sex PSID sample.




                                                                                                                  54
Table 2: Sample Characteristics by Wage Sample
                        Years of Schooling                         Fraction with BA or Advanced Degree                     Years Full Time Experience
                     Men                Women                            Men                Women                          Men                 Women
               Total    Entrants    Total  Entrants                Total    Entrants    Total   Entrants             Total    Entrants     Total   Entrants
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981          13.528        -      13.355      -                   0.289          -         0.236          -        17.216          -        11.895          -
1990          13.917        -      13.872      -                   0.314          -         0.278          -        17.028          -        13.721          -
1999          14.191        -      14.352      -                   0.349          -         0.334          -        17.731          -        14.736          -
2011          14.251        -      14.566      -                   0.380          -         0.419          -        14.268          -        13.413          -
2015          14.340        -      14.905      -                   0.378          -         0.465          -        13.293          -        12.850          -
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981          13.500     13.105    13.275   13.081                 0.286       0.240        0.229       0.210       16.829       11.489      10.358        6.596
1990          13.921     13.988    13.838   13.740                 0.313       0.288        0.266       0.232       16.756       11.774      12.365        8.415
1999          14.201     14.383    14.314   14.176                 0.349       0.342        0.328       0.304       17.520       13.735      13.724       10.077
2011          14.190     13.563    14.515   14.332                 0.368       0.235        0.408       0.368       13.974       10.938      12.571        9.556
2015          14.291     13.592    14.819   14.485                 0.366       0.193        0.444       0.362       13.087       10.107      12.013        8.782
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981          13.395     12.071    13.160   12.843                 0.275       0.139        0.216       0.180       16.586       13.506       9.195        6.008
1990          13.817     12.570    13.704   13.154                 0.295       0.083        0.247       0.171       16.545       14.018      11.458        7.767
1999          14.153     13.491    14.244   13.855                 0.340       0.212        0.317       0.258       17.328       14.658      12.972        8.752
2011          14.052     13.126    14.400   13.893                 0.344       0.183        0.387       0.296       13.864       13.126      12.042        9.694
2015          14.222     13.550    14.652   13.714                 0.352       0.209        0.413       0.243       12.977       11.917      11.566        9.055
Sample 4 (Adds imputed wages)
1981          13.335     10.702    12.934   11.919                 0.269       0.000        0.194       0.094       16.593       16.930       8.407        4.866
1990          13.767     11.155    13.553   12.319                 0.291       0.047        0.235       0.128       16.498       14.017      10.840        5.776
1999          14.097     11.970    14.126   12.992                 0.333       0.068        0.305       0.192       17.177       11.501      12.457        7.526
2011          13.951     12.455    14.218   13.058                 0.329       0.109        0.361       0.193       13.673       10.838      11.565        8.532
2015          14.088     12.358    14.468   13.192                 0.331       0.061        0.384       0.184       12.854       11.264      11.223        8.838
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26
or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100 hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining
missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and Sample 4 imputes remaining missing wages using education, experience, and
marital status.



                                                                                55
Table 3A: Estimates of the Gender Wage Gap and Blinder-Oaxaca-Style Decomposition, Actual
Experience Controls
                                          OLS (Mean)                    Unconditional Median
                                    Gap    Explained Unexplained    Gap      Explained Unexplained
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981                               0.446     0.128       0.318     0.476       0.105        0.371
                                  (0.021)   (0.015)    (0.021)    (0.027)     (0.016)      (0.028)
1990                               0.279     0.083       0.196     0.304       0.085        0.220
                                  (0.020)   (0.013)    (0.018)    (0.026)     (0.014)      (0.027)
1999                               0.245     0.061       0.184     0.213       0.060        0.153
                                  (0.022)   (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.029)     (0.017)      (0.028)
2011                               0.208     0.004       0.204     0.186      -0.005        0.191
                                  (0.022)   (0.017)    (0.021)    (0.023)     (0.016)      (0.023)
2015                               0.165    -0.019       0.184     0.178      -0.029        0.206
                                  (0.024)   (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.026)     (0.019)      (0.026)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.282   -0.147      -0.134     -0.299     -0.133       -0.165
                                  (0.032)   (0.024)    (0.032)    (0.037)     (0.025)      (0.039)
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981                               0.486     0.173       0.313     0.534       0.133        0.400
                                  (0.020)   (0.018)    (0.024)    (0.028)     (0.019)      (0.030)
1990                               0.353     0.122       0.232     0.369       0.120        0.249
                                  (0.020)   (0.015)    (0.020)    (0.028)     (0.016)      (0.031)
1999                               0.287     0.081       0.206     0.260       0.082        0.178
                                  (0.022)   (0.017)    (0.025)    (0.027)     (0.018)      (0.029)
2011                               0.228     0.021       0.206     0.220       0.009        0.211
                                  (0.022)   (0.022)    (0.029)    (0.031)     (0.016)      (0.031)
2015                               0.197     0.005       0.193     0.209       0.000        0.209
                                  (0.023)   (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.020)      (0.025)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.288   -0.168      -0.120     -0.324     -0.133       -0.191
                                  (0.030)   (0.026)    (0.034)    (0.036)     (0.028)      (0.039)
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981                               0.555     0.201       0.354     0.597       0.170        0.427
                                  (0.019)   (0.017)    (0.023)    (0.023)     (0.019)      (0.027)
1990                               0.406     0.161       0.245     0.435       0.161        0.273
                                  (0.020)   (0.015)    (0.019)    (0.027)     (0.018)      (0.026)
1999                               0.316     0.111       0.205     0.298       0.100        0.198
                                  (0.022)   (0.017)    (0.025)    (0.024)     (0.018)      (0.027)
2011                               0.239     0.036       0.202     0.242       0.022        0.220
                                  (0.022)   (0.018)    (0.024)    (0.025)     (0.014)      (0.026)
2015                               0.211     0.031       0.180     0.234       0.027        0.207
                                  (0.023)   (0.017)    (0.023)    (0.027)     (0.019)      (0.026)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.344   -0.169      -0.174     -0.363     -0.144       -0.220
                                  (0.029)   (0.024)    (0.032)    (0.035)     (0.027)      (0.038)
Sample 4 (Adds imputed wages)
1981                               0.584     0.228       0.356     0.619       0.209        0.410
                                  (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.021)    (0.025)     (0.020)      (0.029)
1990                               0.433     0.187       0.246     0.462       0.188        0.274
                                  (0.019)   (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.028)     (0.018)      (0.027)
1999                               0.328     0.123       0.205     0.312       0.115        0.197
                                  (0.021)   (0.016)    (0.023)    (0.022)     (0.017)      (0.023)
2011                               0.256     0.053       0.203     0.251       0.043        0.208
                                  (0.020)   (0.014)    (0.020)    (0.027)     (0.013)      (0.027)
2015                               0.217     0.040       0.177     0.242       0.036        0.206
                                  (0.021)   (0.015)    (0.020)    (0.028)     (0.016)      (0.026)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.367   -0.188      -0.179     -0.378     -0.174       -0.204
                                  (0.027)   (0.022)    (0.029)    (0.037)     (0.026)      (0.039)
Notes: See Table 3B.




                                               56
Table 3B: Estimates of the Gender Wage Gap and Blinder-Oaxaca-Style Decomposition, Potential
Experience Controls
                                          OLS (Mean)                    Unconditional (Median)
                                    Gap    Explained Unexplained    Gap      Explained Unexplained
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981                               0.446     0.024       0.422     0.476        0.022        0.454
                                  (0.020)   (0.010)    (0.018)    (0.026)      (0.010)      (0.025)
1990                               0.279     0.022       0.257     0.304        0.020        0.284
                                  (0.021)   (0.011)    (0.018)    (0.025)      (0.012)      (0.023)
1999                               0.245     0.000       0.245     0.213       -0.005        0.218
                                  (0.022)   (0.012)    (0.019)    (0.028)      (0.013)      (0.026)
2011                               0.208    -0.018       0.226     0.186       -0.016        0.202
                                  (0.024)   (0.014)    (0.020)    (0.025)      (0.014)      (0.023)
2015                               0.165    -0.051       0.216     0.178       -0.061        0.239
                                  (0.024)   (0.015)    (0.022)    (0.025)      (0.016)      (0.025)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.282   -0.075      -0.206     -0.299      -0.084       -0.215
                                  (0.031)   (0.018)    (0.028)    (0.036)      (0.019)      (0.035)
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981                               0.486     0.013       0.473     0.534        0.012        0.521
                                  (0.019)   (0.009)    (0.018)    (0.027)      (0.009)      (0.026)
1990                               0.353     0.012       0.341     0.369        0.009        0.359
                                  (0.020)   (0.010)    (0.018)    (0.027)      (0.011)      (0.025)
1999                               0.287    -0.002       0.289     0.260       -0.007        0.268
                                  (0.022)   (0.011)    (0.019)    (0.027)      (0.012)      (0.025)
2011                               0.228    -0.030       0.257     0.220       -0.028        0.247
                                  (0.024)   (0.013)    (0.021)    (0.032)      (0.013)      (0.030)
2015                               0.197    -0.055       0.252     0.209       -0.064        0.273
                                  (0.023)   (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.023)      (0.015)      (0.022)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.288   -0.067      -0.221     -0.324      -0.076       -0.248
                                  (0.030)   (0.017)    (0.027)    (0.036)      (0.018)      (0.034)
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981                               0.555     0.014       0.540     0.597        0.013        0.584
                                  (0.018)   (0.008)    (0.017)    (0.022)      (0.008)      (0.021)
1990                               0.406     0.025       0.381     0.435        0.022        0.413
                                  (0.020)   (0.010)    (0.018)    (0.026)      (0.011)      (0.024)
1999                               0.316     0.001       0.315     0.298       -0.005        0.303
                                  (0.021)   (0.011)    (0.019)    (0.024)      (0.011)      (0.022)
2011                               0.239    -0.031       0.270     0.242       -0.031        0.273
                                  (0.023)   (0.013)    (0.020)    (0.026)      (0.012)      (0.025)
2015                               0.211    -0.042       0.253     0.234       -0.049        0.283
                                  (0.024)   (0.013)    (0.022)    (0.026)      (0.015)      (0.026)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.344   -0.056      -0.287     -0.363      -0.062       -0.301
                                  (0.029)   (0.016)    (0.027)    (0.034)      (0.017)      (0.034)
Sample 4 (Adds imputed wages)
1981                               0.569     0.017       0.551     0.603        0.017        0.586
                                  (0.016)   (0.008)    (0.015)    (0.023)      (0.008)      (0.022)
1990                               0.416     0.030       0.386     0.446        0.027        0.419
                                  (0.019)   (0.010)    (0.017)    (0.026)      (0.010)      (0.024)
1999                               0.321     0.005       0.316     0.306       -0.001        0.308
                                  (0.020)   (0.010)    (0.018)    (0.023)      (0.010)      (0.021)
2011                               0.249    -0.024       0.273     0.245       -0.023        0.267
                                  (0.021)   (0.012)    (0.018)    (0.027)      (0.011)      (0.026)
2015                               0.219    -0.038       0.257     0.241       -0.042        0.283
                                  (0.021)   (0.012)    (0.020)    (0.026)      (0.013)      (0.025)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.350   -0.055      -0.294     -0.362      -0.059       -0.303
                                  (0.027)   (0.014)    (0.025)    (0.034)      (0.015)      (0.033)
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54.
Bootstrapped standard errors based on 599 draws in parentheses. Table 3A controls for actual experience in the wage equation, while
Table 3B controls for potential experience (both in addition to our other human capital specification controls). Note that unconditional
quantile coefficients do not precisely go through the sample median, but that the medians are similar to the raw figures reported in
Table 1. Decomposition covariates correspond to those in our human capital specification. Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26 or
more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100
hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and Sample 4
imputes remaining missing wages using our human capital specification control set.




                                                                                         57
Table 4: Selection-Corrected Mean Regression and Decomposition
                               Uncorrected   Corrected Gap Selectivity Bias
                                                                                                         Explained           Unexplained
                               Sample Gap   (Col. 4 + Col. 5) (Col. 2 ­ Col. 1)
                                     (1)            (2)              (3)                                     (4)                   (5)
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981                               0.446           0.467            0.021                                   0.123                 0.344
                                  (0.020)        (0.119)           (0.119)                                 (0.019)               (0.122)
1990                               0.279           0.384            0.105                                   0.063                 0.322
                                  (0.020)        (0.049)           (0.044)                                 (0.016)               (0.055)
1999                               0.245           0.374            0.130                                   0.036                 0.338
                                  (0.021)        (0.046)           (0.042)                                 (0.019)               (0.053)
2011                               0.208           0.450            0.242                                   -0.013                0.463
                                  (0.023)        (0.058)           (0.053)                                 (0.016)               (0.061)
2015                               0.165           0.323            0.159                                   -0.025                0.348
                                  (0.025)        (0.158)           (0.155)                                 (0.017)               (0.158)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.282         -0.143            0.138                                   -0.147                0.004
                                  (0.032)        (0.198)           (0.195)                                 (0.025)               (0.200)
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981                               0.486           0.489            0.004                                   0.168                 0.321
                                  (0.020)        (0.044)           (0.042)                                 (0.021)               (0.051)
1990                               0.353           0.440            0.086                                   0.102                 0.337
                                  (0.020)        (0.043)           (0.039)                                 (0.016)               (0.047)
1999                               0.287           0.342            0.055                                   0.072                 0.270
                                  (0.022)        (0.058)           (0.055)                                 (0.026)               (0.073)
2011                               0.228           0.355            0.128                                   0.015                 0.340
                                  (0.023)        (0.056)           (0.052)                                 (0.022)               (0.061)
2015                               0.197           0.299            0.102                                   -0.002                0.301
                                  (0.023)        (0.095)           (0.090)                                 (0.019)               (0.096)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.288         -0.190            0.098                                   -0.170               -0.020
                                  (0.030)        (0.105)           (0.099)                                 (0.028)               (0.109)
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981                               0.555           0.524           -0.030                                   0.198                 0.327
                                  (0.019)        (0.033)           (0.029)                                 (0.018)               (0.037)
1990                               0.406           0.354           -0.052                                   0.154                 0.199
                                  (0.019)        (0.021)           (0.013)                                 (0.015)               (0.023)
1999                               0.316           0.333            0.017                                   0.095                 0.238
                                  (0.022)        (0.033)           (0.023)                                 (0.024)               (0.047)
2011                               0.239           0.294            0.055                                   0.033                 0.261
                                  (0.023)        (0.067)           (0.064)                                 (0.022)               (0.076)
2015                               0.211           0.194           -0.017                                   0.028                 0.166
                                  (0.023)        (0.038)           (0.034)                                 (0.018)               (0.041)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)          -0.344         -0.330            0.014                                   -0.170               -0.160
                                  (0.030)        (0.050)           (0.045)                                 (0.025)               (0.055)
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54.
Bootstrapped standard errors based on 299 draws in parentheses. Selection-corrected results at the mean are obtained using the Heckman selection
correction and are estimated with maximum likelihood estimation. In the case that the MLE fails to converge, we instead use a Heckman Two
Step procedure (this only occurs for Sample 3 men in 1981 and 1999). The selection corrected population gap is the predicted average log hourly
wage difference for the entire population, obtained from the selection-corrected wage equation. The selection corrected sample gap is computed
analogously on each wage sample. Selectivity bias equals the difference between the selection corrected sample gap and the uncorrected sample
gap (i.e., column (4)=column (3)-column (1)), and the sum of the explained and the unexplained gaps equals the selectivity corrected sample gap
(i.e., column (5) + column (6)=column (3)). Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time
worker and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100 hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent
PSID waves if wage data is available in those years; and Sample 4 imputes remaining missing wages using education, experience, and marital
status. The excluded instruments used for selection correction are an indicator for the presence of one child under 6 and an indicator for the
presence of two or more children under 6, applied to men and women. Wage equation variables are those listed as the human capital specification
in the text.




                                                                           58
Table 5: Selection-Corrected Median Regression and Decomposition
                              Uncorrected    Corrected Gap     Selectivity Bias
                                                                                                           Explained            Unexplained
                               Sample Gap   (Col. 4 + Col. 5) (Col. 2 ­ Col. 1)
                                    (1)             (2)               (3)                                       (4)                   (5)
Sample 1 (Full-time, 26+ weeks worked)
1981                               0.475           0.779            0.304                                     0.171                   0.608
                                  (0.037)        (0.040)           (0.043)                                   (0.018)                (0.036)
1990                               0.292           0.414            0.122                                     0.108                   0.306
                                  (0.027)        (0.024)           (0.021)                                   (0.014)                (0.020)
1999                               0.235           0.481            0.246                                     0.093                   0.388
                                  (0.028)        (0.027)           (0.029)                                   (0.015)                (0.026)
2011                               0.203           0.443            0.240                                     0.031                   0.412
                                  (0.029)        (0.036)           (0.032)                                   (0.021)                (0.035)
2015                               0.173           0.405            0.231                                    -0.029                   0.433
                                  (0.029)        (0.034)           (0.030)                                   (0.021)                (0.030)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)         -0.302          -0.374            -0.073                                   -0.200                  -0.175
                                  (0.047)        (0.052)           (0.052)                                   (0.028)                (0.047)
Sample 2 (Adds part-time and part-year)
1981                               0.515           0.655            0.140                                     0.191                   0.464
                                  (0.025)        (0.023)           (0.019)                                   (0.018)                (0.024)
1990                               0.362           0.436            0.074                                     0.139                   0.297
                                  (0.024)        (0.022)           (0.017)                                   (0.016)                (0.019)
1999                               0.284           0.407            0.123                                     0.101                   0.307
                                  (0.025)        (0.023)           (0.021)                                   (0.016)                (0.025)
2011                               0.224           0.390            0.166                                     0.037                   0.354
                                  (0.029)        (0.030)           (0.025)                                   (0.021)                (0.030)
2015                               0.205           0.281            0.076                                     0.005                   0.276
                                  (0.027)        (0.029)           (0.024)                                   (0.020)                (0.027)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)         -0.310          -0.374            -0.064                                   -0.186                  -0.188
                                  (0.037)        (0.037)           (0.031)                                   (0.027)                (0.036)
Sample 3 (Adds nearby wave wages)
1981                               0.583           0.603            0.020                                     0.184                   0.420
                                  (0.023)        (0.019)           (0.013)                                   (0.016)                (0.021)
1990                               0.418           0.438            0.020                                     0.158                   0.279
                                  (0.024)        (0.020)           (0.015)                                   (0.014)                (0.018)
1999                               0.320           0.372            0.052                                     0.108                   0.264
                                  (0.025)        (0.020)           (0.018)                                   (0.015)                (0.020)
2011                               0.234           0.301            0.068                                     0.034                   0.268
                                  (0.026)        (0.024)           (0.019)                                   (0.017)                (0.026)
2015                               0.222           0.258            0.036                                     0.020                   0.238
                                  (0.026)        (0.023)           (0.017)                                   (0.019)                (0.021)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)         -0.361          -0.346            0.015                                    -0.164                  -0.181
                                  (0.035)        (0.030)           (0.021)                                   (0.025)                (0.030)
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. All results
are unconditional on covariates, obtained via simulating the sample wage distribution based on conditional regression estimates. We present an
uncorrected gap computed analogously, accounting for a slight difference between column 1 and results presented in Table 3. Selectivity bias
equals the difference between the selection corrected gap and the uncorrected sample gap (i.e., column (3) = column (2) - column (1)), and the
sum of the explained and the unexplained gaps equals the selectivity corrected gap (i.e., column (4) + column (5) = column (2)). Sample 1 is
full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment
but at least 100 hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and
Sample 4 imputes remaining missing wages using education, experience, and marital status. The excluded instruments used for selection
correction are an indicator for the presence of one child under 6 and an indicator for the presence of two or more children under 6, applied to men
and women. Wage equation variables are those listed as the human capital specification in the text.




                                                                       59
Table 6: Bounding the Median Gender Wage Gap
                                Summary                                                                                   Log Gap Bounds
                                                                               Worst Case                        FOSD              Exclusion Restriction               FOSD + Exclusion
                                 Male    Female                           Lower          Upper           Lower          Upper           Lower          Upper           Lower          Upper
                               Coverage Coverage Log Gap                  Bound          Bound           Bound          Bound           Bound          Bound           Bound          Bound
Sample 1 Base
1981                              0.845        0.426        0.476         -0.898       2.375              0.362         2.281           -0.681         1.751            0.435         1.669
                                                                            [-0.922, 2.403]                  [0.322, 2.300]                [-0.696, 1.767]                [0.385, 1.685]
1990                              0.859        0.533        0.304         -0.549       1.214              0.184         1.122           -0.253         0.867            0.290         0.802
                                                                            [-0.737, 1.462]                  [0.142, 1.363]                [-0.317, 0.974]                [0.220, 0.908]
1999                              0.861        0.601        0.213         -0.398       0.840              0.114         0.711           -0.230         0.641            0.179         0.584
                                                                            [-0.472, 0.895]                  [0.063, 0.769]                [-0.296, 0.716]                [0.142, 0.651]
2011                              0.744        0.551        0.187         -0.840       1.176             -0.065         0.905           -0.524         0.873            0.029         0.720
                                                                            [-0.967, 1.316]                 [-0.129, 1.035]                [-0.620, 1.004]                [-0.010, 0.830]
2015                              0.787        0.589        0.179         -0.637       0.936             -0.021         0.724           -0.420         0.720            0.112         0.611
                                                                            [-0.728, 1.038]                 [-0.079, 0.812]                [-0.510, 0.811]                [0.051, 0.702]
Convergence Bounds                                                        -3.012       1.833             -2.302         0.363            -2.17         1.401           -1.557         0.176
Confidence Region                                                           [-3.107, 1.914]                 [-2.368, 0.457]                [-2.239, 1.458]                [-1.605, 0.269]
Sample 2 Base
1981                              0.906        0.599        0.534         -0.051        1.044             0.464         0.990           0.110          0.897            0.502        0.856
                                                                             [-0.102, 1.116]                 [0.420, 1.063]                 [0.071, 0.948]                [0.463, 0.906]
1990                              0.906        0.716        0.369         -0.001        0.762             0.292         0.698           0.101          0.635            0.415        0.583
                                                                             [-0.060, 0.811]                 [0.251, 0.748]                 [0.043, 0.674]                [0.338, 0.633]
1999                              0.909        0.768        0.260         -0.029        0.555             0.201         0.474           0.057          0.445            0.247        0.412
                                                                             [-0.086, 0.600]                 [0.157, 0.522]                 [0.008, 0.493]                [0.210, 0.461]
2011                              0.816        0.705        0.220         -0.284        0.699             0.051         0.550           -0.145         0.567            0.129        0.486
                                                                             [-0.343, 0.760]                [-0.010, 0.602]                [-0.213, 0.636]                [0.090, 0.556]
2015                              0.841        0.742        0.208         -0.216        0.605             0.058         0.466           -0.093         0.487            0.179        0.427
                                                                             [-0.264, 0.686]                 [0.017, 0.522]                [-0.139, 0.557]                [0.128, 0.489]
Convergence Bounds                                                         -1.26        0.656            -0.933         0.002            -0.99         0.378           -0.677        -0.074
Confidence Region                                                            [-1.353, 0.736]                [-1.021, 0.075]                [-1.053, 0.444]               [-0.736, -0.013]
Sample 3 Base
1981                              0.978        0.818        0.597          0.422        0.763             0.583         0.742           0.442         0.708             0.697        0.702
                                                                             [0.379, 0.801]                 [0.550, 0.788]                 [0.408, 0.748]                 [0.642, 0.746]
1990                              0.981        0.891        0.435          0.313        0.547             0.418         0.536           0.457         0.482             0.574        0.480
                                                                             [0.267, 0.595]                 [0.369, 0.578]                 [0.392, 0.528]                 [0.516, 0.523]
1999                              0.974        0.905        0.299          0.195        0.385             0.280         0.371           0.221         0.356             0.362        0.353
                                                                             [0.150, 0.432]                 [0.240, 0.405]                 [0.191, 0.388]                 [0.280, 0.384]
2011                              0.937        0.864        0.243          0.040        0.400             0.183         0.353           0.131         0.352             0.276        0.333
                                                                             [-0.006, 0.446]                [0.141, 0.396]                 [0.075, 0.404]                 [0.203, 0.379]
2015                              0.928        0.874        0.234          0.061        0.393             0.165         0.336           0.181         0.346             0.253        0.332
                                                                             [0.005, 0.446]                 [0.110, 0.390]                 [0.123, 0.377]                 [0.204, 0.368]
Convergence Bounds                                                        -0.702        -0.029           -0.577        -0.246           -0.527        -0.097           -0.449        -0.365
Confidence Region                                                            [-0.773, 0.035]               [-0.645, -0.188]               [-0.601, -0.067]               [-0.520, -0.310]
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. 95 percent confidence regions in brackets. The median gap
is the log difference of male and female wages. The gap bounds are computed as: 1) for the upper bound, the male median upper bound minus the female median lower bound, and 2) for the
lower bound, the male median lower bound minus the female median upper bound. First-order stochastic dominance (FOSD) bounds assume FOSD of the observed wage distribution relative
to the unobserved wage distribution. The excluded instruments are an indicator for the presence of one child under 6 and an indicator for the presence of two or more children under 6, applied to
men and women. Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100
hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and Sample 4 imputes remaining missing wages using education,
experience, and marital status.




                                                                                              60
Table 7: Bounding the Median Gender Wage Gap by Education and Experience Groups Using Sample 3
                               Summary                  FOSD Bounds              Summary                 FOSD Bounds
                        Male    Female                Lower        Upper  Male    Female               Lower       Upper
                      Coverage Coverage Log Gap Bound             Bound Coverage Coverage Log Gap Bound           Bound
                                Panel A. Low Edu., Low Exp.                       Panel B. Low Edu., High Exp.
1981                   0.929     0.693      0.553      0.475       0.812  0.963    0.891     0.489      0.468       0.567
                                                         [0.392, 0.934]                                  [0.422, 0.620]
1990                   0.914     0.744      0.352      0.262       0.606  0.976    0.938     0.353      0.341       0.388
                                                         [0.175, 0.687]                                  [0.273, 0.444]
1999                   0.882     0.746      0.448      0.405       0.614  0.975    0.921     0.246      0.230       0.317
                                                         [0.239, 0.741]                                  [0.164, 0.382]
2011                   0.796     0.699      0.370      0.227       0.632  0.927    0.864     0.178      0.132       0.281
                                                         [0.069, 0.791]                                  [0.068, 0.378]
2015                   0.797     0.715      0.207      0.056       0.461  0.892    0.855     0.237      0.130       0.344
                                                        [-0.074, 0.573]                                  [0.032, 0.436]
Convergence Bounds                                    -0.756       -0.014                              -0.437      -0.124
Confidence Region                                       [-0.944, 0.121]                                 [-0.560, -0.021]
                                Panel C. High Edu., Low Exp.                     Panel D. High Edu., High Exp.
1981                   0.998     0.860      0.320      0.318       0.458  1.000    0.936     0.441      0.441       0.478
                                                         [0.242, 0.542]                                  [0.363, 0.539]
1990                   0.992     0.886      0.311      0.306       0.408  0.995    0.974     0.307      0.303       0.317
                                                         [0.205, 0.518]                                  [0.239, 0.391]
1999                   0.987     0.896      0.218      0.206       0.290  0.983    0.957     0.324      0.315       0.353
                                                         [0.123, 0.367]                                  [0.254, 0.411]
2011                   0.960     0.870      0.142      0.110       0.253  0.970    0.918     0.293      0.255       0.352
                                                         [0.054, 0.337]                                  [0.183, 0.430]
2015                   0.963     0.885      0.125      0.106       0.217  0.967    0.926     0.265      0.254       0.334
                                                         [0.047, 0.304]                                  [0.183, 0.409]
Convergence Bounds                                    -0.352       -0.101                              -0.223      -0.107
Confidence Region                                       [-0.451, 0.015]                                 [-0.320, -0.002]
Notes: See notes for Table 6. All results correspond to FOSD bounding from a base of Sample 3. Low education corresponds to no college education, while
high education corresponds to at least some college. Low experience corresponds to less than or equal to eight years of full-time experiences, while high
experience corresponds to more than eight years of full-time experience.




                                                                            61
Table 8: Identification at Infinity Gender Wage Gap Estimates and Decomposition
                                                                      OLS (Mean)                                                          Unconditional (Median)
                                 Male Count Female Count      Gap      Explained Unexplained                                        Gap        Explained     Unexplained
Panel A: Infinity Sample Based on Wave-Specific Probit
1981                                 1598           185      0.305       -0.070     0.375                                          0.296             -0.061            0.357
                                                            (0.048)     (0.036)    (0.047)                                        (0.071)           (0.034)           (0.067)
1990                                 2062           381      0.067       -0.140     0.207                                          0.085             -0.132            0.217
                                                            (0.065)     (0.052)    (0.037)                                        (0.071)           (0.052)           (0.049)
1999                                 1887           603      0.091       -0.085     0.176                                          0.034             -0.104            0.138
                                                            (0.041)     (0.037)    (0.039)                                        (0.050)           (0.041)           (0.051)
2011                                 826            179      -0.097      -0.307     0.210                                          -0.123            -0.347            0.224
                                                            (0.065)     (0.063)    (0.065)                                        (0.079)           (0.075)           (0.095)
2015                                 1165           352      -0.062      -0.293     0.231                                          -0.055            -0.309            0.254
                                                            (0.057)     (0.051)    (0.057)                                        (0.067)           (0.056)           (0.070)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)                                    -0.367      -0.223     -0.144                                         -0.351            -0.249            -0.103
                                                            (0.075)     (0.062)    (0.074)                                        (0.098)           (0.066)           (0.097)
Panel B: Infinity Sample Based on 1981 Probit
1981                                 1598           185      0.305       -0.070     0.375                                          0.296             -0.061            0.357
                                                            (0.048)     (0.036)    (0.047)                                        (0.071)           (0.034)           (0.067)
1990                                 2056           534      0.120       -0.071     0.192                                          0.115             -0.063            0.178
                                                            (0.047)     (0.034)    (0.033)                                        (0.054)           (0.036)           (0.042)
1999                                 1885           623      0.098       -0.075     0.173                                          0.042             -0.093            0.135
                                                            (0.042)     (0.034)    (0.038)                                        (0.051)           (0.038)           (0.050)
2011                                 1437           587      0.093       -0.136     0.229                                          0.072             -0.131            0.202
                                                            (0.051)     (0.047)    (0.041)                                        (0.065)           (0.050)           (0.054)
2015                                 1503           554      0.080       -0.163     0.243                                          0.089             -0.170            0.259
                                                            (0.052)     (0.046)    (0.046)                                        (0.059)           (0.050)           (0.055)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)                                    -0.225      -0.093     -0.131                                         -0.207            -0.110            -0.097
                                                            (0.071)     (0.058)    (0.066)                                        (0.092)           (0.060)           (0.087)
Panel C: Main Sample 1 Results (Whole Sample)
1981                                 2207          1413      0.446       0.128      0.318                                          0.476             0.105             0.371
                                                            (0.020)     (0.015)    (0.020)                                        (0.026)           (0.016)           (0.028)
1990                                 2619          1999      0.279       0.083      0.196                                          0.304             0.085             0.220
                                                            (0.021)     (0.013)    (0.018)                                        (0.025)           (0.014)           (0.025)
1999                                 2384          2087      0.245       0.061      0.184                                          0.213             0.060             0.153
                                                            (0.022)     (0.015)    (0.021)                                        (0.028)           (0.016)           (0.028)
2011                                 2038          2070      0.208       0.004      0.204                                          0.186             -0.005            0.191
                                                            (0.024)     (0.016)    (0.022)                                        (0.025)           (0.016)           (0.025)
2015                                 2192          2154      0.165       -0.019     0.184                                          0.178             -0.029            0.206
                                                            (0.024)     (0.018)    (0.024)                                        (0.025)           (0.019)           (0.027)
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)                                    -0.282      -0.147     -0.134                                         -0.299            -0.133            -0.165
                                                            (0.031)     (0.023)    (0.031)                                        (0.036)           (0.025)           (0.039)
Notes: See notes for Table 8. In Panel A the employment probability probit is estimated separately for each wave. For Panel B, this probability is calculated using the 1981 PSID
wave, with estimated probability coefficients then applied to other waves. Wage equation and employment probability equation variables are those listed as the human capital
specification in the text. Decompositions computed with female dummy method. Note that unconditional quantile coefficients do not precisely go through the sample median, but
that the predicted medians are very similar to sample medians.




                                                                                      62
               Figure A1: Unexplained Median Gender Wage Gaps using 1981 Weights
0.500

0.450
           0.441
           0.410
0.400
           0.371
0.350                            0.358
           0.341

0.300
                                 0.282
0.250                                                                              0.259

                                 0.220                    0.198                    0.205      0.218
0.200                                                                                         0.206
                                                          0.193                    0.191      0.196
                                                                                              0.184
                                                          0.158
0.150
                                 0.144                    0.153                    0.136

0.100

0.050

0.000
        1981                 1990                     1999                      2011       2015
                          Unexplained Gap, Uncorrected for Selection
                          Unexplained Gap, Only Women Corrected for Selection
                          Unexplained Gap, Only Men Corrected for Selection
                          Unexplained Gap, Both Men and Women Corrected for Selection


                                                    63
Notes for Figure A1

Entries are based on the unconditional median regression models of Table 3A. After estimating each year's regressions, we
reweighted each year's data, so that the weighted frequency of Sample 1 observations in Sample 4 was set to the 1981 level. Using
these reweighted samples, the entries in Figure A1 are defined the same way as the entries in Figure 1. The Unexplained Gap,
Uncorrected for Selection is the unexplained gap comparing men in Sample 1 and women in Sample 1 (this is identical to Figure 1
since it uses only Sample 1 individuals). The Unexplained Gap, Only Women Corrected for Selection is the unexplained gap
comparing men in Sample 1 with women in the reweighted Sample 4. The Unexplained Gap, Only Men Corrected for Selection is the
unexplained gap comparing men in the reweighted Sample 4 with women in Sample 1. The Unexplained Gap, Both Men and Women
Corrected for Selection is the unexplained gap comparing men and women both in the reweighted Sample 4.




                                                               64
Table A1: Selected Findings on Selection-Corrected Trends in the Gender Pay Gap
             Paper                                    Technique                             Data                      Finding on Selection-Adjusted Gender Pay Gap

Blau and Beller (1988)           Heckman-style correction, using non-labor income March CPS Mean wage gap fell by 23% (raw) and 20% (unexplained) between 1971 and
                                 and household age distribution as IVs.                     1981 for whites (Table 5). Mean gap fell by 13% (raw) and 4% (unexplained)
                                                                                            for Blacks during same period (Table 5).

Blau and Kahn (2006)             Median regression combined with replacing             PSID           Median raw wage gap fell by 0.24 log points between 1979 and 1998 (Table
                                 unobserved wages with nearby year wages and                          3). Median unexplained gap fell by 0.15 log points during the same period
                                 assigning remaining unobserved wages relative to                     (Table 3).
                                 the median based on observables.

Blundell, et al. (2007)          Bounding the population wage distribution by sex      UK Family Median raw wage gap among 25-year-olds with no college education fell by
                                 and using assumptions to shrink bounds.               Expenditure 0.23 to 0.28 log points (lower and upper bounds) between 1978 and 1998
                                                                                       Survey      (Figure 14). Bounds cross zero for 40-year-olds with college education (Figure
                                                                                                   14). Bounds for other groups suggest convergence but 95% confidence
                                                                                                   intervals cross zero.

Mulligan and Rubinstein          Heckman-style correction, using number of young March CPS Mean unexplained wage gap did not fall between the 1975-1979 period and the
(2008)                           children in household and its interaction with            1995-1999 period (Table 1).
                                 marital status as IVs.

Mulligan and Rubinstein          Identification at infinity, analyzing sample with     March CPS Mean unexplained wage gap did not fall between the 1975-1979 period and the
(2008)                            80% employment probability.                                    1995-1999 period (Figure V).

Machado (2017)                   Identification from a sample of "always employed" March CPS Mean raw wage gap within identification sample fell 0.26 log points between
                                 women (work regardless of IV value), using                  the 1976-1980 period and the 2001-2005 period (Table 5), and there was
                                 presence of young children as IV.                           similar convergence within four separate education level groups (Table 4).

Maasoumi and Wang (2019)         Heckman-style correction and quantile regression      March CPS Mean raw wage gap (smoothed) fell by 0.16 log points between 1976 and
                                 extension, using number of young children in                    2013 (Figure 2). Median raw wage gap (smoothed) fell by 0.18 log points over
                                 household as IV.                                                same period (Figure 2).
See reference list for full citations. In the findings column, we approximated numerical figures from our best reading of a graph when a similar figure was not available in a table.




                                                                                         65
Table A2: Unconditional Quantile Estimates of the Gender Wage Gap, Selected Quantiles
                                      10th Percentile                       25th Percentile                                                          75th Percentile                                  90th Percentile
                              Gap       Explained Unexplained      Gap        Explained Unexplained                                       Gap          Explained Unexplained                Gap         Explained Unexplained
Sample 1
1981                         0.395         0.154        0.240      0.479        0.139        0.340                                        0.415           0.110            0.304           0.438           0.150            0.288
1990                         0.252         0.082        0.170      0.246        0.100        0.145                                        0.277           0.077            0.199           0.273           0.065            0.208
1999                         0.228         0.083        0.145      0.251        0.051        0.200                                        0.243           0.057            0.185           0.288           0.057            0.231
2011                         0.211         0.013        0.198      0.207        0.015        0.191                                        0.238           -0.011           0.248           0.233           -0.039           0.271
2015                         0.092         0.031        0.061      0.146        0.000        0.146                                        0.186           -0.056           0.242           0.216           -0.069           0.285
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)   -0.303        -0.123       -0.180     -0.333        -0.139      -0.194                                       -0.228           -0.166          -0.062          -0.222           -0.219          -0.003
Sample 2
1981                         0.455         0.238        0.217      0.521        0.198        0.323                                        0.438           0.129            0.309           0.414           0.158            0.256
1990                         0.366         0.145        0.221      0.366        0.145        0.220                                        0.302           0.102            0.200           0.298           0.084            0.214
1999                         0.316         0.124        0.192      0.317        0.081        0.236                                        0.266           0.070            0.195           0.302           0.052            0.251
2011                         0.210         0.071        0.139      0.213        0.032        0.181                                        0.241           -0.011           0.253           0.256           -0.063           0.318
2015                         0.162         0.073        0.089      0.178        0.036        0.141                                        0.208           -0.037           0.245           0.242           -0.056           0.297
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)   -0.293        -0.165       -0.128     -0.343        -0.162      -0.181                                       -0.230           -0.165          -0.065          -0.172           -0.214           0.042
Sample 3
1981                         0.561         0.274        0.287      0.578        0.270        0.308                                        0.507           0.139            0.368           0.475           0.174            0.301
1990                         0.438         0.211        0.227      0.459        0.189        0.270                                        0.348           0.124            0.224           0.311           0.108            0.203
1999                         0.344         0.204        0.140      0.357        0.123        0.234                                        0.298           0.079            0.218           0.304           0.056            0.248
2011                         0.237         0.108        0.129      0.235        0.059        0.176                                        0.252           0.003            0.248           0.281           -0.047           0.328
2015                         0.200         0.103        0.097      0.202        0.054        0.148                                        0.218           -0.011           0.229           0.212           -0.025           0.236
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)   -0.361        -0.171       -0.191     -0.376        -0.216      -0.159                                       -0.289           -0.151          -0.138          -0.263           -0.199          -0.064
Sample 4
1981                         0.617         0.286        0.332      0.586        0.303        0.283                                        0.519           0.169            0.349           0.508           0.203            0.305
1990                         0.487         0.234        0.253      0.481        0.215        0.266                                        0.373           0.153            0.220           0.333           0.137            0.197
1999                         0.351         0.222        0.128      0.356        0.134        0.222                                        0.304           0.096            0.208           0.315           0.070            0.245
2011                         0.261         0.135        0.126      0.236        0.071        0.165                                        0.252           0.029            0.223           0.292           -0.020           0.313
2015                         0.214         0.120        0.094      0.193        0.065        0.128                                        0.229           0.006            0.223           0.213           -0.011           0.224
Convergence (2015 ­ 1981)   -0.403        -0.166       -0.237     -0.393        -0.238      -0.155                                       -0.289           -0.163          -0.126          -0.295           -0.214          -0.081
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. Note that unconditional quantile coefficients do not precisely go through the sample quantiles, but
that the quantiles are similar to the raw figures. Decomposition covariates correspond to those in our human capital specification. Sample 1 is full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment; Sample 2 adds part-time workers
and workers with less than 26 weeks of employment but at least 100 hours; Sample 3 assigns remaining missing wages using adjacent PSID waves if wage data are available in those years; and Sample 4 imputes remaining missing
wages using our human capital specification control set.




                                                                                                                 66
Table A3: Alternative Sample 4 Imputations I
                             OLS (Mean)                                                 Unconditional (Median)
                 Gap          Explained        Unexplained                      Gap          Explained       Unexplained
Panel A: Baseline
1981            0.584            0.228            0.356                        0.619               0.209               0.410
1990            0.433            0.187            0.246                        0.462               0.188               0.274
1999            0.328            0.123            0.205                        0.312               0.115               0.197
2011            0.256            0.053            0.203                        0.251               0.043               0.208
2015            0.217            0.040            0.177                        0.242               0.036               0.206
Panel B: Additional Labor Force Participation Variables
1981            0.584            0.228            0.356                        0.618               0.209               0.409
1990            0.433            0.187            0.246                        0.462               0.188               0.274
1999            0.328            0.123            0.205                        0.310               0.115               0.196
2011            0.254            0.053            0.201                        0.251               0.043               0.208
2015            0.217            0.040            0.177                        0.241               0.035               0.206
Panel C: Sample 3 Entrants
1981            0.607            0.225            0.382                        0.642               0.207               0.435
1990            0.445            0.188            0.257                        0.482               0.189               0.293
1999            0.338            0.130            0.208                        0.322               0.118               0.204
2011            0.261            0.057            0.204                        0.261               0.047               0.214
2015            0.223            0.040            0.183                        0.248               0.037               0.211
Panel D: Donut ( 20,  80)
1981            0.576            0.235            0.340                        0.605               0.192               0.413
1990            0.444            0.195            0.249                        0.462               0.185               0.276
1999            0.333            0.140            0.194                        0.308               0.110               0.198
2011            0.258            0.061            0.197                        0.249               0.038               0.211
2015            0.218            0.054            0.164                        0.239               0.034               0.205
Panel E: Random Decile Wages
1981            0.581            0.233            0.348                        0.621               0.209               0.412
1990            0.433            0.188            0.244                        0.462               0.188               0.274
1999            0.325            0.127            0.199                        0.311               0.115               0.197
2011            0.254            0.055            0.198                        0.251               0.043               0.208
2015            0.216            0.042            0.174                        0.242               0.037               0.205
Notes: This table provides results for sensitivity tests of our primary Sample 4 decomposition of the gender wage gap. Panel A
assigns wages to Sample 4 entrants using our baseline specification. Panel B adds additional labor force supply variables to the
wage decile assignment probit, including the number of children under six and marital status. Panel C estimates the original ordered
probit model using only Sample 3 entrants. Panel D only imputes wages for individuals with a predicted probability of being
below or above the median of less than or equal to 20 percent or greater than or equal to 80 percent, respectively. Panel E assigns
within-decile wages based on a uniform random draw of a wage in each decile (probability weights remain the same). See Table 3
notes for additional sample descriptions.




                                                                67
Table A4: Alternative Sample 4 Imputations II
                              OLS (Mean)                                                   Unconditional (Median)
                 Gap           Explained Unexplained                              Gap           Explained       Unexplained
Panel A: 10 Quantiles (Baseline)
1981            0.584            0.228        0.356                               0.619               0.209                0.410
1990            0.433            0.187        0.246                               0.462               0.188                0.274
1999            0.328            0.123        0.205                               0.312               0.115                0.197
2011            0.256            0.053        0.203                               0.251               0.043                0.208
2015            0.217            0.040        0.177                               0.242               0.036                0.206
Panel B: 8 Quantiles
1981            0.582            0.228        0.355                               0.621               0.209                0.411
1990            0.432            0.187        0.245                               0.462               0.188                0.274
1999            0.329            0.123        0.205                               0.311               0.115                0.196
2011            0.254            0.053        0.201                               0.251               0.043                0.207
2015            0.217            0.039        0.178                               0.242               0.035                0.207
Panel C: 4 Quantiles
1981            0.578            0.226        0.352                               0.618               0.210                0.408
1990            0.429            0.185        0.243                               0.462               0.189                0.273
1999            0.327            0.121        0.206                               0.311               0.116                0.196
2011            0.252            0.052        0.200                               0.251               0.045                0.206
2015            0.219            0.037        0.182                               0.243               0.035                0.207
Panel D: 2 Quantiles
1981            0.567            0.223        0.344                               0.621               0.213                0.408
1990            0.421            0.183        0.238                               0.462               0.191                0.271
1999            0.324            0.117        0.207                               0.312               0.118                0.194
2011            0.248            0.048        0.200                               0.250               0.047                0.204
2015            0.214            0.034        0.180                               0.242               0.037                0.205
Notes: This table provides results for sensitivity tests of our primary Sample 4 decomposition of the gender wage gap. Each panel
reestimates our wage assignment probit using various partitions of the wage distribution. Panel A reproduces our primary
specification that partitions the distribution into deciles. Panel B partitions into octiles, Panel C into quartiles, and Panel D into
halves. See Table 3 notes for additional sample descriptions.




                                                                  68
Table A5: Probit Error Rates
                  Men Above                                         Women Above
                    Median,        Men Above                          Median,                           Women Above
                   Imputation     Median, Real        Difference     Imputation                         Median, Real            Difference
Panel A: S1 Model, S2 Entrant Results (Probability Weights)
1981                 0.363             0.375            -0.011         0.422                                  0.387                0.035
1990                 0.432             0.318             0.113         0.431                                  0.290                0.142
1999                 0.452             0.495            -0.043         0.433                                  0.375                0.057
2011                 0.392             0.308             0.084         0.450                                  0.381                0.069
2015                 0.341             0.298             0.042         0.419                                  0.331                0.088
Panel B: S2 Model, S3 Entrant Results (Probability Weights)
1981                 0.354             0.243             0.112         0.431                                  0.295                0.137
1990                 0.351             0.153             0.199         0.378                                  0.234                0.144
1999                 0.394             0.359             0.035         0.405                                  0.315                0.090
2011                 0.380             0.265             0.115         0.411                                  0.314                0.097
2015                 0.391             0.227             0.164         0.368                                  0.260                0.109
Panel C: S2 Entrant Model, S3 Entrant Results (Probability Weights)
1981                 0.394             0.243             0.152         0.384                                  0.295                0.090
1990                 0.273             0.153             0.121         0.251                                  0.234                0.017
1999                 0.445             0.359             0.086         0.364                                  0.315                0.049
2011                 0.330             0.265             0.066         0.343                                  0.314                0.029
2015                 0.314             0.227             0.087         0.311                                  0.260                0.051
Notes: This table provides results for sensitivity tests of our primary Sample 4 decomposition of the gender wage gap. Specifically, this table
compares the fraction of observations with an above median wage ("Above, Real") to that predicted by an ordered probit ("Above, Imputation").
"Above, Imputation" is the mean probability of being above the median (specifically, the mean sum of probability weights for deciles above the
median). The ordered probit model is estimated on three different samples: Sample 1, Sample 2, and Sample 2 entrants. The results from the
probit model are compared against two different samples: Sample 2 entrants and Sample 3 entrants. See text for more details. See Table 3 notes
for additional sample descriptions.




                                                                      69
Table A6: Alternative Sample 4 Imputations III
                              OLS (Mean)                                                   Unconditional (Median)
                 Gap           Explained  Unexplained                             Gap           Explained      Unexplained
Panel A: 10 Quantiles (Baseline)
1981            0.584            0.228         0.356                              0.619               0.209               0.410
1990            0.433            0.187         0.246                              0.462               0.188               0.274
1999            0.328            0.123         0.205                              0.312               0.115               0.197
2011            0.256            0.053         0.203                              0.251               0.043               0.208
2015            0.217            0.040         0.177                              0.242               0.036               0.206
Panel B: Error Adjusted Estimates
1981            0.605            0.230         0.376                              0.651               0.210               0.441
1990            0.444            0.188         0.255                              0.477               0.192               0.285
1999            0.337            0.127         0.210                              0.320               0.116               0.203
2011            0.264            0.054         0.209                              0.263               0.045               0.218
2015            0.219            0.041         0.178                              0.243               0.038               0.205
Notes: This table provides results for sensitivity tests of our primary Sample 4 decomposition of the gender wage gap. Panel A
reproduces our baseline specification. In Panel B, we adjust the Sample 4 entrant probability weights based on the error rates reported
in Table A5, Panel B, which corresponds to computing errors by predicting Sample 3 entrant wages using Sample 2. See the text for
more details. See Table 3 notes for additional sample descriptions.




                                                                  70
Table A7A: Bounding the Median Gender Wage Gap by Education and Experience Groups, Low Education
                                Summary            Worst Case               FOSD            Excl. Rest.   Excl. Rest. + FOSD        Summary           Worst Case           FOSD                Excl. Rest.       Excl. Rest. + FOSD
                        Male      Female        Lower      Upper     Lower       Upper  Lower      Upper   Lower       Upper  Male   Female         Lower    Upper     Lower     Upper       Lower    Upper       Lower       Upper
                      Coverage Coverage Log Gap Bound Bound Bound Bound Bound Bound Bound Bound Coverage Coverage Log Gap                           Bound Bound Bound Bound                  Bound Bound          Bound Bound
                                                          Panel A. Low Edu., Low Exp.                                                                       Panel B. Low Edu., High Exp.
Sample 1 Base
1981                    0.643      0.214 0.555  -0.972      2.336     0.122       2.005 -0.694      1.503   0.375      1.333  0.837   0.615 0.435   -0.016      0.909    0.343      0.785     0.025      0.883    0.366       0.759
                                                 [-1.194, 2.424]       [-0.098, 2.034]   [-0.799, 1.605]     [0.209, 1.402]                           [-0.121, 1.042]     [0.261, 0.915]       [-0.065, 0.946]      [0.333, 0.836]
1990                    0.602      0.263 0.248  -1.065      2.143    -0.216       1.652 -0.780      1.443   0.050      1.130  0.870   0.693 0.291    0.000      0.666    0.221      0.571     0.065      0.595    0.235       0.501
                                                 [-1.406, 2.340]       [-0.495, 1.753]   [-0.962, 1.548]     [-0.077, 1.231]                          [-0.143, 0.769]     [0.124, 0.664]       [-0.016, 0.676]      [0.200, 0.595]
1999                    0.689      0.317 0.376  -1.194      2.119     0.114       1.863 -0.222      1.427   0.486      1.352  0.862   0.685 0.217   -0.159      0.542    0.120      0.480    -0.065      0.467    0.202       0.454
                                                 [-1.410, 2.229]       [-0.138, 1.962]   [-0.338, 1.494]     [0.325, 1.401]                           [-0.253, 0.661]     [0.058, 0.588]       [-0.134, 0.561]      [0.149, 0.549]
2011                    0.423      0.289 0.447  -2.846      3.086    -1.594       1.994 -1.172      1.860   0.035      1.418  0.716   0.611 0.187   -0.479      0.905    -0.067     0.625    -0.300      0.680    0.190       0.562
                                                 [-2.846, 3.086]       [-1.661, 2.100]   [-2.271, 2.352]     [-1.305, 1.514]                          [-0.593, 1.053]     [-0.148, 0.764]      [-0.370, 0.816]      [0.030, 0.675]
2015                    0.548      0.325 0.240  -1.363      2.537    -0.345       1.863 -0.743      1.341   0.091      1.132  0.741   0.577 0.193   -0.481      0.945    -0.001     0.735    -0.415      0.816    0.058       0.677
                                                 [-2.170, 2.936]       [-1.213, 1.898]   [-0.841, 1.520]     [-0.063, 1.193]                          [-0.786, 1.161]     [-0.122, 0.954]      [-0.503, 0.900]     [-0.012, 0.771]
Convergence Bounds                              -3.699      3.509    -2.350       1.741 -2.246      2.035  -1.241      0.757                        -1.390      0.961    -0.785     0.393    -1.297      0.791    -0.701      0.311
Confidence Region                                [-4.505, 3.954]       [-3.095, 1.937]   [-2.344, 2.124]     [-1.345, 0.899]                          [-1.731, 1.201]     [-0.968, 0.607]      [-1.348, 0.909]     [-0.776, 0.386]
Sample 2 Base
1981                    0.758      0.410 0.584  -1.260      2.259     0.323       2.088 -0.813      1.882   0.494      1.823  0.890   0.743 0.464    0.228       0.734   0.412      0.662     0.262      0.681    0.507       0.635
                                                 [-1.376, 2.378]        [0.168, 2.117]   [-0.873, 1.965]     [0.366, 1.872]                            [0.156, 0.807]     [0.349, 0.738]       [0.200, 0.747]       [0.414, 0.695]
1990                    0.716      0.470 0.277  -1.077      2.182     0.045       1.813 -0.707      1.284   0.281      1.141  0.897   0.813 0.342    0.139       0.544   0.282      0.481     0.155      0.490    0.453       0.441
                                                 [-1.276, 2.274]       [-0.147, 1.923]   [-0.844, 1.424]     [0.113, 1.242]                            [0.074, 0.633]     [0.206, 0.561]       [0.119, 0.569]       [0.287, 0.507]
1999                    0.738      0.501 0.407  -2.919      2.113     0.235       1.874 -0.099      0.920   0.513      0.844  0.909   0.827 0.228    0.031       0.396   0.165      0.362     0.146      0.361    0.218       0.352
                                                 [-3.089, 2.200]       [-0.012, 1.973]   [-0.556, 1.352]     [0.377, 1.346]                           [-0.047, 0.481]     [0.101, 0.435]       [0.036, 0.406]       [0.167, 0.395]
2011                    0.547      0.466 0.447  -2.416      2.482    -0.509       1.910 -0.813      1.540   0.291      1.297  0.777   0.720 0.196   -0.237       0.609   0.020      0.418    -0.113      0.501    0.125       0.410
                                                 [-3.418, 3.136]       [-1.511, 2.101]   [-1.025, 1.706]     [-0.090, 1.418]                          [-0.313, 0.728]     [-0.060, 0.527]      [-0.181, 0.562]      [0.082, 0.478]
2015                    0.650      0.502 0.254  -1.398      2.264    -0.115       1.858 -0.353      0.822   0.206      0.755  0.796   0.703 0.190   -0.190       0.670   0.026      0.494    -0.070      0.360    0.155       0.323
                                                 [-1.519, 2.336]       [-0.268, 1.871]   [-0.639, 1.395]     [0.093, 1.309]                           [-0.365, 0.784]     [-0.058, 0.626]      [-0.196, 0.565]      [0.084, 0.543]
Convergence Bounds                              -3.657      3.524    -2.203       1.535 -2.234      1.635  -1.617      0.261                        -0.923       0.442   -0.636     0.082    -0.751      0.098    -0.480     -0.183
Confidence Region                                [-3.796, 3.670]       [-2.354, 1.666]   [-2.424, 2.089]     [-1.711, 0.813]                          [-1.096, 0.586]     [-0.742, 0.221]      [-0.865, 0.320]     [-0.553, 0.032]
Sample 3 Base
1981                    0.929      0.693 0.553   0.204      0.903     0.475       0.812 0.359       0.774   0.608      0.774  0.963   0.891 0.489    0.422       0.581   0.468       0.567    0.587      0.567    0.599       0.563
                                                  [0.118, 0.978]        [0.392, 0.934]    [0.231, 0.873]     [0.487, 0.873]                            [0.359, 0.642]      [0.422, 0.620]      [0.449, 0.616]       [0.495, 0.609]
1990                    0.914      0.744 0.352   0.021      0.670     0.262       0.606 0.272       0.592   0.483      0.570  0.976   0.938 0.353    0.305       0.399   0.341       0.388    0.462      0.384    0.462       0.384
                                                 [-0.070, 0.766]        [0.175, 0.687]    [0.085, 0.659]     [0.335, 0.654]                            [0.238, 0.453]      [0.273, 0.444]      [0.310, 0.415]       [0.358, 0.415]
1999                    0.882      0.746 0.448   0.199      0.699     0.405       0.614 0.406       0.579   0.520      0.557  0.975   0.921 0.246    0.186       0.330   0.230       0.317    0.209      0.246    0.252       0.246
                                                 [-0.023, 0.841]        [0.239, 0.741]    [0.249, 0.666]     [0.406, 0.655]                            [0.121, 0.393]      [0.164, 0.382]      [0.154, 0.333]       [0.201, 0.333]
2011                    0.796      0.699 0.370  -0.072      0.847     0.227       0.632 0.311       0.610   0.362      0.518  0.927   0.864 0.178    0.054       0.343   0.132       0.281    0.109      0.153    0.199       0.148
                                                 [-0.277, 1.010]        [0.069, 0.791]    [0.173, 0.730]     [0.299, 0.648]                           [-0.007, 0.435]      [0.068, 0.378]      [0.056, 0.321]       [0.134, 0.320]
2015                    0.797      0.715 0.207  -0.217      0.591     0.056       0.461 -0.017      0.226   0.206      0.212  0.892   0.855 0.237   -0.001       0.423   0.130       0.344    0.165      0.219    0.250       0.219
                                                 [-0.372, 0.774]       [-0.074, 0.573]   [-0.128, 0.349]     [0.117, 0.331]                           [-0.056, 0.522]      [0.032, 0.436]      [0.060, 0.315]       [0.168, 0.315]
Convergence Bounds                              -1.120      0.388    -0.756      -0.014 -0.791     -0.134  -0.568      -0.395                       -0.582       0.001   -0.437     -0.124   -0.402     -0.368    -0.313     -0.380
Confidence Region                                [-1.281, 0.606]       [-0.944, 0.121]   [-0.930, 0.041]    [-0.694, -0.249]                          [-0.675, 0.112]     [-0.560, -0.021]    [-0.499, -0.251]     [-0.388, -0.288]
Notes: See notes for Tables 6 and 7.




                                                                                                          71
Table A7B: Bounding the Median Gender Wage Gap by Education and Experience Groups, High Education
                           Summary             Worst Case          FOSD             Excl. Rest.   Excl. Rest. + FOSD                       Summary             Worst Case              FOSD              Excl. Rest.      Excl. Rest. + FOSD

                       Male     Female            Lower     Upper     Lower     Upper   Lower        Upper     Lower     Upper   Male    Female              Lower     Upper     Lower     Upper    Lower       Upper      Lower     Upper
                      Coverage Coverage Log Gap   Bound     Bound Bound Bound Bound                  Bound     Bound     Bound Coverage Coverage Log Gap     Bound     Bound Bound Bound Bound                  Bound      Bound     Bound
                                                           Panel C. High Edu., Low Exp.                                                                               Panel D. High Edu., High Exp.
Sample 1 Base
1981                    0.760     0.375   0.234   -0.904     1.534     0.067      1.328    -0.605     1.393     0.261      1.223   0.940    0.722    0.401    0.158       0.644   0.367      0.619     0.256      0.599    0.413       0.587
                                                   [-0.999, 1.658]      [-0.085, 1.469]     [-0.716, 1.425]      [0.103, 1.311]                                 [0.069, 0.734]     [0.292, 0.707]       [0.157, 0.660]       [0.331, 0.642]
1990                    0.809     0.408   0.157   -1.034     1.689     0.017      1.524    -0.547     1.053     0.152      1.012   0.909    0.711    0.251   -0.014       0.549   0.191      0.493     0.079      0.458    0.398       0.440
                                                   [-1.166, 1.757]      [-0.147, 1.596]     [-0.700, 1.234]      [0.053, 1.187]                                [-0.093, 0.614]     [0.114, 0.559]       [0.007, 0.507]       [0.289, 0.490]
1999                    0.796     0.473   0.124   -1.343     1.637    -0.014      1.560    -0.536     0.671     0.093      0.632   0.900    0.730    0.273   -0.048       0.624   0.194      0.549     0.037      0.533    0.256       0.506
                                                   [-1.391, 1.990]      [-0.127, 1.917]     [-0.753, 0.912]      [0.005, 0.880]                                [-0.130, 0.685]     [0.126, 0.604]       [-0.037, 0.614]      [0.211, 0.579]
2011                    0.768     0.482   0.103   -2.107     2.170    -0.103      1.990    -0.705     0.903     0.006      0.786   0.839    0.664    0.281   -0.253       0.817   0.116      0.645    -0.179      0.755    0.175       0.628
                                                   [-2.168, 2.248]      [-0.206, 2.063]     [-0.986, 1.143]      [-0.079, 1.054]                               [-0.363, 0.876]     [0.029, 0.728]       [-0.249, 0.788]      [0.128, 0.694]
2015                    0.789     0.527   0.111   -0.901     1.121    -0.059      0.902    -0.539     0.659     0.085      0.601   0.879    0.731    0.235   -0.130       0.588   0.140      0.486    -0.034      0.503    0.205       0.466
                                                   [-1.555, 1.798]      [-0.149, 1.600]     [-0.680, 0.856]      [0.016, 0.777]                                [-0.220, 0.689]     [0.059, 0.575]       [-0.124, 0.582]      [0.162, 0.532]
Convergence Bounds                                -2.435     2.026    -1.387      0.835    -1.932     1.265    -1.138      0.340                             -0.774       0.430   -0.480     0.119    -0.633      0.247    -0.382      0.053
Confidence Region                                  [-3.085, 2.721]      [-1.559, 1.521]     [-2.036, 1.422]      [-1.214, 0.547]                               [-0.897, 0.576]     [-0.600, 0.242]      [-0.726, 0.388]     [-0.429, 0.147]
Sample 2 Base
1981                    0.900     0.597   0.266   -0.230     0.839     0.206       0.736   -0.090     0.629     0.297      0.536   0.965    0.835    0.427    0.314       0.520   0.415      0.511     0.348      0.475    0.441       0.470
                                                   [-0.389, 0.985]       [0.119, 0.913]     [-0.190, 0.748]      [0.188, 0.690]                                 [0.206, 0.611]     [0.320, 0.594]       [0.288, 0.537]       [0.365, 0.532]
1990                    0.915     0.669   0.255   -0.176     0.682     0.179       0.631   0.080      0.509     0.284      0.489   0.944    0.867    0.283    0.148       0.428   0.254      0.396     0.177      0.348    0.413       0.346
                                                   [-0.302, 0.831]       [0.061, 0.771]     [-0.047, 0.624]      [0.179, 0.622]                                 [0.081, 0.484]     [0.165, 0.450]       [0.146, 0.425]       [0.308, 0.421]
1999                    0.889     0.703   0.154   -0.226     0.519     0.093       0.446   -0.082     0.352     0.203      0.318   0.938    0.866    0.306    0.144       0.459   0.262      0.410     0.206      0.402    0.310       0.388
                                                   [-0.302, 0.636]       [0.010, 0.584]     [-0.188, 0.470]      [0.085, 0.444]                                 [0.078, 0.528]     [0.188, 0.485]       [0.151, 0.463]       [0.259, 0.447]
2011                    0.873     0.676   0.094   -0.357     0.547     0.014       0.439   -0.187     0.424     0.069      0.344   0.886    0.804    0.283    0.006       0.582   0.173      0.448     0.090      0.455    0.349       0.401
                                                   [-0.454, 0.641]      [-0.066, 0.548]     [-0.325, 0.532]      [0.008, 0.481]                                [-0.083, 0.687]     [0.098, 0.562]       [0.037, 0.556]       [0.214, 0.508]
2015                    0.869     0.732   0.118   -0.245     0.453     0.017       0.359   -0.109     0.337     0.093      0.305   0.905    0.846    0.270    0.077       0.482   0.211      0.412     0.110      0.439    0.310       0.407
                                                   [-0.324, 0.567]      [-0.059, 0.428]     [-0.177, 0.420]      [0.041, 0.393]                                 [0.001, 0.567]     [0.132, 0.473]       [0.066, 0.492]       [0.230, 0.448]
Convergence Bounds                                -1.084     0.683    -0.719       0.153   -0.737     0.427    -0.443      0.007                             -0.443       0.168   -0.300     -0.004   -0.365      0.090    -0.159     -0.034
Confidence Region                                  [-1.259, 0.897]      [-0.907, 0.269]     [-0.859, 0.558]      [-0.590, 0.126]                               [-0.566, 0.318]     [-0.416, 0.109]      [-0.419, 0.164]     [-0.255, 0.042]
Sample 3 Base
1981                    0.998     0.860   0.320    0.201      0.458    0.318       0.458   0.239       0.347    0.429      0.347   1.000    0.936    0.441    0.407       0.478   0.441       0.478    0.441      0.377    0.462       0.377
                                                    [0.116, 0.551]       [0.242, 0.542]      [0.163, 0.470]      [0.315, 0.470]                                 [0.324, 0.539]      [0.363, 0.539]      [0.355, 0.489]       [0.400, 0.489]
1990                    0.992     0.886   0.311    0.200      0.432    0.306       0.408   0.248       0.392    0.330      0.392   0.995    0.974    0.307    0.286       0.319   0.303       0.317    0.397      0.307    0.408       0.307
                                                    [0.089, 0.526]       [0.205, 0.518]      [0.146, 0.459]      [0.242, 0.459]                                 [0.209, 0.394]      [0.239, 0.391]      [0.291, 0.362]       [0.327, 0.362]
1999                    0.987     0.896   0.218    0.113      0.298    0.206       0.290   0.146       0.228    0.307      0.228   0.983    0.957    0.324    0.280       0.363   0.315       0.353    0.321      0.192    0.346       0.191
                                                    [0.032, 0.375]       [0.123, 0.367]      [0.082, 0.323]      [0.204, 0.323]                                 [0.210, 0.426]      [0.254, 0.411]      [0.263, 0.320]       [0.288, 0.318]
2011                    0.960     0.870   0.142   -0.024      0.279    0.110       0.253   0.059       0.242    0.143      0.230   0.970    0.918    0.293    0.194       0.377   0.255       0.352    0.227      0.162    0.334       0.139
                                                   [-0.091, 0.366]       [0.054, 0.337]     [-0.016, 0.315]      [0.102, 0.296]                                 [0.121, 0.463]      [0.183, 0.430]      [0.182, 0.343]       [0.242, 0.318]
2015                    0.963     0.885   0.125    0.027      0.243    0.106       0.217   0.089       0.218    0.153      0.210   0.967    0.926    0.265    0.200       0.359   0.254       0.334    0.333      0.323    0.335       0.323
                                                   [-0.040, 0.330]       [0.047, 0.304]      [0.028, 0.288]      [0.110, 0.279]                                 [0.124, 0.431]      [0.183, 0.409]      [0.237, 0.384]       [0.283, 0.384]
Convergence Bounds                                -0.431      0.042   -0.352      -0.101   -0.258     -0.021   -0.194     -0.220                             -0.278      -0.048   -0.223     -0.107   -0.044     -0.118    -0.042     -0.139
Confidence Region                                  [-0.537, 0.176]      [-0.451, 0.015]     [-0.376, 0.072]     [-0.308, -0.121]                               [-0.375, 0.072]     [-0.320, -0.002]    [-0.188, -0.027]     [-0.148, -0.062]
Notes: See notes for Tables 6 and 7.




                                                                                                                    72
Table A8: Identification at Infinity Gender Wage Gap Estimates and Decomposition, Female Dummy Method
                                                           OLS (Mean)                           Unconditional (Median)

                Male Count    Female Count         Gap                        Explained         Unexplained              Gap             Explained          Unexplained
Panel A: Infinity Sample Based on Wave-Specific Probit
1981               1598            185             0.305                        -0.070              0.375               0.302               -0.064              0.366
1990               2062            381             0.067                        -0.139              0.206               0.059               -0.130              0.189
1999               1887            603             0.091                        -0.085              0.176               0.046               -0.104              0.150
2011                826            179            -0.097                        -0.306              0.209               -0.147              -0.353              0.206
2015               1165            352            -0.062                        -0.302              0.239               -0.081              -0.314              0.233
Panel B: Infinity Sample Based on 1981 Probit
1981               1598            185             0.305                        -0.070              0.375               0.302               -0.064              0.366
1990               2056            534             0.120                        -0.066              0.186               0.078               -0.059              0.137
1999               1885            623             0.098                        -0.071              0.169               0.044               -0.089              0.133
2011               1437            587             0.093                        -0.140              0.233               0.073               -0.131              0.204
2015               1503            554             0.080                        -0.157              0.237               0.076               -0.161              0.237
Notes: Data from the 1981, 1990, 1999, 2011, and 2015 waves of the PSID and includes non-immigrant individuals aged 25 to 54. The sample is limited to Sample 1
observations (full-time workers with 26 or more weeks of employment) with probability of full-time year-round employment equal to or above 0.8. In Panel A the employment
probability probit is estimated separately for each wave. For Panel B, this probability is calculated using the 1981 PSID wave, with estimated probability coefficients then
applied to other waves. Wage equation and employment probability equation variables are those listed as the human capital specification in the text. Decompositions computed
with female dummy method. Note that unconditional quantile coefficients do not precisely go through the sample median, but that the predicted medians are very similar to
sample medians.




                                                                                    73
