                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN DO ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES HAVE ELECTORAL CONSEQUENCES?
                    EVIDENCE FROM FRACKING

                                      Judson Boomhower

                                      Working Paper 28857
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28857


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




I am grateful to workshop participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Yale University, Duke
University, North Carolina State University, UC Davis, Stanford University, the AERE Summer
Conference, the Workshop in Environmental Economics and Data Science (TWEEDS), and the
ASSA Annual Meeting; as well as Edson Severnini, Mark Jacobsen, Julie Cullen, Richard
Carson, Teevrat Garg, and Megan Mullin. Wesley Howden provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Judson Boomhower. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
When Do Environmental Externalities Have Electoral Consequences? Evidence from Fracking
Judson Boomhower
NBER Working Paper No. 28857
May 2021
JEL No. D72,H11,Q35,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

The electoral salience of some issues may diminish when one politician has authority over many
policy areas. This study measures the role of environmental regulation in concurrent elections for
governors and specialized energy regulators in two U.S. states. I first show that while both offices
can influence environmental and energy policies, quantitative analysis of campaign news
coverage reveals clear differences in the importance of these issues in the two races. Next, I use
geologic variation in earthquakes caused by oil and gas production to measure the electoral
consequences of a costly environmental externality. There are measurable effects only in the
energy regulator race. These results are consistent with theories of issue bundling. Finally, the
unbundling effects that I measure appear to be themselves limited by voter attentiveness and
partisanship.


Judson Boomhower
Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jboomhower@ucsd.edu
In principle, the regulation of externalities in a democracy is subject to elec-
toral discipline. Yet the degree to which voters actually hold elected officials
accountable for the perceived quality of environmental regulation is an open
question. Do theories of retrospective voting advanced by Key (1966), Fiorina
(1981), and Ferejohn (1986) extend to environmental issues or do voters focus
scarce attention on other issues? Does exposure to costly environmental ex-
ternalities affect voters' choices in partisan races, or do party labels continue
to dominate other factors? Such questions are central to the political economy
of environmental regulation.

Various theories have been proposed for how imperfect information, limited at-
tention, cognitive biases among voters, and other factors may soften electoral
accountability.1 One well-known case arises when voters choose one politician
to represent their interests in many policy areas ("issue bundling"). Besley and
Coate (2003, 2008) propose a model where generalist politicians face limited
electoral consequences for their handling of "secondary" issues, while these
topics play a larger role in elections for more specialized offices with fewer
competing issues. More recent work considers how the accountability benefits
of unbundling electoral decisions into multiple specialized races may depend
on voter attentiveness, partisan polarization, and other factors (Berry and
Gersen 2009, 2011; Augenblick and Nicholson 2015; Lim and Snyder 2015).
Several empirical studies provide indirect tests of these theories by comparing
policy outcomes (such as the stringency of utility rate regulation) across juris-
dictions with different degrees of specialization among elected officials (Besley
and Coate 2003; Mullin 2008; Hauge, Jamison, and Prieger 2012).2 But there
is little direct evidence from actual voting behavior on how bundling affects
the electoral salience of particular issues.

This study approaches these questions through the lens of energy regulation
   1. See Kramer (1971), Barro (1973), Fair (1978), Ferejohn (1986), and additional studies
reviewed in Healy and Malhotra (2013).
   2. A separate literature compares policy outcomes in systems with elected politicians vs.
non-elected bureaucrats, holding constant the degree of functional specialization (Maskin
and Tirole 2004; Lim 2013; Whalley 2013; Hessami 2018).



                                             1
in the U.S. states of Oklahoma and Texas. Statewide elections in both states
include a specialized energy regulator race alongside the races for governor
and other generalist offices. This setting allows me to observe the role of en-
ergy and environmental issues in concurrent races with differing numbers of
competing issues. In addition to providing descriptive evidence of the role of
environmental issues in general, the empirical analysis focuses on the response
to a new externality: earthquakes caused by underground disposal of wastewa-
ter from oil and gas production. As I show using data on insurance takeup, the
emergence of this new externality has imposed meaningful costs in the most-
affected areas. These costs are further substantiated by hedonic studies that
find fracking-related earthquakes decrease house prices by several percentage
points or more (Koster and van Ommeren 2015; Metz, Roach, and Williams
2017; Cheung, Wetherell, and Whitaker 2018; Ferreira, Liu, and Brewer 2018;
Gibbons, Heblich, and Timmins 2021; Burnett and Mothorpe 2021).

Fracking-related earthquake risk provides an unusually good opportunity for
empirical analysis. First, governors and elected energy regulators both have
authority to affect the stringency of earthquake regulation. The energy reg-
ulators ­ the Oklahoma Corporation Commission (OCC) and Texas Railroad
Commission (TRC) ­ can directly regulate wastewater disposal. Governors
can exercise influence through appointments such as the Oklahoma Secretary
of Energy and the Environment and the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality, and by exercising their broader convening power.3 Second, unlike typ-
ical pollution externalities, induced seismicity is unlikely to be endogenously
determined with respect to local political and economic factors. While oil
and gas drilling happens throughout Oklahoma and Texas, susceptibility to
fracking-related earthquakes depends on local geological factors that were es-
sentially unknown prior to about 2013. This reduces the importance of omitted
variables concerns that arise when considering the electoral effects of PM2.5 ,
NOx , or other commonly-considered air and water pollutants.
   3. For example, former Oklahoma governor Mary Fallin established a Coordinating Coun-
cil on Seismic Activity that included the Secretary of Energy and the Environment, the
Oklahoma Geologic Survey, the OCC, state legislators, and industry representatives.


                                           2
From a geographic perspective, Oklahoma and Texas are inherently interest-
ing places to examine the electoral significance of energy and environmental
issues. They are representative of the Republican-dominated states that con-
trol a disproportionate share of the United States' energy production, as well
as electoral votes and U.S. Senate seats. The fracking boom has generated
tremendous wealth in these states at the same time that it has introduced
large local disamenities (Muehlenbachs, Spiller, and Timmins 2015; Currie,
Greenstone, and Meckel 2017; Bartik et al. 2019). Because most onshore oil
and gas reserves in the United States are on private land, state-level regula-
tions are of primary importance in controlling production and trading off these
economic benefits and local externalities.

The paper combines text analysis of campaign news coverage with traditional
regression analysis of election outcomes. The first part of the paper analyzes
the role of environmental issues in the 2018 campaigns for governor and energy
regulator. I apply methods for quantitative text analysis to a collection of lo-
cal newspaper articles. This exercise reveals the relative prominence of various
issues in the race for each office. The gubernatorial campaigns focused on ed-
ucation, budget balance, healthcare, and the economy. There is no indication
that either candidate for governor believed environmental issues or earthquake
regulation to be important to voters in that race. In contrast, the energy
regulator races focused heavily on oil and gas regulation, including induced
seismicity. In Oklahoma, phrases related to earthquakes, other environmental
issues, and the oil and gas industry were 110, 18, and 12 times more common
in coverage of the OCC race than the governor race. Moreover, the candidates
for energy regulator had clearly differentiated positions. The Democratic OCC
candidate focused more heavily on earthquake regulation while the Republican
incumbent instead emphasized economic messages.

The second part of the paper measures voters' responses to fracking-related
earthquakes using elections data. Whether this new externality would have
led self-interested voters to prefer stricter regulation is ex ante ambiguous,
since that decision depends on the perceived costs of regulation as well as its


                                       3
benefits. I do not impose any assumption about which candidates would have
best served voters' interests. Instead, I let the data reveal whether the issue
affected election outcomes in either direction in each race.

The analysis of election outcomes first considers the energy regulator races
(OCC and TRC). The empirical design here takes advantage of the electoral
institutions in these two states by measuring how the difference in outcomes
between energy regulator and other downballot executive races (e.g., Labor
Commissioner, Agriculture Commissioner) varies along the earthquake expo-
sure gradient. This differencing design aids identification and substantially
improves precision by purging unobserved heterogeneity across precincts. I
find small but clearly measurable effects of induced seismicity on candidate
vote share and undervote (the share of ballots left blank for energy regula-
tor). These effects are limited to Oklahoma, where earthquake experience
was particularly acute. In the precincts with the most severe shaking, in-
duced seismicity appears to have reduced the vote share for the Republican
OCC candidate by about 1.5 percentage points and reduced undervote about
one-fourth of one percentage point (a 15% reduction).

These effects may appear modest given the costs of the externality revealed in
hedonic studies and the narrow policy portfolio of Corporation Commissioner.
Such muted effects may reflect limitations on issue unbundling in partisan
races. Given attention constraints, adding many low-information races to the
ballot can lead voters to rely even more heavily than usual on party labels in
these races. Lim and Snyder (2015) document this effect in partisan judicial
races in the United States.4 My data show that precinct-level party vote
shares for OCC or TRC are almost perfectly predicted by vote shares in other
downballot executive races unrelated to earthquakes and the environment. A
simple bivariate regression of Republican vote share for OCC or TRC on vote
shares in these other low-information races has an R-squared of 0.98.

Lastly, I consider the effect of exposure to induced seismicity on overall turnout
   4. See also the recent review piece by the same authors describing additional studies on
this question (Lim and Snyder 2021).


                                            4
and party vote shares for governor. The differencing estimator used for the
downballot energy regulator offices is not applicable here because of the lack of
a contemporaneous comparison group for these top-level outcomes. I present
estimates from three other approaches: a regression-adjusted cross-sectional
gradient with respect to earthquake exposure; matching estimates that com-
pare observationally similar voters in more- and less-affected areas; and county-
level panel estimates that compare outcomes across historical elections. Across
these various designs, there is no evidence of effects on participation in the elec-
tion or on candidate choice for governor. Thus, but for the unusual inclusion of
a specialized energy regulator race in these states, there would have been scant
evidence that voters cared about earthquakes at all, either in news coverage
of the campaigns or in election outcomes.

This study is related to an economic and political science literature on voting
and the environment. Many of these studies have considered environmentally-
oriented ballot initiatives, which often address land preservation, infrastruc-
ture, and other public goods (Deacon and Shapiro 1975; Kahn and Matsusaka
1997; Kotchen and Powers 2006; Burkhardt and Chan 2017; Anderson, Mari-
nescu, and Shor 2019; Hazlett and Mildenberger 2020). This paper, in con-
trast, is one of a small number of studies examining partisan races for elected
office. List and Sturm (2006) consider the role of environmental policy in U.S.
gubernatorial elections using state-level data on environment and natural re-
sources spending. The authors propose that governors facing close re-election
races may adjust environmental spending to win over small numbers of "sin-
gle issue voters" who disproportionately prioritize environment, while these
issues remain inconsequential to most voters. Stokes (2016) documents voter
backlash against renewable energy infrastructure in Canada.5

This paper makes several contributions. It presents the first evidence of the
   5. Another strand of work uses natural disasters as an empirical tool to understand
whether voters irrationally punish politicians for acts of nature and/or reward them for
providing generous post-disaster aid (Healy and Malhotra 2009; Bechtel and Hainmueller
2011; Gasper and Reeves 2011; Cole, Healy, and Werker 2012; Chen 2013). While earth-
quakes also feature in the present study, these are human-caused events related to industrial
activity, as opposed to random natural disasters.


                                             5
importance of environmental issues in elections for generalist and functionally-
specialized offices in the same election. The results add to our limited under-
standing of the electoral salience of environmental policy. More broadly, they
extend an empirical literature that seeks to resolve competing theoretical pre-
dictions about issue bundling. From a methodological perspective, the paper
applies emerging empirical tools for text analysis. Finally, it is one of a small
number of studies that apply quasi-experimental methods to develop casually-
identified estimates of the electoral effects of pollution exposure.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes state-level oil and gas
regulation and the problem of induced seismicity. Section 2 describes the data
and Section 3 describes the empirical strategy. Section 4 presents and discusses
the results and Section 5 concludes.



1     Background

This section describes oil and gas regulation in Oklahoma and Texas (Section
1.1) and the issue of manmade earthquakes due to oil and gas wastewater
disposal (Section 1.2).


1.1 State-level Oil and Gas Regulation

The large majority of oil and natural gas production in the United States ­
76% of crude oil and 87% of natural gas in 2017 ­ occurs on private or state
lands and is thus governed by state-level regulatory commissions.6 These com-
missions manage most aspects of drilling and production. They play key roles
in determining environmental and safety rules, enforcing those rules through
site inspections and penalty hearings, resolving common pool externalities,
and permitting new drilling. Given this important role, there is a surprisingly
   6. Production totals are from Congressional Research Service, "U.S. Crude Oil and Nat-
ural Gas Production in Federal and Nonfederal Areas", CRS Report R42432, Updated Oc-
tober 23, 2018.


                                           6
limited amount of research on the political economy of state-level oil and gas
regulation.

Texas and Oklahoma, the first- and fourth-highest oil-producing states, both
choose their oil and gas regulators via popular election (as opposed to other
states where these are appointed positions). The Texas Railroad Commission
(TRC) and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission (OCC) each consist of
three members elected to six-year terms. These terms are staggered so that
one seat is contested in each November general election. In Texas, the TRC
regulates the oil and gas industry, natural gas utilities, pipelines, and coal
and uranium mining. In Oklahoma, the OCC regulates oil and gas extraction
and serves as the public utilities commission. The governors of both states
have parallel responsibility to enforce additional environmental rules affecting
the industry (for example, through appointments to the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality or the Oklahoma Secretary of Energy and the Envi-
ronment).

Despite receiving less attention than gubernatorial races or close Congressional
contests, the energy regulator races in both states attract significant campaign
effort and money. In Texas, total contributions in the 2018 TRC race were $6.2
million, compared to $18.7 million for Attorney General and $82.3 million for
governor. In Oklahoma, contributions were $1.4 million for OCC, $6.4 million
for Attorney General, and $23.8 million for governor.7

The state governments of Texas and Oklahoma include a number of other
directly-elected executive officers.8 All of these races are contested in the
regular November statewide elections. These are partisan races; candidates'
political party affiliations are listed on the ballot and the major party can-
didates are selected via party-specific primary elections. During the study
   7. Campaign contribution data are reported by the National Institute on Money in Poli-
tics and are available from www.FollowTheMoney.org.
   8. Oklahoma: Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Treasurer, State Au-
ditor and Inspector, Superintendent of Public Instruction, Labor Commissioner, Insurance
Commissioner, and Corporation Commissioner. Texas: Governor, Lieutenant Governor, At-
torney General, Comptroller, Agriculture Commissioner, Land Commissioner, and Railroad
Commissioner.


                                           7
period, both Oklahoma and Texas ballots included a "straight ticket" option
(an optional choice to select one party's full slate of candidates with a single
selection). According to Oklahoma State Election Board data, 40% of Ok-
lahoma voters chose to use the straight ticket option in 2018. Haag (2019)
reports a higher rate (67%) in Texas.

This study focuses on 2018. This election cycle was the first time in a decade
that there was a challenger in the OCC race. In the intervening years, Repub-
licans ran unopposed in both the general and Republican primary elections.
A Democrat entered in 2016, explicitly citing earthquakes as motivation, but
withdrew prior to the general election for family reasons.9 In Texas, the TRC
race has included candidates from both major parties in every recent year.
The online appendix shows some time series analysis of TRC races (Appendix
Figure A5). Appendix Table A2 reports overall outcomes for energy regulator
and governor in both states in 2018. Republican candidates won by signif-
icant margins, consistent with recent Republican party dominance in these
states.


1.2 Induced Seismicity

The empirical analysis of election outcomes focuses on earthquakes caused by
the underground disposal of wastewater from oil and gas extraction. Prior to
2009, earthquakes larger than magnitude 3.5 were rare in the central United
States. Between 2009 and the 2018 election, there was a rapid increase in
seismic activity affecting Oklahoma, northern Texas, and neighboring states.
These events are caused by human activity ­ specifically, the injection of oil
and gas wastewater into disposal wells in certain vulnerable geologic formations
(Ellsworth 2013; Weingarten et al. 2015; Petersen et al. 2018).
   9. Monies, Paul. "Democratic opponent bows out of Oklahoma Corporation Commission
race." The Oklahoman, June 22, 2016. "[Richard] Morrissette announced his candidacy
in February at an Edmond earthquake forum that featured environmental and consumer
activist Erin Brockovich. He pledged to reform the Corporation Commission, which he
said had a slow response to Oklahoma's sharp rise in earthquakes connected to wastewater
disposal wells."


                                           8
These so-called "swarms" of earthquakes received substantial public and media
attention. Most have caused little or no physical harm, but a few large events
such as the 2011 Prague earthquake (magnitude 5.7) and the 2016 Pawnee
earthquake (magnitude 5.8) damaged homes and other buildings. The per-
ceived risk of damage during the years prior to the 2018 election was high.
The United States Geological Survey (USGS) began producing "induced seis-
micity" forecasts for this region in 2016 as a response to this new risk. The
2016, 2017, and 2018 forecasts all implied that the predicted risk of property
damage from earthquakes in the central United States region was among the
highest in the country (Petersen et al. 2018). In more recent years, seismic
activity has slowed but remains substantially above pre-2009 levels.

A variety of sources confirm the economic and psychological salience of man-
made earthquakes. Earthquake insurance takeup in Oklahoma increased dra-
matically from 2% to 15% in four years. Figure 2 shows that total premiums
written for earthquake insurance rose from $3.9 million to $23.8 million dol-
lars between 2010 and 2018.10 This greater than five-fold increase coincides
with the onset of induced seismicity. The post-2009 trend dramatically exceeds
growth rates for other lines of coverage like private auto, flood, or homeowner's
multi-peril (which excludes earthquakes). Furthermore, hedonic studies find
home price impacts of 4­10% in the worst-affected areas (Metz, Roach, and
Williams 2017; Cheung, Wetherell, and Whitaker 2018; Ferreira, Liu, and
Brewer 2018; Burnett and Mothorpe 2021). Casey, Goldman-Mellor, and
Catalano (2018) report that the earthquake swarms increased Google searches
for anxiety-related keywords.

Oklahoma governor Mary Fallin established a Coordinating Council on Seismic
Activity in 2014 that included the Secretary of Energy and the Environment,
the Oklahoma Geologic Survey, the OCC, state legislators, and industry rep-
  10. Premiums data were compiled by the author from Oklahoma Insurance Department
annual reports for 2004­2018. See Table II: Property & Casualty Lines of Business. Takeup
numbers for 2011 and 2015 are from National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
"Insurance Regulators Discuss Earthquake Issues and Challenges at CIPR Event", Center
for Insurance Policy and Research Newsletter, December 2015.



                                           9
resentatives. The OCC began ordering the closure of nearby disposal wells
following particularly large seismic events. The TRC held public hearings
in affected areas of North Texas. Both states invested in improved seismic
monitoring and research. Critics argued that these officials were too slow to
publicly acknowledge the link between oil and gas activity and earthquakes,
and that greater restrictions on wastewater injection were warranted.



2    Data

The online appendix describes the creation of the database in detail (Appendix
Sections 4 and 5). This section provides an overview of the key datasets.

Data on election outcomes for Oklahoma were provided by the Oklahoma State
Election Board. These data include each candidate's name, political party,
and vote total at the precinct level for every office in the statewide general
election. Individual-level information on turnout and voter registration comes
from the state voter registration database, which was also provided by the
State Election Board. These data include date of birth, party preference, and
voting history (whether a ballot was cast in a given election) for all registered
voters as of August, 2019. Data on election outcomes for Texas come from
the Texas Legislative Council. The data include vote totals by candidate for
every statewide race in 2018 at the level of voting tabulation districts (VTDs),
which are based on 2018 election precincts.

Data on earthquake locations, dates, and magnitudes come from the USGS
Advanced National Seismic System Comprehensive Catalog (ANSS ComCat).
This catalog reports dates, magnitudes, and geographic locations for earth-
quakes throughout the world. Data on oil and gas well locations and pro-
duction comes from Enverus (DrillingInfo). These data include geographic
coordinates, drilling date, and monthly production volumes for the universe of
oil and gas wells in Oklahoma and Texas.

The analysis of campaign news coverage uses a dataset of election-related

                                       10
articles from Oklahoma and Texas newspapers. Full details of the database
creation are in Appendix Section 5. Briefly, I used news databases and directed
searches of individual newspapers to compile a database of election-related
news articles from calendar year 2018. I then identified a subset of articles
that focused primarily on the governor or energy regulator races during the
primary or general elections. The resulting dataset includes 320 articles about
the governor races in the two states and 38 articles about the energy regulator
races.



3     Methods

Section 3.1 discusses the descriptive text analysis of campaign news coverage.
Section 3.2 describes the econometric analysis of election outcomes.


3.1 Text Analysis

I use text analysis methods to explore the relative emphasis on various issues
in news coverage of the 2018 campaigns for governor and energy regulator.
Using techniques for statistical analysis of text reviewed in Gentzkow, Kelly,
and Taddy (2019) and elsewhere, I calculated the relative frequencies of policy-
related keywords in the database of news stories assembled for this study. This
analysis involves removing common stopwords (e.g., "the", "said"), applying
a stemming algorithm that reduces various word forms to common roots, and
counting occurrences of word stems in the resulting list. All words appearing
at least five times across all Oklahoma articles were assigned by hand to one of
ten issue categories.11 The list of words in each category is in Appendix Table
A10. For each word and each topic category, I calculate the occurrence rate
per 10,000 words of news coverage in the governor and energy regulator races
in each state. To compare the relative importance of topics across any two
 11. Economy, education, health, state budget, social issues, oil & gas, earthquakes, other
environmental issues (beside earthquakes), utilities, and other/not policy-related.


                                            11
races, I calculate the natural log of the ratio of occurrence rates, which I call
the log occurrence ratio.12 The main objects of interest in the text analysis
are the log occurrence ratios between the energy regulator and governor races
for each issue category.

This analysis relies on news coverage instead of directly-recorded candidate
speech. This is partly by necessity due to the scarcity of recorded candidate
speech, especially for energy regulator. It is worth considering the degree to
which differences in coverage of various offices and candidates could reflect
journalistic decisions instead of the messaging priorities of candidates. Two
pieces of evidence suggest that the patterns of emphasis across races are not
primarily driven by differences in editorial slant. First, the topics emphasized
in the news articles that most resemble unedited candidate speech ­ op-eds
by candidates and news coverage of in-person debates ­ mirror those in the
full sample. Second, many of the news stories about different candidates come
from the same newspapers, and often the same individual reporters.


3.2 Econometric Analysis of Election Data

The next several sections explain how variation in earthquake exposure is used
to measure the effects of induced seismicity on candidate choice and turnout.
Section 3.2.1 describes the variation in earthquake exposure and relevant co-
variates. Section 3.2.2 explains the methods for analyzing downballot out-
comes, and Section 3.2.3 describes the approach for governor and overall voter
turnout.
  12. For example, if a given topic category appeared 125 times per 10,000 words in the
Oklahoma Corporation Commission race and 50 times per 10,000 words in the Oklahoma
governor race, the log occurrence ratio for Oklahoma is ln( 125
                                                             50 ) = 0.92. Thus, a topic with
a log occurrence ratio of 1 appears about 2.7 times more frequently in the energy regulator
race than in the governor race, while a log occurrence ratio of -1 indicates that the topic is
about 2.7 times more common in the governor race.




                                             12
3.2.1 Variation in Earthquakes and Other Observables

Oil and gas development occurs throughout Oklahoma and Texas, but vulner-
ability to induced seismicity depends on particular geological characteristics.
Figure 1 shows the most severe shaking experienced at each election precinct
centroid prior to the November 2018 general election. These exposures are
calculated using a geophysical formula from Atkinson and Wald (2007) that
predicts the intensity of shaking in each precinct during each earthquake as
a function of magnitude and proximity. Intensities are expressed in units
of Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI).13 The observed range of MMI values
in Texas and Oklahoma includes "Weak" (3), "Light" (4), "Moderate" (5),
"Strong" (6), and "Very Strong" (7). Appendix Table A1 describes the MMI
scale in detail. Few areas in Texas experience shaking above 4 MMI, while
exposures in Oklahoma exceed 7.

In my default specification, I use the 2009-2018 peak exposures shown in Figure
1 as the measure of a precinct's earthquake exposure. The online appendix
explores other ways of translating the vector of historical exposures to a scalar
measure for each precinct. The ranking of exposures differs little across these
metrics because the areas experiencing the largest earthquakes also experience
the most frequent smaller earthquakes. Appendix Figures A2, A3, and A4
show approaches using only recent events, the count of exposures above a
given level, and a predicted induced seismicity risk measure produced by USGS
(which does not rely on the estimated attenuation coefficients used in the other
measures).

The physical processes that determine earthquake occurrence are unlikely to
be endogenously related to economic or political factors, especially since they
were not well understood prior to about 2013. At the same time, the spa-
  13. The validity of these attenuation coefficients for induced earthquakes was investigated
by Hough (2014). They have been used in economic research by Cheung, Wetherell, and
Whitaker (2018) and Ferreira, Liu, and Brewer (2018) to study the effects of earthquakes
on home values. The MMI scale takes discrete integer values, but the Atkinson and Wald
(2007) predicted MMI is continuous. I refer to this continuous measure throughout the
paper as "MMI".


                                             13
tial concentration of earthquake exposure in central Oklahoma raises concerns
about possible spurious correlations with broad spatial trends in economic or
political factors. Table 1 summarizes economic and political characteristics for
the approximately 1,900 precincts used in Oklahoma's 2018 general election.
The first column reports statewide means. The next two columns report means
in high-exposure and low-exposure subsamples. For many variables, the high-
and low-exposure precincts are broadly similar. Oil and gas industry employ-
ment share is closely balanced and the numbers of active wells and recently-
drilled wells are similar and actually slightly lower in high-exposure precincts.
The average age of registered voters is also well balanced. Differences on
other measures are larger. High-exposure precincts have a lower household in-
come and a larger fraction of white residents. There is also a small difference
in party affiliation, with the high-exposure precincts having more registered
Republicans and fewer Democrats. These differences complicate naive cross-
sectional comparisons across the earthquake exposure gradient, highlighting
the need for an empirical design that can address these differences. The rest
of this section describes the empirical approaches used to measure the effects
of induced seismicity on downballot and overall outcomes and the assumptions
under which these approaches yield consistent estimates.


3.2.2 Empirical Design for Energy Regulator Races

To understand the effects of induced seismicity in the Oklahoma Corporation
Commissioner and Texas Railroad Commissioner races, I take advantage of
the fact that each of these offices is one of several downballot executive races
in each state. The empirical design examines how the difference in outcomes
between energy regulator and other downballot executive races changes with
exposure to induced seismicity. This approach differences out precinct-specific
determinants of political participation and party preference. In addition to im-
proving identification, this design yields substantial gains in precision relative
to purely cross-sectional approaches.



                                       14
Comparing contemporaneous downballot races has advantages with respect
to traditional panel methods that compare outcomes across election years.
Voter behavior is highly variable over time and space based on observable
and unobservable factors, including national politics (e.g., close Congressional
races), presidential vs. midterm elections, and compositional changes in the
electorate. Since elections represent repeated cross sections of a changing
electorate, strategies that attempt to difference away time-invariant place-
specific components of behavior may be prone to bias.

I model election outcomes separately for Oklahoma and Texas. For each state
individually, I represent outcomes for office j in precinct i as,

                     yij = i + j + Dj M M Ii + Dj Xi  + ij                               (1)

where yij is vote share for the Republican candidate or share of ballots indi-
cating any choice in race ij .14 Outcome yij depends on a precinct fixed effect
i and an office fixed effect j . The indicator variable Dj equals one for the
energy regulator race (OCC or TRC) and M M Ii is earthquake exposure. I
show results using a variety of comparison offices (Dj = 0). The comparison
offices for Oklahoma include Insurance Commissioner, Labor Commissioner,
Superintendent of Public Instruction, and Attorney General. For Texas, the
comparison races are Commissioner of Agriculture, Commissioner of the Gen-
eral Land Office, Comptroller of Public Accounts, and Attorney General. The
main coefficient of interest  captures the differential effect of earthquake ex-
posure on the energy regulator race. In my preferred specifications, I param-
eterize M M Ii using a flexible binned form so that  is a vector of bin-specific
exposure effects. The precinct fixed effects control for unobserved determi-
nants of voting behavior or party preference in a given precinct (for example,
a precinct's overall partisan lean this year, or residents' commitment to vot-
ing in downballot races). The office fixed effects control for unobserved office
effects that are constant across precincts (for example, a candidate's overall
14. Equation 1 with a single comparison group is equivalent to the differenced specification,
yi = u + 1 M M Ii + Xi 2 + i .


                                             15
popularity or name recognition).

Equation 1 estimates  consistently if, conditional on the fixed effects and
control variables, there are no unobserved determinants of voting behavior
that are correlated with MMI and differentially affect the energy regulator
race relative to the comparison group. In addition to the precinct fixed ef-
fects, this identification assumption is further bolstered by the predetermined
geological variation that governs susceptibility to earthquakes. Table 1 shows
that oil and gas activity and employment are widespread in both high- and
low-earthquake exposure areas. The greater shaking in the latter group is
primarily a function of local geological factors that were not understood prior
to about 2013. As a further step to address any potential omitted variables,
the interacted control variables Dj Xi allow for differential effects of covari-
ates Xi on the energy regulator race. These controls include the number of
active oil and gas wells within 3 kilometers of the precinct centroid, new wells
completed since 2015 within 3 kilometers of the precinct centroid, county-level
oil and gas employment share, household income, unemployment, education,
racial composition, and age.15 The three kilometer radius for oil and gas wells
is chosen based on the distance over which amenity effects of fracking were
found by Muehlenbachs, Spiller, and Timmins (2015).

When the outcome variable is Republican vote share,  captures the degree to
which election outcomes for energy regulator in earthquake-exposed precincts
deviate from purely partisan voting. This increase in ticket-splitting relative to
other downballot races can be interpreted as a sign of attention or persuasion.
  15. The full list of controls is active wells, active wells squared, completions since 2015,
completions since 2015 squared, oil and gas employment share, median household income
and median household income squared, share high school graduate, share college degree,
share White, share Black, share Native American, unemployment rate, share in an urban
area with more than 50,000 people, share in an urban area with 2,500 ­ 49,999 people,
age, age squared, and share White times share college graduate. Oil and gas drilling data
come from DrillingInfo. Oil and gas employment share data are county-level data from U.S.
Census County Business Patterns. Other demographic data come from the 2017 American
Community Survey (ACS) except age in Oklahoma, where the voter registration data allow
direct calculation of average age by precinct. In Oklahoma, precincts are matched to Census
block group-level ACS demographics (other than age) by geocoding voter addresses. In
Texas, county-level ACS data are used.


                                             16
Note that  does not measure changes in vote shares caused by increases
in overall voter turnout (since, for example, increasing the number of purely
partisan Democratic voters would affect party vote shares for energy regulator
and the comparison races similarly). Section 3.2.3 explains how I separately
test for effects on overall turnout.

When the outcome is office-specific participation rates (i.e., undervote), 
can be interpreted as a measure of differential attention to the energy reg-
ulator race. Positive values of  imply that earthquake exposure increases
voter participation in the energy regulator race relative to other downballot
races.16


3.2.3 Empirical Design for Governor and Overall Turnout

The differencing strategy used to study the energy regulator race is not appli-
cable to the governor race or overall turnout because neither of these has a con-
temporaneous comparison group. I instead use two alternative approaches: a
matching estimator that compares individual voting decisions for observationally-
similar registered voters in high and low earthquake areas; and a county-by-
year panel approach. I focus on Oklahoma in this section because of its greater
earthquake exposure.

The matching approach measures effects on voter turnout using individual vot-
ing records in Oklahoma's voter registration database. Following Imbens and
Rubin (2015) and related references, I construct a propensity score-matched
sample of voters in high- and low-exposure precincts. I use the matched sam-
ple to estimate the effect of earthquake exposure on voter turnout with several
different regression and matching estimators. This approach relies on an un-
  16. One might expect earthquake exposure to have heterogeneous effects on participation,
increasing participation among some (e.g., Democrats who otherwise would have left the
energy regulator race blank) while decreasing it among others (e.g., discouraged Republicans
who abstain in the energy regulator race instead of choosing the Republican candidate). In
this case,  is a net effect that represents the full positive (or negative) effect minus a
smaller, partially offsetting effect. In other words,  is a conservative estimate of the share
of voters whose behavior is affected.


                                             17
confoundedness assumption: the estimates are consistent if, conditional on the
controls, earthquake exposure is uncorrelated with unobserved determinants
of the individual turnout decision in the matched sample.

Details on the matching and estimation are in Appendix Section 2.2. The
matching uses individual information from the voter database as well as de-
mographic information at the level of Census block groups. I implement a
number of validity checks following Imbens and Rubin (2015), which are re-
viewed in detail in the online appendix. In addition to confirming balance on
contemporaneous covariates, I also take advantage of historical data in the
voter registration database to compare voting histories for registered voters in
the treatment and comparison groups in the last election prior to the onset of
induced seismicity (2010). The results of these validity checks lend support to
the identifying assumption.

The matching estimates are complemented with estimates from a county-by-
election cycle panel.17 The panel estimates provide an alternative view of
turnout effects and the only feasible estimates of party share effects for gov-
ernor, since the voter registration data do not include candidate choice. The
panel includes county-level turnout and party vote shares for midterm elec-
tions in 2010, 2014, and 2018. I define earthquake exposure for each county-
by-election observation as the highest MMI experienced at the county center
of population prior to that election. My main estimating equation for the
panel results is a difference-in-differences specification in which counties are
considered to be treated starting in the first election cycle after local earth-
quake exposure of 6 MMI or greater. These panel regressions include county
fixed effects that absorb time-invariant determinants of county-level outcomes.
They also include election cycle fixed effects that absorb arbitrary patterns in
outcomes across election years. Finally, the panel regressions control for time-
  17. The available voter registration data are a snapshot of registered voters. While the
data include voting history for these individuals, they do not allow for credible panel analysis
due to substantial attrition between election cycles. Even for voters who have resided in
Oklahoma in all periods, the data include only current address, making it impossible to
reconstruct exposure to earthquakes or other shocks at the time of previous elections. For
these reasons, the panel analysis relies on county-level aggregate data.


                                              18
varying covariates. These are new well completions in the county during the
past 4 years (from DrillingInfo), oil and gas employment share, median house-
hold income, share college graduate, share high school graduate, share White,
and share White times share college graduate.18



4    Results and Discussion

This section summarizes the results of the empirical analysis. Section 4.1
discusses the role of environment and other issues in the governor and energy
regulator campaigns, based on quantitative text analysis. Sections 4.2 and 4.3
describe the econometric estimates for downballot outcomes, overall turnout,
and the governor race.


4.1 Text Analysis of Campaign Issues

This section describes the role of environment and other issues in the cam-
paigns for governor and energy regulator. The main text presents results for
the Oklahoma governor and Corporation Commissioner races. Similar results
for Texas governor and Texas Railroad Commission are presented in Appendix
Section 3.

Figure 3 illustrates overall differences across races. The figure plots the oc-
currence rates of various individual word stems in newspaper coverage of the
2018 governor and Corporation Commissioner races in Oklahoma. Words re-
lated to energy and environmental policy are shown in red, and the subset of
these related to earthquakes are indicated with solid fill. The remaining gray
markers are all other policy-related word stems. Labels are included for words
appearing at least 20 times per 10,000 words of news coverage in either race.19
 18. Demographic variables for 2010 use 2011 ACS 5-year estimates and those for 2018 use
2017 ACS 5-year estimates. Values for 2014 are linearly interpolated based on 2010 and
2018 values.
 19. The full list of words and occurrence rates is provided in Appendix Table A10.


                                          19
The lack of emphasis on environmental issues in the governor race is visually
obvious: environment-related word stems are clustered along the horizontal
axis, reflecting near-zero mention in coverage of the governor race. The im-
portant role that these issues played in the Corporation Commissioner race is
similarly clear.

Figure 4 formalizes these results by comparing occurrence rates for aggregate
topic categories. Panel A compares estimates and 95% confidence intervals
across the two offices. The issue categories are ordered according to the log of
the ratio of occurrence rates in the two races ("ln(ratio)"), which is reported
at the left of the figure. The log occurrence ratio for Health, for example,
is -2.3, meaning that the probability of encountering a health-related word
is about 10 times higher in coverage of the governor race than in the OCC
race. Health, the state budget, social issues like abortion and marijuana, and
education were common in the governor race. Education-related keywords in
particular accounted for 179 out of every 10,000 words of governor coverage,
perhaps reflecting the high profile teacher strikes in Oklahoma in 2018. In
comparison, environment and energy-related topics received little mention in
the campaign for governor. The occurrence rates for oil and gas regulation,
utilities, earthquakes, and other environmental issues are all near zero.

The balance of topics for OCC is quite different. Oil and gas, utilities, earth-
quakes, and other environment/energy issues were dominant. Oil- and gas-
related keywords appeared 319 times in every 10,000 words of coverage, while
the other three categories all had occurrence rates exceeding 100 per 10,000. It
is particularly striking to see this high occurrence rate for the relatively narrow
topic of earthquakes. The log occurrence ratios emphasize how different the
issues were in these two races. The largest, +4.7, is for earthquakes, implying
that earthquakes were discussed about 100 times more frequently in coverage
of the OCC race. Utilities and "other environment" have log occurrence rates
of +3.1 and +2.9, and oil and gas has a log occurrence rate of +2.5. The
one topic that received relatively similar emphasis across the two races was
economic issues, with a log occurrence rate of +0.4 (about 1.5 times more


                                        20
common).

Panel B of Figure 4 compares coverage of Democratic and Republican OCC
candidates. This panel uses a subset of 14 articles that focused exclusively on
the OCC race and on one party. Many of these are from "election guides" in
local newspapers featuring side-by-side articles about each candidate, or are
coverage of one party's primary candidates. While the estimates are noisier due
to the small sample size, two differences across parties stand out. Earthquakes
are about 2.5 times more common for Democrats than Republicans (log ratio
0.9), and Republicans placed greater emphasis on economic issues.

These quantitative results are consistent with a close reading of individual
stories. In October 2018, Democratic Corporation Commissioner nominee
Ashley McCray told the Muskogee Phoenix that the most important issues
were, "Property damage from earthquakes that are caused by injecting frack-
ing wastewater into disposal wells, home values plummeting because no one
wants a giant fracking operation as their next door neighbor, water contam-
ination, especially of groundwater and rural Oklahoman water wells, [and]
lack of inclusion".20 HuffPo ran an article headlined, "Ashley McCray Bets
on Fracking Quake Concerns to Push Red Oklahoma Green."21 In contrast,
Republican incumbent Bob Anthony focused on his experience in utility regu-
lation. He told the Tulsa World that, "There are issues before the Commission
right now that are worth billions to Oklahoma's economy... My knowledge and
experience are key to protecting ratepayers."22

Appendix Table A9 includes similar results for Texas races. The log occur-
rence ratios between Texas Railroad Commissioner and Texas governor are
similar to the Oklahoma results. Energy and environment topics, including
earthquakes, are emphasized in the Railroad Commissioner race while receiv-
 20. "Quick 5: McCray challenges Anthony for Corporation Commission seat." Muskogee
Phoenix. October 30, 2018.
 21. Blood, Liz. "Ashley McCray Bets on Fracking Quake Concerns to Push Red Oklahoma
Green." HuffPo November 1, 2018.
 22. Hoberock, Barbara. "Four Advance to Runoffs for Corporation Commissioner." Tulsa
World August 5, 2018.



                                         21
ing little attention in the governor race. Appendix Figure A5 reports the time
series of occurrence rates in the Railroad Commissioner race in each statewide
election from 2006 to 2018 (taking advantage of the fact that TRC has been
consistently contested by both parties). Oil and gas regulation, economic
issues, and non-earthquake environmental issues show consistent occurrence
rates over time. Earthquakes are not discussed at all prior to 2014, which is
consistent with the timing of scientific understanding of the link between earth-
quakes and oil and gas activity. In 2014, 2016, and 2018, earthquake-related
words appear about as frequently as all other non-earthquake environment
topics combined.


4.2 Election Outcomes: Energy Regulator

This section turns to the effects of induced seismicity on election outcomes. I
begin with the energy regulator races.


4.2.1 Graphical Evidence

Figure 5 shows the differential effect of induced seismicity on the energy reg-
ulator races in Texas and Oklahoma in 2018. In each panel, the difference
between energy regulator outcomes and average outcomes in the comparison
races was calculated, and these differences were regressed on the control vari-
ables Xi from Equation 1. The figure plots the residuals from this regression.
The horizontal axis shows the peak shaking experienced in each precinct prior
to the 2018 general election. The blue line and shaded region show a local
linear regression fit using a bandwidth of 0.75 MMI and weighting precincts
by registered voters.

Panel A considers vote share for Republican candidates. Texas is on the left.
Notice first that the precinct-level differences are mostly clustered between
-2.5% to +2.5% percent and that the fitted regression is near zero. This
implies that average outcomes in other downballot races closely predict TRC


                                       22
outcomes. Second, there is no observable effect of earthquakes over the limited
exposure range experienced in Texas (though the regression estimates become
noisy above about 4.5 MMI). This is intuitive given that the large majority
of precincts in Texas experienced mild shaking that may not even have been
noticed. Moving to the top right panel, performance differences between the
Republican OCC candidate and other downballot Republicans in Oklahoma
are also near zero on average. However, the local regression fit slopes down at
high earthquake exposures, implying poorer relative performance of the Re-
publican OCC candidate compared to other downballot candidates in those
precincts. This negative effect begins between about 4.5 to 5 MMI and in-
creases with exposure. In the most-exposed precincts, the performance gap
between the Republican OCC candidate and other downballot Republicans is
about 1.5 percentage points larger than in the least-exposed precincts.

Panel B considers the difference in total votes cast for energy regulator and
other downballot offices. Again, the mild exposures in Texas do not seem to
affect the relative share of voters indicating a choice in the TRC race. The
local linear regression may show a small increase starting at about 5 MMI,
but this is quite noisy given the small number of precincts at these exposure
levels. In Oklahoma, higher exposures are associated with a small relative
increase in the share of voters indicating choices for energy regulator. In the
most-exposed precincts the effect is about 0.5 percentage points. While this
is a small effect in absolute terms, it represents a large percentage decrease
in undervote given that the overall average rate of undervote for Corporation
Commissioner was only about 2%.


4.2.2 Regression Evidence

Given the evidence in the previous section, the additional regression results
in this section focus on Oklahoma. Table 2 shows estimates from a version of
Equation 1 where M M I has been parameterized using 4 exposure bins. The
omitted bin includes precincts with exposure below 4.5 MMI. The key coef-


                                      23
ficients of interest are the bin indicators interacted with 1[OCC ], a dummy
for the Corporation Commissioner race. The first two columns show effects
on Republican candidate vote share. Column 1 includes Labor Commissioner
and Insurance Commissioner (the two adjacent races on the ballot) as compar-
ison races, while Column 2 includes these races plus Superintendent of Public
Instruction and Attorney General. In keeping with the visual evidence in Fig-
ure 5, exposures between 4.5 and 5.0 MMI have little effect on the relative
performance of the Republican OCC candidate. The estimates in the next
bin imply that exposures between 5.0 and 6.0 MMI widen the performance
gap by about 0.7 percentage points. Finally, exposures of 6.0 MMI or greater
widen the performance gap for the Republican OCC candidate by about 1.1
percentage points. The upper end of the 95% confidence interval rules out an
effect larger than 2 percentage points.

The final two columns show the effect on downballot turnout. These specifi-
cations measure the difference in voters' likelihood of making a choice in the
OCC race vs. the comparison races. Focusing on Column 4, which includes all
four comparison races, there is a negligible increase in the middle two bins. In
the top bin, exposures greater than 6 MMI, the difference in the the share of
voters indicating a choice for Corporation Commissioner vs. other downballot
offices grows to about one-fourth of one percentage point.


4.2.3 Partisan Cues in the Energy Regulator Race

The electoral effects of induced seismicity in the energy regulator races appear
small given the amenity costs documented elsewhere. No fewer than six sep-
arate hedonic studies of induced earthquakes have all found consistent home
price impacts of at least several percentage points (Koster and van Ommeren
2015; Metz, Roach, and Williams 2017; Cheung, Wetherell, and Whitaker
2018; Ferreira, Liu, and Brewer 2018; Gibbons, Heblich, and Timmins 2021;
Burnett and Mothorpe 2021). The comparatively muted effects on voting raise
questions about what factors did affect choices in these races. One strong ex-


                                      24
planation appears to be partisanship. Figure 6 plots precinct-level vote shares
for the Republican OCC and TRC candidates against Republican vote shares
in the four comparison downballot executive races in each state. The fit is
striking. A simple least-squares regression with no controls yields an R2 above
0.98 for either state.23 The high predictive power of party labels in these races
is consistent with voters relying on partisan cues instead of investing atten-
tion in these low-information races. Such an outcome mirrors the results of
Lim and Snyder (2015) for judicial races in the United States, as well as other
studies reviewed in Lim and Snyder (2021).


4.2.4 Additional Results and Robustness Checks

An alternative theory of voter behavior might be that voters responded not
to their own earthquake exposure, but rather to the existence of induced seis-
micity anywhere in the state (either out of altruism or because manmade
earthquakes provide a signal about politicians' effort or performance). The
results in Table 2 and additional results in the online appendix are useful
for exploring this alternative theory. As a starting point, Column 2 of Table
2 shows that the overall vote share for the Republican OCC candidate was
59.7%, while the average Republican vote share across the comparison offices
was 61.3%. On their face, these outcomes do not suggest that the Republi-
can OCC candidate paid a substantial statewide price. Appendix Table A3
further explores this theory using an alternative empirical design. Counties
in the western, southern, and eastern fringes of Oklahoma are included in
media markets that primarily serve surrounding states like Texas, Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Missouri. The geographic concentration of earthquakes in cen-
tral Oklahoma means that local news consumers in these fringe markets likely
 23. This pattern may partially stem from the availability of single-punch straight party
voting. Recall, however, that only 40% of Oklahoma voters chose the straight party box,
meaning that factor alone cannot explain the high correlation of vote shares across offices.
Moreover, straight party voting is optional ­ nothing prevents voters from indicating their
choices individually if they are sufficiently motivated by issues. In fact, election rules allow
voters to choose the straight party box and then override that selection by voting for another
party in an individual race.


                                              25
experienced less coverage of induced seismicity events than news consumers
in the state's interior. Holding constant actual earthquake exposure, the per-
formance gap between the Republican OCC candidate and other downballot
Republicans does not meaningfully differ across fringe- and non-fringe media
markets, providing little support for the hypothesis that general awareness of
induced seismicity mattered more than one's individual exposure.

One additional robustness check addresses the fact that the Democratic Cor-
poration Commissioner candidate, Ashley McCray, was a member of the Ab-
sentee Shawnee Tribe of American Indians. Appendix Table A4 re-estimates
Equation 1 dropping 56 election precincts in Pottawatomie, Cleveland, and
Oklahoma Counties that are inside of the US Census Citizen Potawatomi
Nation-Absentee Shawnee Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area, finding similar
results. Also, all regressions throughout the paper control for share Native
American among registered voters.


4.3 Overall Turnout and Governor Race

Moving from the specialized energy regulator race to generalist races, this sec-
tion considers how exposure to induced seismicity affected voters' likelihood of
going to the polls and their choice of candidate for governor. The differencing
strategy used to study the energy regulator race is not applicable to these
outcomes because there is no contemporaneous comparison group. Instead, I
show results for two alternative approaches: matched-sample regressions using
individual-level voting data, and a county-by-year panel approach. Both meth-
ods yield noisier estimates, underscoring the benefits of the downballot differ-
encing approach. Still, these other approaches allow me to place meaningful
bounds on the importance of induced seismicity for broader outcomes.

Table 3 summarizes the results. The first two columns show turnout results
using the individual-level voter file data. To simplify calculation of the propen-
sity score, I focus on a binary treatment indicator equal to 1 for voters who
experienced shaking of 6 MMI or higher. This treatment definition is informed

                                       26
by the results for downballot offices, where effects are largest above 6 MMI. I
compare these voters to voters who experienced shaking below 5 MMI; voters
experiencing between 5 and 6 MMI are not included in the main specification.
As a starting point, Column 1 reports the regression-adjusted cross-sectional
difference in turnout probability without matching. This specification includes
1.6 million registered voters. It includes Congressional district fixed effects
that allow for arbitrary effects of federal Congressional races on turnout.24 It
also controls for a cubic function of the voter's age (from the voter registration
data); new well completions within 3 km since 2015; county oil and gas em-
ployment share; and demographic variables for the voter's Census block group:
median household income, income squared, share college graduate, unemploy-
ment rate, share White, share Black, share Native American, share White
times share college graduate, and share living in an urban area with more
than 2,500 people. The point estimate is about 0.25 percentage points and is
not statistically distinguishable from zero. The standard errors in Column 1
allow for clustered residuals within Census tracts. The resulting confidence in-
tervals rule out effects on turnout that exceed about ±1.25 percentage points.
Column 2 restricts the sample to individuals in high-exposure areas and the
matched comparison group. The estimate in Column 2 comes from OLS re-
gression using this matched sample, and including the same controls as in
Column 1. The effect of induced seismicity is again close to zero. Apply-
ing other estimators to the matched sample yields similar results. Appendix
Table A6 reports results for propensity score weighting, subclassification on
the propensity score, and nearest neighbor matching. None of these produce
meaningfully different estimates.

The final two columns of Table 3 show results using the county-level panel of
historical election outcomes. In Column 3, the dependent variable is the share
of registered voters that voted. The results for voter turnout are similar to the
 24. Oklahoma has 5 Congressional districts, 3 of which include both treated and untreated
areas. Voters in the remaining 2 Congressional districts contribute to identification in Col-
umn 1 through the control variables. The matched sample includes only Congressional
districs with treated and untreated voters.



                                             27
cross-sectional estimates, with little evidence of meaningful changes in county-
level turnout rates after exposure to shaking events. The dependent variable
in the final column is the vote share earned by the Republican candidate for
governor. Again, there is little evidence of effects after counties are exposed
to induced seismicity. The point estimate is about one-third the size of the
decrease for the energy regulator. The standard error for this estimate is
larger than for the estimates of turnout or downballot party share effects.
The noisier estimates reflect the limitations of county-level data and difficult-
to-model trends in candidate preferences between election cycles and across
counties. Still, the confidence interval is centered near zero and rules out
effects larger than about 3 percentage points.25

In summary, the results in Table 3 suggest that there was little meaning-
ful change in overall voter turnout due to induced seismicity. For candidate
choice, the noisier estimates rule out moderate effects in the governor race
while underscoring the value of the downballot differencing approach for iso-
lating effects on party vote shares in other races.



5     Conclusion

How governments respond to pollution, climate change, and other environmen-
tal externalities will depend on whether and how affected households change
their voting behavior. This study takes advantage of an unusually good setting
in Oklahoma and Texas to understand the electoral salience of environmen-
tal issues. Comparing the specialized energy regulator races to the generalist
governor races reveals the relative salience of externality regulation vs. other
policy issues.

This study first described the different role played by environmental issues
in these concurrent elections. Environment, including the new issue of man-
 25. The treatment cutoff of 6 MMI yields few treated observations when applied at the
county level. For robustness, Appendix Table A8 reports panel estimates using other treat-
ment cutoffs. The results are similar.


                                           28
made earthquakes, featured prominently in the campaigns for energy regulator.
The issues were particularly emphasized by Democrats, the opposition party
in both states. But these same issues were essentially absent from the race
for governor, which focused on other, higher-profile issues. Quantitative text
analysis of campaign news coverage shows these differences clearly.

Next, the study measured the causal effect of exposure to induced seismicity
on voting behavior. There is little evidence of effects on overall turnout in
the election or on candidate vote shares for governor. For energy regulator,
the data show increased voter participation and reduced incumbent party vote
share in the most-affected areas of Oklahoma. Taken together, these strands
of evidence support the Besley and Coate (2003)-style hypothesis that bundled
elections reduce the salience of environmental issues. These topics do matter
to voters, but they are drowned out by higher-priority issues in generalist
races. Given that most elected representatives in the United States and other
countries are responsible for a range of policy areas, these results imply a
limited role for environmental regulation in typical elections.

Even in the specialized energy regulator race, the effects of induced seismic-
ity on voting were relatively small given the substantial amenity effects im-
plied by changes in house prices. The striking correlation of party vote shares
across downballot candidates suggests that these muted effects partially re-
flect limited attention by voters to these individual races. Thus, while bun-
dled elections reduce the salience of environmental issues, unbundling choices
into a large number of individual races also may not result in full accountabil-
ity.

Overall, the results of this study imply limited electoral consequences for en-
vironmental externalities. This conclusion is particularly relevant for under-
standing oil and gas regulation in energy-producing areas of the United States,
where the recent boom in hydraulic fracturing has magnified the importance of
these issues. The current results are also more broadly informative about the
likely political consequences of climate change and other pollution problems,
especially given the paucity of other evidence. Evaluating the generality of

                                      29
these results in other jurisdictions and for other externalities is an important
priority for future research.


References

Anderson, Soren T., Ioana Marinescu, and Boris Shor. 2019. Can Pigou at the
   Polls Stop Us Melting at the Poles? NBER Working Paper No. 26146.
Atkinson, Gail M, and David J Wald. 2007. "Did You Feel It?" Intensity Data:
    A Surprisingly Good Measure of Earthquake Ground Motion." Seismolog-
    ical Research Letters 78 (3): 362­368.
Augenblick, Ned, and Scott Nicholson. 2015. "Ballot Position, Choice Fatigue,
    and Voter Behaviour." The Review of Economic Studies 83 (2): 460­480.
Barro, Robert. 1973. "The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model." Public
    Choice 14 (1): 19­42.
Bartik, Alexander W., Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R.
    Knittel. 2019. "The Local Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hy-
    draulic Fracturing." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11
    (4): 105­55.
Bechtel, Michael M., and Jens Hainmueller. 2011. "How Lasting Is Voter Grat-
    itude? An Analysis of the Short- and Long-Term Electoral Returns to
    Beneficial Policy." American Journal of Political Science 55 (4): 852­868.
Berry, Christopher R., and Jacob E. Gersen. 2009. "Fiscal Consequences of
    Electoral Institutions." The Journal of Law and Economics 52 (3): 469­
    495.
       . 2011. "Election Timing and Public Policy." Quarterly Journal of Po-
    litical Science 6 (2): 103­135.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 2003. "Elected versus Appointed Regu-
    lators: Theory and Evidence." Journal of the European Economic Associ-
    ation 1 (5): 1176­1206.
       . 2008. "Issue Unbundling via Citizens' Initiatives." Quarterly Journal
    of Political Science 3 (4): 379­397.




                                      30
Burkhardt, Jesse, and Nathan W. Chan. 2017. "The Dollars and Sense of Bal-
    lot Propositions: Estimating Willingness to Pay for Public Goods Using
    Aggregate Voting Data." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
    Resource Economists 4 (2): 479­503.
Burnett, J. Wesley, and Christopher Mothorpe. 2021. "Human-induced Earth-
    quakes, Risk Salience, and Housing Values." Resource and Energy Eco-
    nomics 63.
Casey, Joan A, Sidra Goldman-Mellor, and Ralph Catalano. 2018. "Associa-
    tion Between Oklahoma Earthquakes and Anxiety-related Google Search
    Episodes." Environmental Epidemiology 2 (2).
Chen, Jowei. 2013. "Voter Partisanship and the Effect of Distributive Spending
    on Political Participation." American Journal of Political Science 57 (1):
    200­217.
Cheung, Ron, Daniel Wetherell, and Stephan Whitaker. 2018. "Induced Earth-
    quakes and Housing Markets: Evidence from Oklahoma." Regional Science
    and Urban Economics 69:153­166.
Cole, Shawn, Andrew Healy, and Eric Werker. 2012. "Do Voters Demand Re-
    sponsive Governments? Evidence from Indian Disaster Relief." Journal of
    Development Economics 97 (2): 167­181.
Currie, Janet, Michael Greenstone, and Katherine Meckel. 2017. "Hydraulic
    Fracturing and Infant Health: New Evidence from Pennsylvania." Science
    Advances 3 (12).
Deacon, Robert, and Perry Shapiro. 1975. "Private Preference for Collective
    Goods Revealed through Voting on Referenda." The American Economic
    Review 65 (5): 943­955.
Ellsworth, William L. 2013. "Injection-Induced Earthquakes." Science 341 (6142).
Fair, Ray C. 1978. "The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President."
     The Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (2): 159­173.
Ferejohn, John. 1986. "Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control." Public
     Choice 50 (1/3): 5­25.
Ferreira, Susana, Haiyan Liu, and Brady Brewer. 2018. "The Housing Market
     Impacts of Wastewater Injection Induced Seismicity Risk." Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management 92:251­269.



                                     31
Fiorina, Morris P. 1981. Retrospective Voting in American National Elections.
     Yale University Press.
Gasper, John T., and Andrew Reeves. 2011. "Make It Rain? Retrospection and
    the Attentive Electorate in the Context of Natural Disasters." American
    Journal of Political Science 55 (2): 340­355.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy. 2019. "Text as Data."
    Journal of Economic Literature 57 (3): 535­74.
Gibbons, Stephen, Stephan Heblich, and Christopher Timmins. 2021. "Mar-
    ket Tremors: Shale Gas Exploration, Earthquakes, and Their Impact on
    House Prices." Journal of Urban Economics 122:103313.
Haag, Stefan. 2019. Straight-ticket voting in Texas in 1998­2018. Austin Com-
    munity College Center for Public Policy and Political Studies Report #14.
Hauge, Janice A., Mark A. Jamison, and James E. Prieger. 2012. "Oust the
   Louse: Does Political Pressure Discipline Regulators?" The Journal of
   Industrial Economics 60 (2): 299­332.
Hazlett, Chad, and Matto Mildenberger. 2020. "Wildfire Exposure Increases
    Pro-Environment Voting within Democratic but Not Republican Areas."
    American Political Science Review 114 (4): 1359­1365.
Healy, Andrew, and Neil Malhotra. 2009. "Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster
    Policy." American Political Science Review 103 (3): 387­406.
      . 2013. "Retrospective Voting Reconsidered." Annual Review of Political
    Science 16:285­306.
Hessami, Zohal. 2018. "Accountability and Incentives of Appointed and Elected
    Public Officials." The Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (1): 51­64.
Hough, Susan E. 2014. "Shaking from InjectionInduced Earthquakes in the
   Central and Eastern United States." Bulletin of the Seismological Society
   of America 104 (5): 2619­2626.
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics,
    Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University
    Press.
Kahn, Matthew E, and John G Matsusaka. 1997. "Demand for Environmen-
   tal Goods: Evidence from Voting Patterns on California Initiatives." The
   Journal of Law and Economics 40 (1): 137­174.


                                     32
Key, V.O. 1966. The Responsible Electorate: Rationality in Presidential Voting,
    1936­1960. Harvard University Press.
Koster, Hans R.A., and Jos van Ommeren. 2015. "A Shaky Business: Natu-
    ral Gas Extraction, Earthquakes and House Prices." European Economic
    Review 80:120­139.
Kotchen, Matthew J, and Shawn M Powers. 2006. "Explaining the Appearance
    and Success of Voter Referenda for Open-space Conservation." Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 52 (1): 373­390.
Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. "Short-term Fluctuations in US Voting Behavior,
   1896-1964." The American Political Science Review 65 (1): 131­143.
Lim, Claire S. H. 2013. "Preferences and Incentives of Appointed and Elected
    Public Officials: Evidence from State Trial Court Judges." American Eco-
    nomic Review 103 (4): 1360­97.
Lim, Claire S.H., and James M. Snyder. 2015. "Is more information always bet-
    ter? Party cues and candidate quality in U.S. judicial elections." Journal
    of Public Economics 128:107­123.
       . 2021. "What Shapes the Quality and Behavior of Government Offi-
    cials? Institutional Variation in Selection and Retention Methods." Annual
    Review of Economics 13 (1): null.
List, John A, and Daniel M Sturm. 2006. "How Elections Matter: Theory and
     Evidence from Environmental Policy." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 121 (4): 1249­1281.
Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole. 2004. "The Politician and the Judge: Account-
   ability in Government." American Economic Review 94 (4): 1034­1054.
Metz, Neil E., Travis Roach, and Jordan A. Williams. 2017. "The Costs of
    Induced Seismicity: A Hedonic Analysis." Economics Letters 160:86­90.
Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. 2015. "The
   Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development." American Economic
   Review 105 (12): 3633­59.
Mullin, Megan. 2008. "The Conditional Effect of Specialized Governance on
    Public Policy." American Journal of Political Science 52 (1): 125­141.




                                      33
Petersen, M.D., C.S. Mueller, M.P. Moschetti, S.M. Hoover, K.S. Rukstales,
    D.E. McNamara, R.A. Williams, et al. 2018. Data Release for 2018 One-
    Year Seismic Hazard Forecast for the Central and Eastern United States
    from Induced and Natural Earthquakes. U.S. Geological Survey data re-
    lease.
Stokes, Leah C. 2016. "Electoral Backlash against Climate Policy: A Natu-
    ral Experiment on Retrospective Voting and Local Resistance to Public
    Policy." American Journal of Political Science 60 (4): 958­974.
Weingarten, M., S. Ge, J. W. Godt, B. A. Bekins, and J. L. Rubinstein. 2015.
    "High-rate Injection is Associated with the Increase in U.S. Mid-continent
    Seismicity." Science 348 (6241): 1336­1340.
Whalley, Alexander. 2013. "Elected versus Appointed Policy Makers: Evidence
   from City Treasurers." The Journal of Law and Economics 56 (1): 39­81.
Wilson, Edwin B. 1927. "Probable Inference, the Law of Succession, and Statis-
    tical Inference." Journal of the American Statistical Association 22 (158):
    209­212.




                                      34
           Figure 1: Earthquake Exposure Prior to 2018 Election




Notes: Best viewed in color. Map scale indicates strongest shaking experienced in
each election precinct during 2009­2018, in Modified Mercalli Index units.




                                       35
  Figure 2: Growth in Earthquake Insurance vs. Other Lines in Oklahoma




Notes: Figure shows annual premiums written in Oklahoma divided by their level in
2004. Data were compiled by the author from Oklahoma Insurance Department an-
nual reports for 2004­2018. In each year's report, see Table II: Property & Casualty
Lines of Business. "Homeowners" refers to Homeowners Multiple Peril. "Private
Automobile" refers to Private Passenger Auto Physical Damage.




                                        36
       Figure 3: Individual Word Frequencies in Oklahoma Campaigns




Notes: Figure shows occurrence rates for individual word stems in local news cover-
age of the 2018 governor and Corporation Commissioner races in Oklahoma. Labels
listing the word are added for words with occurrence rates over 20 per 10,000 in ei-
ther race. Red markers indicate words related to energy and environmental policy;
filled red markers represent words related to earthquakes. The gray line has a slope
of one.




                                        37
 Figure 4: Campaign Themes by Office, Oklahoma 2018 Statewide Election

              Panel A. Corporation Commissioner vs. Governor




                Panel B. Corporation Commissioner, by Party




Notes: Markers represent occurrence rates for all words in each topic category. Log
occurrence ratios ("ln(ratio)") are the natural log of the ratio of occurrence rates
across offices. Whiskers are 95% confidence intervals calculated following Wilson
(1927) under the assumption that each word represents an independent trial.


                                        38
            Figure 5: Differential Effects in Downballot Races, Oklahoma vs. Texas

      Panel A: Share R for Energy Regulator Minus Share R in other Downballot Races
                    (i) Texas                                          (ii) Oklahoma




      Panel B: Turnout for Energy Regulator Minus Turnout in other Downballot Races
                   (iii) Texas                                        (iv) Oklahoma




Notes: Each panel shows residuals from a separate OLS regression of precinct-level differences on oil
and gas activity measures and demographic controls. Panel A shows differences in Republican Party
vote share for energy regulator vs. other downballot races. Panel B shows differences in the share
of voters indicating any choice (i.e., 1-undervote) for energy regulator vs. other downballot races.
Markers show precinct-level residuals and have size proportional to the log10 of registered voters. The
blue line is a local linear regression fit with a bandwidth of 0.75 MMI. The shaded region is a 95%
confidence interval calculated via block bootstrap by county. All regressions are weighted by number
of registered voters. The y-axes in both panels are scaled to show 99% of precincts. The rug ticks at
the bottom of each figure show the density of observations.
         Figure 6: Republican Party Vote Share, Energy Regulator vs. Other Races
                   (i) Texas                                          (ii) Oklahoma




Notes: Markers show precinct-level vote shares for the Republican energy regulator candidate vs.
average vote shares for Republican candidates in four other downballot executive races in each
state. Marker size is proportional to the log10 of registered voters. The blue line shows an OLS fit
and the light gray line has a slope of 1. Figure includes precincts with 50 or more registered voters.
See text for list of comparison races.




                                                 40
             Table 1: Precinct Characteristics for Oklahoma

                                       Full           MMI     MMI      t-stat
                                    Sample             <5       6 Difference

Active oil and gas wells                12.1           12.2      8.9       1.14
Wells completed, 2015­2018               0.6            0.6      0.4       0.85
Oil and Gas Employment Share           2.9%           2.9%     3.2%        0.91
Share college                         27.2%          26.9%    23.8%        1.72
Median HH income (thousands)              58             57       46       4.08
Unemployment rate                      5.5%           5.5%     5.9%        0.88
Share white                           74.2%          73.9%    78.6%        3.09
Age on election day                     50.4           50.5     50.3       0.67
Registered Republican                 48.4%          48.2%    50.0%        1.09
Registered Democrat                   36.0%          36.3%    34.4%        1.27
Registered Independent                15.2%          15.1%    15.1%        0.01

Number of Voters                  1,984,171       1,525,720 75,293
Number of Precincts                   1,933           1,534     76

Notes: Education, income, unemployment, and race data are 2017 American
Community Survey (ACS) 5-year estimates. Precinct-level averages for ACS
variables are calculated by geocoding voter addresses to Census block groups.
Active wells and new well completions are counts within 3 km of precinct cen-
troid, from DrillingInfo. Age and party affiliation are from the voter registra-
tion database. Oil and gas industry employment share comes from US Census
County Business Patterns data. Precincts are weighted by number of registered
voters. The final column reports the t-statistic from a test of equal means in
the high-exposure and low-exposure subsamples.




                                      41
      Table 2: Differential Outcomes for Oklahoma Corporation Commissioner

                                 Republican Vote Share                      Turnout
                                 2 adjacent   4 adjacent           2 adjacent   4 adjacent
                                   offices      offices              offices      offices

  MMI 4.5*1[OCC]                   0.0003        -0.0014            0.0011**      0.0008*
                                  (0.0030)      (0.0029)            (0.0004)      (0.0004)

  MMI 5*1[OCC]                    -0.0055*     -0.0068**           0.0013***     0.0009**
                                  (0.0033)      (0.0030)            (0.0005)     (0.0004)

  MMI 6*1[OCC]                   -0.0100***    -0.0112**           0.0027***     0.0023***
                                  (0.0033)      (0.0045)            (0.0007)      (0.0005)

  Precinct Fixed Effects              X             X                   X             X
  Office Fixed Effects                X             X                   X             X
  Additional Controls                 X             X                   X             X


  Mean Dep. Var, 1[OCC]=1           0.597          0.597              0.985        0.985
  Mean Dep. Var, 1[OCC]=0           0.616          0.613              0.980        0.984
  N                                 5,799          9,665              5,799        9,665
  R2                                 0.41           0.51              0.36         0.54

Notes: Each column shows a separate OLS regression comparing precinct-level outcomes
for OCC to other downballot races in Oklahoma in 2018. There is one observation for
each race in each precinct. The dependent variable in Columns 1 and 2 is the vote share
for the Republican candidate. The dependent variable in Columns 3 and 4 is the share
of voters indicating a choice in the race (i.e., 1-undervote). 1[OCC ] is an indicator for
the Oklahoma Corporation Commissioner race. The three M M I  1[OCC ] bins correspond
to bins of earthquake exposure (named for each bin's left end) interacted with 1[OCC ].
"Additional Controls" includes controls for oil and gas industry activity and demographic
characteristics, all of which are interacted with 1[OCC ]. See text for details. Precincts are
weighted by registered voters. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                              42
          Table 3: Effects on Overall Turnout and Vote Share for Governor

                                                  Turnout                     Republican
                                                   Rate                       Vote Share

                               Cross-section,       Matched        Panel,        Panel
                                   2018           Sample, 2018   2010-2018     2010-2018
                                  (Voter)           (Voter)      (County)       (County
                                   File)             File)       Returns)      Returns)

 MMI 6                             0.0024            0.0049       0.0062         -0.0044
                                  (0.0052)          (0.0062)     (0.0086)       (0.0154)

 Congr. Dist. Fixed Effects          X                 X
 County Fixed Effects                                               X              X
 Year Fixed Effects                                                 X              X
 Additional Controls                 X                 X            X              X
 N                               1,571,232          143,902        231            231
 R2                                 0.11              0.13         0.93           0.59

Notes: Each column shows a separate regression. Columns (1) and (2) use individual-level
data for 2018 from the state voter registration database. The dependent variable is an
indicator variable for voting in the general election. Column (2) uses a propensity score-
matched sample of control individuals. See text for details on the matching procedure.
Columns (3) and (4) use a panel of county-level midterm election results from 2010 to 2018.
The dependent variable in column (3) is the share of registered voters casting ballots, and
in column (4) it is the Republican candidate vote share for governor. Counties are weighted
by the number of registered voters in 2010. All specifications include additional controls
for oil and gas industry activity and demographic variables; see text for details of control
variables. Standard errors are clustered by Census tract in Columns (1) and (2) and by
county in Columns 3 and 4.




                                             43
                         ONLINE APPENDIX


1 Measuring Earthquake Exposure                                             A2

2 Election Outcomes: Additional Results                                     A7
  2.1   Energy Regulator Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     A8
  2.2   Overall Turnout and Governor Additional Results . . . . . . . A10
        2.2.1   Matching Procedure and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . A10
        2.2.2   Matched Sample Estimates of Turnout Effects . . . . . A11
        2.2.3   Panel Estimates for Turnout and Party Share . . . . . A15

3 Text Analysis: Additional Results                                       A16
  3.1   Results for Texas and Oklahoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A16
  3.2   Word-level results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A18

4 Construction of the Election Dataset                                    A22
  4.1   Oklahoma Election Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A22
  4.2   Oklahoma Voter Registration Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A23
  4.3   Texas Election Outcome Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A23
  4.4   Earthquake exposure and oil and gas activity . . . . . . . . . A24

5 Construction of the News Coverage Dataset                               A26
  5.1   Oklahoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A26
  5.2   Texas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A26




                                     A1
                            ONLINE APPENDIX


1    Measuring Earthquake Exposure

           Appendix Figure A1: Earthquake Locations, 2009­2018




Notes: Blue circles indicate earthquakes with magnitude less than 4.0. Red triangles
indicate earthquakes with magnitude of 4.0 or greater. Earthquake data are from
USGS ANSS COMCAT catalog for January 1, 2009­November 6, 2018. Gray lines
are election precinct boundaries.




                                        A2
                           ONLINE APPENDIX




Appendix Figure A2: Earthquake Exposure During Most Recent Two Years




Notes: Map scale indicates strongest shaking experienced in each election precinct
during November 2016­2018, in Modified Mercalli Index units. Best viewed in color.




                                       A3
                           ONLINE APPENDIX




          Appendix Figure A3: Count of Exposures Above 4.0 MMI




Notes: Map scale indicates the number of shaking exposures of 4.0 MMI or greater
in each election precinct during 2009­2018, in Modified Mercalli Index units. Best
viewed in color.




                                       A4
                           ONLINE APPENDIX




        Appendix Figure A4: USGS Seismic Hazard Forecast for 2018




Notes: Map scale indicates the ex-ante predicted 1% exceedance exposure predicted
by USGS in each election precinct for 2018, in Modified Mercalli Index units. Best
viewed in color.




                                       A5
                             ONLINE APPENDIX


      Appendix Table A1: Levels of the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale

MMI     Shaking       Description/Damage

I       Not Felt      Not felt except by a very few under especially favorable conditions.
II      Weak          Felt only by a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors of
                      buildings.
III     Weak          Felt quite noticeably by persons indoors, especially on upper floors
                      of buildings. Many people do not recognize it as an earthquake.
                      Standing motor cars may rock slightly. Vibrations similar to the
                      passing of a truck. Duration estimated.
IV      Light         Felt indoors by many, outdoors by few during the day. At night,
                      some awakened. Dishes, windows, doors disturbed; walls make
                      cracking sound. Sensation like heavy truck striking building.
                      Standing motor cars rocked noticeably.
V       Moderate      Felt by nearly everyone; many awakened. Some dishes, windows
                      broken. Unstable objects overturned. Pendulum clocks may stop.
VI      Strong        Felt by all, many frightened. Some heavy furniture moved; a few
                      instances of fallen plaster. Damage slight.
VII     Very strong   Damage negligible in buildings of good design and construction;
                      slight to moderate in well-built ordinary structures; considerable
                      damage in poorly built or badly designed structures; some chim-
                      neys broken.
VIII    Severe        Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable dam-
                      age in ordinary substantial buildings with partial collapse. Dam-
                      age great in poorly built structures. Fall of chimneys, factory
                      stacks, columns, monuments, walls. Heavy furniture overturned.
IX      Violent       Damage considerable in specially designed structures; well-
                      designed frame structures thrown out of plumb. Damage great
                      in substantial buildings, with partial collapse. Buildings shifted
                      off foundations.
X       Extreme       Some well-built wooden structures destroyed; most masonry and
                      frame structures destroyed with foundations. Rails bent.
XI                    Few, if any (masonry) structures remain standing. Bridges de-
                      stroyed. Rails bent greatly.
XII                   Damage total. Lines of sight and level are distorted. Objects
                      thrown into the air.

Notes:     From United States Geological Survey, "The Severity of an
Earthquake",    USGS General Interest Publication 1989-288-913;  and
https://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/topics/mercalli.php

                                          A6
                          ONLINE APPENDIX


2    Election Outcomes: Additional Results

                Appendix Table A2: Overall Election Results

                                 GOVERNOR
               Texas                                 Oklahoma
 Greg Abbott           REP   55.81%    Kevin Stitt            REP     54.33%
 Lupe Valdez           DEM   42.51%    Drew Edmondson         DEM     42.23%
 Mark Jay Tippetts     LIB    1.69%    Chris Powell           LIB      3.44%

                             ENERGY REGULATOR
            Texas (TRC)                     Oklahoma (OCC)
 Christi Craddick      REP   53.20%    Bob Anthony            REP     60.03%
 Roman McAllen         DEM   43.91%    Ashley Nicole McCray   DEM     34.30%
 Mike Wright           LIB    2.89%    Jackie Short           IND      5.67%

Notes: 2018 general election vote shares from the Texas Secretary of State and
Oklahoma State Election Board. Party abbreviations "REP", "DEM", "LIB", and
"IND" refer to Republican, Democrat, Libertarian, and Independent.




                                      A7
                            ONLINE APPENDIX


2.1 Energy Regulator Additional Results

  Appendix Table A3: Differential OCC Outcomes Across Media Markets

                            Republican Vote Share                   Turnout
                            2 adjacent   4 adjacent         2 adjacent   4 adjacent
                              offices      offices            offices      offices

 1[OCC]*1[FringeMarket]       0.0057       0.0017             -0.0004      -0.0004
                             (0.0036)     (0.0037)           (0.0006)     (0.0005)
 Constant                   0.6173***    0.6173***          0.9795***    0.9795***
                             (0.0018)     (0.0025)           (0.0004)     (0.0004)

 Precinct Fixed Effects         X            X                   X            X
 Office Fixed Effects           X            X                   X            X
 Additional Controls            X            X                   X            X
 N                            5,799        9,665               5,799        9,665
 R2                           0.41         0.51                 0.36         0.54

Notes: Each column shows a separate OLS regression comparing precinct-level out-
comes for OCC to other downballot races in Oklahoma in 2018. There is one ob-
servation for each race in each precinct. The dependent variable in Columns (1)
and (2) is the vote share for the Republican candidate. The dependent variable in
Columns (3) and (4) is the share of voters indicating any choice in the race (i.e.,
1-undervote). 1[OCC ] is an indicator for the Oklahoma Corporation Commissioner
race. 1[F ringeM arkets] is an indicator for precincts located in media markets other
than Oklahoma City and Tulsa. All regressions include a cubic function of earth-
quake exposure (MMI) interacted with 1[OCC ]. "Additional Controls" includes
controls for oil and gas industry activity and demographic characteristics, all of
which are interacted with 1[OCC ]. See text for details. Precincts are weighted by
registered voters. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                         A8
                           ONLINE APPENDIX




     Appendix Table A4: Excluding Absentee Shawnee OTSA precincts

                            Republican Party Vote Share                 Turnout
                               All         Minus                All          Minus
                            precincts   CP-AS OTSA           precincts    CP-AS OTSA

 MMI 4.5*1[OCC]              -0.0014          -0.0008        0.0008*         0.0008*
                            (0.0029)         (0.0029)        (0.0004)        (0.0004)

 MMI 5*1[OCC]               -0.0068**         -0.0043        0.0009**        0.0007*
                             (0.0030)        (0.0030)        (0.0004)        (0.0004)

 MMI 6*1[OCC]               -0.0112**        -0.0107**       0.0023***      0.0022***
                             (0.0045)         (0.0045)        (0.0005)       (0.0005)

 Precinct Fixed Effects        X                X               X                 X
 Office Fixed Effects          X                X               X                 X
 Additional Controls           X                X               X                 X


 Mean Dep. Var, 1[OCC]=1      0.618            0.618           0.985          0.985
 Mean Dep. Var, 1[OCC]=0      0.632            0.631           0.985          0.985
 N                            9,665            9,385           9,665          9,385
 R2                            0.51            0.50             0.54           0.54

Notes: Reproduces the results from Table 2, excluding 56 precincts whose centroids
are located inside of the Citizen Potawatomi Nation-Absentee Shawnee Oklahoma
Tribal Statistical Area (a US Census-designated American Indian Geography).




                                        A9
                               ONLINE APPENDIX


2.2 Overall Turnout and Governor Additional Results

2.2.1 Matching Procedure and Validation

Starting from the voter registration database described in Appendix Section
4.2, I assign earthquake exposures to individual voters based on address in-
formation. Specifically, I assign the highest MMI exposure prior to November
6, 2018 at the centroid of the Census block group that contains the voter's
address. To allow for propensity score analysis, I define a binary treatment
indicator that takes on a value of 1 for voters who experienced shaking of 6.0
MMI or higher and 0 for voters who experienced shaking less than 5.0 MMI.
Voters whose largest exposure was between 5.0 and 6.0 MMI are excluded. I
further restrict the sample to include voters from the 3 Congressional districts
that include both treated and untreated voters (out of 5 total Congressional
districts in Oklahoma).
The matching procedure follows recommended practices in Imbens and Rubin
(2015) and Imbens (2015). The variables used include individual-level data on
voter age and previous voting history from the voter registration database, aug-
mented with Census block group-level information on education, race, income,
and unemployment; oil and gas industry activity from DrillingInfo/Enverus;
and county-level oil and gas employment share from County Business Patterns.
The propensity score is estimated using a flexible logit specification including
higher order terms and interactions. Details are in Appendix Table A7. The
matched sample is created by matching treated to untreated individuals on the
linearized propensity score (log odds ratio) without replacement in a descend-
ing manner (i.e., treated units with the highest propensity scores are matched
first).
Appendix Table A5 compares balance between the treatment and matched
comparison groups using the normalized differences measure recommended by
Imbens and Rubin (2015). Comparing the group means to the unmatched
groups in Table 1 in the main text, it is clear that matching has improved
the balance substantially. The normalized differences in covariates between
the treatment and comparison groups imply that the sample is well balanced.
The differences are all within the range where regression adjustment would be
expected to be effective.26
 26. Imbens and Rubin (2015, p.277) discusses a rule of thumb that normalized differences
be less than 0.25 to 0.5 for regression to remove any remaining bias associated with covariate
differences.


                                            A10
                          ONLINE APPENDIX


The historical information on voting in the voter registration database allows
another useful validity check based on 2010, the last election cycle before the
onset of induced seismicity. The table shows that the share of 2018 registered
voters that were also registered in 2010 is closely matched across groups (54.7
vs. 55.8%, nor.diff.=-0.02). Furthermore, the fraction of these long-registered
voters that turned out to vote in 2010 is closely matched across groups (72.3%
vs. 71.9%, nor.diff.=0.01). In summary, the treatment and comparison group
appear to be closely comparable on both contemporaneous observables and
pre-period voting behavior, bolstering the credibility of the unconfoundedness
assumption.


2.2.2 Matched Sample Estimates of Turnout Effects

Again following Imbens and Rubin (2015), treatment effects in the matched
sample are calculated with 4 different estimators. Each of these estimators is
applied to the matched sample, and also to a trimmed version of the matched
sample that excludes the one-third of matched voters with the poorest matches
(i.e., largest difference in linearized propensity scores between treatment and
matched control). The 8 resulting estimates are summarized in Appendix Ta-
ble A6. The first row shows results from the matched sample, while the second
row shows results using the trimmed subset of the matched sample. Column
1 shows results from applying OLS in the matched voter sample and Column
2 shows a propensity-score weighted regression. The standard errors reported
in both of these columns are clustered by Census tract. Column 3 shows a
nearest-neighbor matching estimator with regression adjustment (Abadie and
Imbens 2011). This estimator selects one nearest-neighbor match for each
treated voter from the control observations included in the balanced sample,
based on the Mahalonobis distance in age, share college education, median
household income, unemployment rate, share White, and share Native Amer-
ican. The matched estimates are then corrected with a regression procedure
using these same variables. Heteroskedasticity-robust Abadie/Imbens stan-
dard errors are reported. Finally, Column 4 shows the point estimate from a
propensity score blocking procedure with regression (Rosenbaum and Rubin
1983, 1984; Imbens and Rubin 2015). The matched sample is split into 4
blocks based on the estimated propensity score. Within each block, a sepa-
rate regression of voting behavior is run on treatment and the covariates. The
weighted average of these block-specific regression estimates is taken as the
overall point estimate. Across all of these estimators, the point estimates are
similar to each other and are all near zero.

                                     A11
                                ONLINE APPENDIX


    Appendix Table A5: Covariate Balance in the Matched Voter Sample

                                             MMI  6     MMI < 5    Nor. Diff.

             Individual-level covariates
             Age on election day              50.542     51.042      -0.03
                                             (19.161)   (19.666)
             Registered Republican             0.509      0.484      0.05
                                              (0.500)    (0.500)
             Registered Democrat               0.336      0.357      -0.04
                                              (0.472)    (0.479)
             Registered Independent            0.150      0.154      -0.01
                                              (0.357)    (0.361)
             Registered Libertarian            0.005      0.005      0.00
                                              (0.072)    (0.071)
             Registered as of 2010             0.552      0.558      -0.01
                                              (0.497)    (0.497)
             Voted in 2010 (if registered)     0.730      0.721      0.02
                                              (0.444)    (0.449)
             Block group demographics
             Share college                     0.245      0.244      0.01
                                              (0.140)    (0.159)
             Share high school                 0.322      0.323      -0.01
                                              (0.099)    (0.119)
             Unemployment rate                 0.057      0.055      0.04
                                              (0.039)    (0.046)
             Median HH income                 47.623     46.550      0.07
                                             (14.926)   (14.402)
             Share urban                       0.526      0.602      -0.17
                                              (0.454)    (0.453)
             Share White                       0.791      0.800      -0.08
                                              (0.104)    (0.133)
             Share Black                       0.030      0.031      -0.02
                                              (0.045)    (0.039)
             Share Native American             0.102      0.088      0.15
                                              (0.078)    (0.113)
             Other covariates
             Oil & Gas Employment Share       0.030      0.030       0.01
                                             (0.016)    (0.020)
             Wells completed, 2015­2018       0.354      0.350       0.00
                                             (0.889)    (1.496)
             Congressional Dist. 2            0.016      0.026       -0.07
             Congressional Dist. 3            0.675      0.662        0.03
             Congressional Dist. 5            0.309      0.312       -0.01


             N (Registered Voters)           71,951      71,951        .

Notes: Normalized differences are mean differences scaled by standard deviations
following Imbens and Rubin (2015). Oil and gas employment share is from County
Business Patterns. Wells completed 2015­2018 is the number of completions within
3 km of the Census block group centroid. Share urban is based on urban areas with
more than 2,500 people.               A12
                           ONLINE APPENDIX




     Appendix Table A6: Alternative Estimators for Overall Turnout

                                     P-score     Matching with     Blocking with
                           OLS      weighting     regression         regression

 Matched                  0.0049      0.0055         -0.0045           0.0056
                         (0.0062)    (0.0059)       (0.0070)

 Matched & Trimmed        0.0038      0.0037         -0.0119           0.0044
                         (0.0062)    (0.0061)       (0.0087)

Notes: This table shows 8 alternative estimates of the effect of induced seismicity
on voter turnout, using methods discussed in Imbens and Rubin (2015) and
Imbens (2015). Standard errors are in parentheses. See text for details.




                                       A13
                            ONLINE APPENDIX




                     Appendix Table A7: Propensity Score Estimation


    Oil & gas employment share                            -35.3057***         (0.2869)
    Wells completed 2015­2018                                -0.0009          (0.0035)
    Age at 2018 election                                   -0.0521***         (0.0053)
    Age squared                                             0.001***           (0.000)
    Age cubed                                               -0.000***          (0.000)
    Congressional Dist. 3                                   7.011***           (0.036)
    Congressional Dist. 5                                   6.716***           (0.036)
    Median HH income                                        -0.061***          (0.002)
    Median HH income squared                                -0.000***          (0.000)
    Share college grad                                     -10.625***          (0.306)
    Unemployment rate                                       4.591***           (0.130)
    Share high school grad                                  -1.523***          (0.078)
    Share White                                             7.718***           (0.117)
    Share Native American                                   0.619***           (0.200)
    Share Black                                             1.091***           (0.146)
    Share White X Share college grad                        17.958***          (0.372)
    Share Urban                                             -1.036***          (0.014)
    Share Native American X Median HH income                0.408***           (0.004)
    Constant                                               -10.273***          (0.137)

    N                                                       845,353
    Log likelihood                                          -135,571

Notes: Table shows results from a logit regression where the dependent variable is an
indicator for peak earthquake exposure greater than or equal to 6.0 MMI units. The sample
includes voters in Congressional Districts 2, 3 and 5 registered in precincts with exposure
less than 5.0 or greater than 6.0 MMI. The two table columns report regression coefficients
and standard errors.




                                       A14
                                ONLINE APPENDIX


2.2.3 Panel Estimates for Turnout and Party Share


                Appendix Table A8: Additional Panel Estimates

                                   Turnout                          Republican
                                    Rate                            Vote Share

                        4.5 MMI    5.25 MMI   6 MMI      4.5 MMI    5.25 MMI     6 MMI

 Exposure Dummy          -0.0090    0.0010     0.0062     -0.0110     -0.0039     -0.0044
                        (0.0070)   (0.0117)   (0.0086)   (0.0124)    (0.0196)    (0.0154)

 County Fixed Effects     X           X            X        X           X           X
 Year Fixed Effects       X           X            X        X           X           X
 Additional Controls      X           X            X        X           X           X
 N                       231         231          231      231         231         231
 R2                      0.93        0.93         0.93     0.59        0.59        0.59

Notes: Each column shows a separate OLS regression. The regression specifications
match columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, except that the MMI threshold for treatment is
varied across columns as shown at the top of each column. In each case, county-
year observations are considered to be treated in all election years following the first
exposure of the given level.




                                            A15
                                    ONLINE APPENDIX


3      Text Analysis: Additional Results

3.1 Results for Texas and Oklahoma

    Appendix Table A9: Campaign Themes by Office, Texas and Oklahoma

                                     Oklahoma                                       Texas
                        OCC              Gov          ln(Ratio)       TRC             Gov           ln(Ratio)
Health                   6.2             58.6          -2.25          11.9             17.5          -0.38
                     (2.7, 13.3)      (53.3, 64.4)                 (5.2, 25.7)      (14.7, 20.7)
Social Issues           14.1             84.8          -1.79          11.9             151.1         -2.54
                     (8.4, 23.5)      (78.4, 91.7)                 (5.2, 25.7)     (142.7, 159.9)
State Budget            48.5             151.9         -1.14          44.2             79.2          -0.58
                     (36.9, 63.6)    (143.3, 160.9)                (29.5, 65.7)     (73.2, 85.8)
Education               59.1             178.6         -1.11          40.8             70.7          -0.55
                     (46.2, 75.5)    (169.3, 188.4)                (26.8, 61.7)     (65.0, 76.9)
Economy                 248.8            158.9          0.45          284.1            104.6          1.00
                    (221.3, 279.6) (150.2, 168.2)                 (243.8, 330.6) (97.7, 112.1)
Oil and Gas             318.5            27.2           2.46          333.4             7.4           3.81
                    (287.3, 352.9)    (23.7, 31.3)                (289.7, 383.3)     (5.7, 9.6)
Other Environment       138.5             7.7           2.88          86.7              5.6           2.74
                    (118.2, 162.2)    (5.9, 10.1)                 (65.3, 114.8)      (4.1, 7.6)
Utilities               243.5            11.0           3.10          57.8              8.0           1.97
                    (216.3, 274.0)    (8.8, 13.7)                  (40.7, 81.7)     (6.2, 10.4)
Earthquakes             107.6             0.9           4.75          34.0              0.4           4.49
                    (89.8, 128.8)      (0.4, 2.0)                  (21.4, 53.5)      (0.1, 1.2)

Notes: This table reports the occurrence rate per 10,000 words for each topic cat-
egory in the energy regulator and governor races in Oklahoma and Texas in 2018.
"OCC" is Oklahoma Corporation Commission and "TRC" is Texas Railroad Com-
mission. "ln(Ratio)" is the natural log of the ratio of occurrence rates between the
energy regulator and governor races in each state. Ninety-five percent confidence
intervals for occurrence rates are in parentheses.




                                                     A16
                          ONLINE APPENDIX




Appendix Figure A5: Campaign Themes by Year, Texas Railroad Commis-
sioner




Notes: Occurrence rates per 10,000 words for four topic categories in TRC races
from 2002 to 2018.




                                     A17
                      ONLINE APPENDIX


3.2 Word-level results

 Appendix Table A10: Occurrence Rates for Individual Words, by Race

        Category         Word (Stemmed)     OCC    Gov    Diff
        Earthquakes      earthquake         28.2    0.0    28.2
        Earthquakes      inject             26.5   0.5     25.9
        Earthquakes      disposal           22.9   0.4     22.5
        Earthquakes      wastewater         19.4    0.0    19.4
        Earthquakes      underground         7.1    0.0    7.1
        Earthquakes      seismic             3.5    0.0    3.5
        Economy          industry           62.6   22.8    39.8
        Economy          companies          50.3   14.7    35.6
        Economy          business           34.4   15.9    18.5
        Economy          economic           24.7   14.8    9.9
        Economy          job                28.2   9.5     18.7
        Economy          consumer           18.5   1.3     17.2
        Economy          mortgage            0.0   13.1   -13.1
        Economy          dollar              1.8    8.1    -6.4
        Economy          invest              4.4    4.5    -0.1
        Economy          businessman         0.9    8.0    -7.1
        Economy          profit              7.9    0.7    7.3
        Economy          commodities         6.2    0.0    6.2
        Economy          commercial          0.9    5.1    -4.2
        Economy          employed            0.0    5.7    -5.7
        Economy          worker              2.6    2.9    -0.3
        Economy          bank                0.9    4.4    -3.5
        Economy          salaries            0.0    4.1    -4.1
        Economy          employ              0.9    2.7    -1.8
        Economy          buy                 0.9    2.3    -1.4
        Economy          poor                0.9    1.9    -1.0
        Economy          prosper             0.0    2.7    -2.7
        Economy          nyse                1.8    0.5     1.2
        Economy          bankruptcy          0.0    1.2    -1.2
        Economy          price               0.0    1.2    -1.2
        Economy          cash                0.0    1.1    -1.1
        Economy          pension             0.0    1.1    -1.1
        Economy          checkbook           0.0    0.8    -0.8
        Economy          entrepreneurship   0.0     0.8    -0.8
        Economy          lender              0.0    0.7    -0.7
        Economy          unemployed          0.0    0.7    -0.7
        Economy          commerce            0.0    0.5    -0.5
        Economy          investor            0.0    0.5    -0.5
        Economy          poverty             0.0    0.5    -0.5
        Economy          sold                0.0    0.5    -0.5
        Economy          banker              0.0    0.4    -0.4


                                 A18
               ONLINE APPENDIX


Economy             debt              0.0     0.4    -0.4
Economy             monopolists       0.0     0.4    -0.4
Economy             entrepreneur      0.0     0.3    -0.3
Economy             foreclosure       0.0     0.3    -0.3
Economy             nasdaq            0.0     0.3    -0.3
Economy             paycheck          0.0     0.3    -0.3
Economy             probusiness       0.0     0.3    -0.3
Economy             businesswoman     0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             foreclose         0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             inflation         0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             jobless           0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             layoffs           0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             marketplace       0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             progrowth         0.0     0.1    -0.1
Economy             workforce         0.0     0.0    0.0
Education           education        28.2    53.8   -25.6
Education           school           21.2    48.3   -27.2
Education           teacher           2.6    45.8   -43.2
Education           student           5.3    10.6    -5.3
Education           walkout           0.0     6.3    -6.3
Education           classroom         0.9     4.8    -3.9
Education           teach             0.0     5.5    -5.5
Education           strike            0.9     1.6    -0.7
Education           textbook          0.0     1.7    -1.7
Education           curricula         0.0     0.1    -0.1
Health              health            0.0    22.2   -22.2
Health              medicaid          0.0    13.5   -13.5
Health              hospital          0.9     5.3    -4.5
Health              doctor            3.5     0.8    2.7
Health              medicine          1.8     2.3    -0.5
Health              pharmaceutical    0.0     0.7    -0.7
Health              healthcare        0.0     0.4    -0.4
Health              obamacare         0.0     0.4    -0.4
Health              physician         0.0     0.4    -0.4
Health              prescription      0.0     0.4    -0.4
Health              healthier         0.0     0.3    -0.3
Health              sick              0.0     0.3    -0.3
Health              surgeries         0.0     0.1    -0.1
Oil and Gas         oil              107.6   12.8    94.8
Oil and Gas         gas              106.7   12.2    94.6
Oil and Gas         pipeline         31.8    0.1     31.6
Oil and Gas         petroleum        30.0    0.9     29.1
Oil and Gas         frack            15.0    0.0     15.0
Oil and Gas         drill            13.2    1.2     12.0
Oil and Gas         fractured         7.1     0.0    7.1
Oil and Gas         hydraulic         7.1     0.0    7.1
Other Environment   environment       53.8    1.9    51.9
Other Environment   water            31.8    2.5     29.2


                           A19
                  ONLINE APPENDIX


Other    Environment   renewable           18.5   0.9     17.6
Other    Environment   polluted            18.5   0.5     18.0
Other    Environment   groundwater          7.1    0.1    6.9
Other    Environment   sustain              3.5    0.7    2.9
Other    Environment   climate              1.8    0.4     1.4
Other    Environment   fossil               1.8    0.0    1.8
Other    Environment   coal                 0.9    0.4     0.5
Other    Environment   green                0.9    0.3     0.6
Social   Issues        marijuana            0.0   21.9   -21.9
Social   Issues        criminal             4.4    3.9     0.5
Social   Issues        church               4.4    1.6     2.8
Social   Issues        pastor               1.8    2.7    -0.9
Social   Issues        tobacco              0.0    4.3    -4.3
Social   Issues        aborted              0.0    3.7    -3.7
Social   Issues        prison               0.0    3.3    -3.3
Social   Issues        immigrant            0.0    3.2    -3.2
Social   Issues        cigarette            0.0    3.1    -3.1
Social   Issues        gun                  0.0    2.9    -2.9
Social   Issues        incarcerate          0.0    2.9    -2.9
Social   Issues        decriminalization   0.0     2.8    -2.8
Social   Issues        cannabis             0.0    2.4    -2.4
Social   Issues        drug                 0.0    2.4    -2.4
Social   Issues        caravan              1.8    0.1     1.6
Social   Issues        methodist            1.8    0.1     1.6
Social   Issues        border               0.0    1.7    -1.7
Social   Issues        prosecutor           0.0    1.7    -1.7
Social   Issues        crime                0.0    1.3    -1.3
Social   Issues        christian            0.0    1.1    -1.1
Social   Issues        smoke                0.0    1.1    -1.1
Social   Issues        alcohol              0.0    0.9    -0.9
Social   Issues        firearm              0.0    0.9    -0.9
Social   Issues        addict               0.0    0.8    -0.8
Social   Issues        jail                 0.0    0.8    -0.8
Social   Issues        liquor               0.0    0.8    -0.8
Social   Issues        murder               0.0    0.8    -0.8
Social   Issues        rifle                0.0    0.8    -0.8
Social   Issues        arrest               0.0    0.7    -0.7
Social   Issues        handgun              0.0    0.7    -0.7
Social   Issues        moral                0.0    0.7    -0.7
Social   Issues        religion             0.0    0.7    -0.7
Social   Issues        faithbased           0.0    0.5    -0.5
Social   Issues        nra                  0.0    0.5    -0.5
Social   Issues        opioid               0.0    0.5    -0.5
Social   Issues        weed                 0.0    0.5    -0.5
Social   Issues        evil                 0.0    0.4    -0.4
Social   Issues        prosecute            0.0    0.4    -0.4
Social   Issues        sheriff              0.0    0.4    -0.4
Social   Issues        victim               0.0    0.4    -0.4


                               A20
                            ONLINE APPENDIX


           Social Issues        evangelical          0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        gay                  0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        hemp                 0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        homicide             0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        lesbian              0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        unborn               0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        visa                 0.0       0.3    -0.3
           Social Issues        antiabortion         0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        catholic             0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        citizenship          0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        felonies             0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        god                  0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        homeless             0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        marriage             0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        migrate              0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        prostitute           0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        suicide              0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        transgender          0.0       0.1    -0.1
           Social Issues        violence             0.0       0.1    -0.1
           State Budget         tax                 15.0      55.7   -40.7
           State Budget         fund                13.2      30.2   -17.0
           State Budget         budget               3.5      24.7   -21.2
           State Budget         financial           11.5      4.9     6.5
           State Budget         revenue              0.9      14.0   -13.1
           State Budget         finance              3.5      10.3    -6.8
           State Budget         taxation             0.9       3.1    -2.2
           State Budget         taxpayer             0.0       2.9    -2.9
           State Budget         fiscal               0.0       2.3    -2.3
           State Budget         deficit              0.0       1.6    -1.6
           State Budget         expenditure          0.0       1.3    -1.3
           State Budget         antitax              0.0       0.8    -0.8
           Utilities            energy              93.5      4.7     88.8
           Utilities            utilities           88.2      0.9     87.3
           Utilities            wind                13.2      0.9     12.3
           Utilities            electric            12.4      0.1     12.2
           Utilities            internet            10.6      0.3     10.3
           Utilities            phone                6.2       2.8     3.4
           Utilities            ratepayers           7.9       0.0    7.9
           Utilities            solar                6.2       0.1    6.0
           Utilities            telephone            2.6       0.3    2.4
           Utilities            telecommunication   1.8        0.0    1.8

Notes: Table lists the individual words in each topic category, and their occurrence
rates in the governor and Corporation Commissioner races in Oklahoma. Reported
occurrence rates are per 10,000 words of news coverage. "`Diff" is the difference be-
tween Governor and Corporation Commissioner. Statistically significant differences
at the 5% level are shown in red.


                                        A21
                           ONLINE APPENDIX


4    Construction of the Election Dataset

4.1 Oklahoma Election Outcomes

The Oklahoma State Election Board provided precinct-level vote totals for all
statewide races in the 2018 general election. These precinct-level data were
merged based on unique precinct IDs to spatial data on precinct boundaries
from the Center Spatial Analysis at the University of Oklahoma. The raw
vote data include 1,953 election precincts. Of these, 5 precincts do not appear
in the spatial data. Two of these 5 precincts are absentee precinct codes for
Oklahoma County and Tulsa County that together account for over 60,000
votes. The other three precincts without spatial data represent fewer than 250
total votes. In the main analysis of precinct-level outcomes, I drop these 5
precincts because the absence of geographic information makes it difficult to
assign earthquake shaking exposures to them. The results are not meaningfully
different if I keep these 5 precincts and assign them county-average values for
earthquake exposure and oil and gas activity.
For each race in each precinct, candidate vote shares were calculated as the
number of votes received divided by the total number of votes cast in that
race. Downballot participation rates were calculated by dividing the total
number of votes for a given downballot office by the number of votes cast for
governor. Precinct-level data on registered voters, party registration shares,
and average age of registered voters were calculated using the voter registration
database (see Section 4.2). Of the 1,953 precinct codes in the vote data, 21
do not appear in the voter registration database. Most of these precincts (14
of 21) reported zero votes cast in 2018. The only 2 of the 21 that represent
non-negligible numbers of votes are the absentee precincts in Oklahoma and
Tulsa Counties. For all 21 of these precincts, party registration shares and
average age of registered voters are imputed as countywide means. Number
of registered voters for these 21 precincts is imputed by multiplying observed
votes by statewide average voter turnout.
I drop 15 precincts from the clean dataset that contain zero registered voters
in the voter registration database. All of these precincts also report zero
votes cast in the vote total data. The cleaned precinct-level outcome data
for Oklahoma thus contain 1,933 precincts. The dataset represents 1,124,702
votes for governor and 1,107,321 votes for Corporation Commissioner.



                                      A22
                              ONLINE APPENDIX


4.2 Oklahoma Voter Registration Data

The database of Oklahoma registered voters was provided by the Oklahoma
State Election Board. These public records include voting history and address
information for the universe of registered voters in Oklahoma. This study uses
the August 5, 2019 version of the database, which includes a total of 2,057,514
registered voters. Of these, I drop 73,345 voters with reported registration
dates after October 2018.
I use address information to assign voters to Census block groups using the US
Census geocoder application. This is a two-step process, accounting for the
fact that geocoding of unstructured text information such as this inevitably has
a success rate less than 100%. First, the 75.4% of voters whose addresses can
be successfully geocoded to the block group level are directly assigned those
block groups and the associated demographic variables. Next, election-precinct
level averages of demographic variables are calculated for this group of voters.
These weighted-average precinct demographic characteristics are used in the
precinct-level analysis of election outcomes (see Section 4.1). These precinct-
level weighted average demographics are also used as imputed demographic
information in the analysis of individual voter turnout decisions for the 24.6%
of voters whose addresses cannot be successfully geocoded to the block group
level. The alternative approach of dropping voters whose addresses cannot be
directly geocoded does not meaningfully change the results.


4.3 Texas Election Outcome Data

Texas election outcome data are from the Texas Legislative Council (TLC).
The data include vote totals by candidate in each race in the 2018 general
election, along with the number of registered voters and number of ballots cast.
The data are reported at the level of voting tabulation districts (VTDs). These
spatial units are based on 2018 election precincts with small modifications that
improve the relationship between precincts and U.S. Census geographies.27 For
  27. According to TLC, "VTDs can differ from actual election precincts because precincts
do not always follow census geography. The VTDs in the redistricting database closely
correspond to the 8,936 precincts in effect for the 2018 general election. On the occasion
that a precinct is in two noncontiguous pieces, it is a suffixed VTD in the database. For
example, if precinct 0001 had two non-contiguous areas, the corresponding VTD would
be VTD 0001A and VTD 0001B. If a 2018 general election precinct does not match any
census geography, it is consolidated with an adjacent precinct and given that precinct's
corresponding VTD number."


                                          A23
                          ONLINE APPENDIX


2018, the data include 9,082 VTDs that together represent 8,341,613 votes
for governor and 8,225,034 votes for Railroad Commissioner. For each race
in each VTD, candidate vote shares were calculated as the number of votes
received divided by the total number of votes cast in that race. Downballot
participation rates were calculated by dividing the total number of votes for a
given downballot office by the total number of ballots cast in that VTD.


4.4 Earthquake exposure and oil and gas activity

Earthquake data come from the United States Geological Survey's ANSS Com-
prehensive Catalog. The data used for this study include magnitude, ge-
ographic coordinates, and depth for 19,496 earthquakes of magnitude 1.5 or
larger that occurred in or close to Oklahoma or Texas between January 1, 2009
and November 6, 2018. I calculate the intensity of shaking experienced at a
given location during a given earthquake by applying the geophysical equation
for central United States earthquakes reported in Atkinson and Wald (2007).
Hough (2014) confirms the validity of this fitted relationship for injection-
caused earthquakes, and it has been used in the applied economics literature
by Cheung, Wetherell, and Whitaker (2018) and Ferreira, Liu, and Brewer
(2018) to study effects of earthquake exposure on home values. This formula
yields local intensity in MMI units as a function of earthquake magnitude, M ,
surface distance in kilometers, S , and depth in kilometers, D. The formula
is,
  M M I = 11.72 + 2.36  (M - 6) + 0.1155  (M - 6)2 - 0.44  log10 (R)-
                         0.002044  R + 2.31  B - 0.479  M  log10 (R)
                                    R
and R = S 2 + D2 + 289, B = log10 ( 80 ) if R > 80, B = 0 if R <= 80.
For the analysis of downballot election outcomes, I calculate predicted MMI at
the geographic centroid of each election precinct in Texas and Oklahoma for
every earthquake between 2009 and November 6, 2018 (including earthquakes
outside of these two states that were close enough to have been plausibly felt).
For the analysis of individual voter turnout decisions, I assign voters a level
of earthquake exposure by calculating MMI values at the geographic centroids
of each Census block. In the county-level panel regressions, I calculate MMI
values at the population-weighted center of mass for each county (as provided
by the U.S. Census Bureau).
To calculate a given location's exposure to oil and gas industry activity, I
use data from DrillingInfo/Enverus. I calculate the number of active wells

                                     A24
                          ONLINE APPENDIX


within 3 kilometers and the number of new wells completed between January
1, 2015 and November 6, 2018 within 3 kilometers. I choose the 3 kilometer
distance based on the distance within amenity effects of drilling are found to
exist in Pennsylvania in Muehlenbachs, Spiller, and Timmins (2015). As with
earthquakes, I calculate oil and gas exposure for election precinct centroids,
Census block group centroids, and county centers of population.




                                    A25
                            ONLINE APPENDIX


5    Construction of the News Coverage Dataset

This section describes the collection of newspaper articles compiled for this
study. Appendix Table A11 summarizes the final collection. A detailed bib-
liography with the full citation information for each article is available upon
request.


5.1 Oklahoma

News stories for Oklahoma come from several sources. I begin with articles
from the The Oklahoman between January 1 and December 31, 2018 that
matched the keyword search "election" in the Nexis Uni database, and also
were tagged by Nexis Uni as related to "Campaigns & Elections." The sam-
ple is augmented with 142 articles from other newspapers, including NonDoc
(an Oklahoma-focused public interest media group), the Daily Ardmoreite,
the Lawton Constitution, the Muskogee Phoenix, the Tulsa World, and Huff-
Post. In the case of NonDoc, 107 articles from 2018 tagged by the publisher
as related to "Oklahoma Elections" were included. The 35 articles from the
remaining newspapers were identified by keyword searches in each paper's on-
line archives for "Governor election" or "Corporation Commissioner election".
The choice of which sources to include in the analysis does not materially
affect the results. Appendix Figure A6 shows that the log occurrence ratios
between the Corporation Commissioner and governor race are similar across
The Oklahoman and the other article sources.
Within this set of news stories, I identified a subset of articles that focused
on the governor or Corporation Commissioner races during the primary or
general election. This classification was based on the appearance of the name
of the office or candidates for that office in the first 500 characters of the article
text. In my validation with a subsample of articles, the resulting classifications
from this 500-character rule closely replicate a categorization based on human
reading of the article. The resulting dataset includes 159 articles about the
governor race and 26 articles about the Corporation Commissioner race.


5.2 Texas

News stories for Texas were identified by keyword searches for "Governor elec-
tion" or "Railroad Commissioner election" in the NewsBank: Access World

                                        A26
                              ONLINE APPENDIX


                Appendix Table A11: Article Counts by Source

                                                       2006­2016   2018
                                          Oklahoma
                Daily Ardmoreite                                    6
                HuffPost                                            1
                Lawton Constitution                                 6
                Muskogee Phoenix                                    5
                NonDoc                                              24
                The Oklahoman                                      126
                Tulsa World                                         17
                TOTAL                                              185
                                               Texas
                Abilene Reporter-News                     14        9
                Amarillo Globe-News                        6        0
                Austin American-Statesman                 12        39
                Corpus Christi Caller-Times                2        11
                Dallas Morning News, The                   9        0
                Denton Record-Chronicle                    0        9
                El Paso Times                              2        8
                Fort Worth Star-Telegram                  22        8
                Houston Chronicle                         16        35
                Longview News-Journal                      8        7
                Lubbock Avalanche-Journal                 18        0
                Midland Reporter-Telegram                 19        3
                New Braunfels Herald-Zeitung               7        0
                San Angelo Standard-Times                  8        6
                San Antonio Express-News                  10        32
                Victoria Advocate, The                     6        6
                TOTAL                                    159       173

Notes: Counts of articles by source in the final database. Articles for 2018 include
governor and energy regulator (TRC/OCC). Articles for 2006­2016 include Texas
Railroad Commissioner only, and are used to produce Appendix Figure A5.


News database. The resulting list of Texas newspapers is summarized in Ap-
pendix Table A11. Both the governor and Railroad Commissioner races were
searched for 2018, producing 173 articles total. Additional searches for "Rail-
road Commissioner election" in each election year between 2006 and 2016
yielded 159 additional articles that were used to produce the time series in
Appendix Figure A5.




                                               A27
                           ONLINE APPENDIX


    Appendix Figure A6: Occurrence ratios across sources in Oklahoma




Notes: Log occurrence ratios are the natural log of the ratio of occurrence rates
between the energy regulator and governor races.


Appendix References

Abadie, Alberto, and Guido W. Imbens. 2011. "Bias-Corrected Matching Esti-
   mators for Average Treatment Effects." Journal of Business & Economic
   Statistics 29 (1): 1­11.
Atkinson, Gail M, and David J Wald. 2007. "Did You Feel It?" Intensity Data:
    A Surprisingly Good Measure of Earthquake Ground Motion." Seismolog-
    ical Research Letters 78 (3): 362­368.
Cheung, Ron, Daniel Wetherell, and Stephan Whitaker. 2018. "Induced Earth-
    quakes and Housing Markets: Evidence from Oklahoma." Regional Science
    and Urban Economics 69:153­166.



                                      A28
Ferreira, Susana, Haiyan Liu, and Brady Brewer. 2018. "The Housing Market
     Impacts of Wastewater Injection Induced Seismicity Risk." Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management 92:251­269.
Hough, Susan E. 2014. "Shaking from InjectionInduced Earthquakes in the
   Central and Eastern United States." Bulletin of the Seismological Society
   of America 104 (5): 2619­2626.
Imbens, Guido W. 2015. "Matching methods in practice: Three examples."
    Journal of Human Resources 50 (2): 373­419.
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics,
    Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University
    Press.
Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. 2015. "The
   Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development." American Economic
   Review 105 (12): 3633­59.
Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. "The central role of the
    propensity score in observational studies for causal effects." Biometrika
    70 (1): 41­55.
      . 1984. "Reducing Bias in Observational Studies Using Subclassification
    on the Propensity Score." Journal of the American Statistical Association
    79 (387): 516­524.




                                     29
