                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       BEYOND HEALTH: NON-HEALTH RISK AND THE VALUE OF DISABILITY
                              INSURANCE

                                       Manasi Deshpande
                                        Lee Lockwood

                                      Working Paper 28852
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28852


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




Deshpande conducted this research as a Visiting Economist at the Social Security Administration
(SSA). We thank the Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics at SSA for providing access to
administrative data, and Katherine Bent, Ben Danforth, Jeffrey Hemmeter, Steve Robinson, Mark
Sarney, Alexander Strand, Robert Weathers, and several SSA components for feedback. We are
grateful to David Autor, Katherine Baicker, Julie Berry Cullen, Joseph Doyle, Arindrajit Dube,
Mark Duggan, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Leora Friedberg, Michael Greenstone, Steven
Haider, Jill Horwitz, William Johnson, Henrik Kleven, Jonathan Kolstad, Magne Mogstad,
Timothy Moore, Austin Nichols, Matthew Notowidigdo, Edgar Olsen, Luigi Pistaferri, James
Poterba, Adam Sacarny, Joseph Shapiro, Isaac Sorkin, Stefanie Stantcheva, Melanie Wasserman,
and seminar participants at Federal Reserve Board, Michigan State, MIT, Stanford, Illinois-
Chicago, and Wisconsin-Madison for helpful comments. We thank Yalun Su and Jiada Ye for
excellent research assistance. Deshpande thanks the Ronzetti Initiative for the Study of Labor
Markets at the Becker-Friedman Institute for financial support. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1941538. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Manasi Deshpande and Lee Lockwood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Beyond Health: Non-Health Risk and the Value of Disability Insurance
Manasi Deshpande and Lee Lockwood
NBER Working Paper No. 28852
May 2021
JEL No. H5,I3

                                          ABSTRACT

The public debate over disability insurance has centered on concerns about individuals without
severe health conditions receiving benefits. We go beyond health risk alone to quantify the
overall insurance value of U.S. disability programs, including value from insuring non-health
risk. We find that disability recipients, especially those with less-severe health conditions, are
much more likely to have experienced a wide variety of non-health shocks than non-recipients.
Selection into disability receipt on the basis of non-health shocks is so strong among individuals
with less-severe health conditions that by many measures less-severe recipients are worse off than
more-severe recipients. As a result, under baseline assumptions, benefits to less-severe recipients
have an annual surplus value (insurance benefit less efficiency cost) over cost-equivalent tax cuts
of $7,700 per recipient, about three-fourths that of benefits to more-severe recipients ($9,900).
Insurance against non-health risk accounts for about one-half of the value of U.S. disability
programs.


Manasi Deshpande
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mdeshpande@uchicago.edu

Lee Lockwood
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall, Room 248
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
leelockwood@virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28852
1       Introduction
Disability insurance is a major component of the social safety net in developed coun-
tries. In the United States, the Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental
Security Income programs (which we collectively refer to as U.S. disability programs,
or USDP) together provide access to health insurance and $200 billion annually in
cash benefits to nearly 13 million Americans. The main purpose of these programs is
to provide assistance to people who cannot work because of severe health conditions.
Yet the expansion of U.S. disability programs in recent decades has been attributed
at least in part to non-health factors like stagnating wages (Autor and Duggan, 2003,
2006; Liebman, 2015), and there is widespread concern that providing benefits to
individuals without severe health conditions is diluting the value of these programs.1
    In this paper, we go beyond health risk alone to quantify the overall insurance
value U.S. disability programs, including value from insuring non-health risk. We
quantify the extent to which these programs insure dierent risks by comparing dis-
ability recipients and non-recipients along a wide variety of health and non-health
dimensions, including consumption, adverse events like job loss, and resources avail-
able to cope with adverse events. Building on these comparisons, we make additional
assumptions to quantify the (ex ante) value of receiving disability benefits in dier-
ent states of the world: the net of the insurance benefit from receiving transfers in
high-marginal utility states less the e ciency cost from distorting behavior. Reflect-
ing the public debate over USDP, we focus on "mismatches with respect to health":
individuals who receive benefits despite not having a health condition that exceeds a
certain severity threshold ("less-severe recipients") and individuals who do not receive
benefits despite having such a condition ("more-severe non-recipients").2
    Going "beyond health" is crucial for making informed judgments about disabil-
ity programs and their mismatches with respect to health. Health, though likely a
strong indicator of the value of receiving disability benefits, is not a perfect indicator
because individuals face major non-health risks as well, including job loss, produc-
    1
     More recently, growth in U.S. disability programs has slowed. Examples of concern include,
"Unfit for Work: The startling rise of disability in America," Chana Joe-Walt, NPR, March 23,
2013, and "How Americans Game the $200 Billion-a-Year `Disability-Industrial Complex,'" Avik
Roy, Forbes, April 8, 2013.
   2
     Such mismatches are not necessarily errors as defined by USDP rules, which explicitly account
for certain non-health factors in eligibility determination (see Section 3 for details). We use "less-
/more-severe individual" as shorthand for "individual with a less-/more-severe health condition."



                                                  1
tivity shocks, and changes in family structure. To the extent that a particular risk
is not completely insured by other means, disability insurance potentially insures or
exacerbates that risk, depending on selection into receiving disability benefits. For
example, disability benefits in states of the world without a health shock but with
limited earning prospects following job layos partially insure that risk. More gen-
erally, although mismatches with respect to health necessarily reduce the extent to
which disability insurance insures health risk, the presence of non-health risk means
that such mismatches might not reduce--and might even increase--the overall value
of disability insurance. The extent to which mismatches insure non-health risk is
therefore a critical determinant of the value of potential reforms. For example, unless
benefits to less-severe recipients provide highly valuable insurance against non-health
risk, reforms to limit such benefits, even at the expense of decreasing benefits to
more-severe recipients, could produce large gains. But if benefits to less-severe recip-
ients provide valuable insurance against non-health risk, such reforms could reduce
the value of disability insurance.3
    The extent to which disability programs and their mismatches with respect to
health insure or exacerbate dierent risks is ultimately an empirical question, one
that we investigate using complementary positive and normative analyses. In the
positive analysis, we use a combination of survey and administrative data to estab-
lish new facts about the targeting of disability benefits on the basis of non-health
factors. We find that less-severe disability recipients are on average much worse o
than less-severe non-recipients, and by many non-health measures are even worse o
than more-severe recipients. For example, we find in administrative data that prior to
receiving disability benefits, less-severe recipients are 40% more likely to have experi-
enced a mass layo than more-severe recipients, 19% more likely to have experienced
a foreclosure, and 23% more likely to have experienced an eviction. From survey data,
less-severe recipients have similarly low consumption levels to more-severe recipients
just prior to receiving disability benefits ($17,000 and $16,400, respectively). Con-
versely, more-severe non-recipients are on average better o than either more-severe
or less-severe recipients. The strong associations between disability receipt and non-
   3
    Although it is natural to think that a risk would optimally be insured by "its own" program,
that is not necessarily true when risks are richer than feasible policy instruments. For example,
unemployment insurance typically does not insure any of the unemployment-related risk within
unemployment spells of a given length, such as risk in re-employment wages or resources with which
to smooth consumption during the spell.



                                                2
health shocks conditional on health means that USDP mismatches with respect to
health are highly selected, in ways likely to increase the value of USDP, by both
increasing insurance of non-health risk and decreasing distortion costs.
    In the normative analysis, we determine how the targeting properties of U.S. dis-
ability programs, including their mismatches with respect to health, translate into
their ex ante value, taking other programs as given. We use a flexible, su cient
statistics-type approach that highlights the importance, in a broad class of models, of
two key factors in determining the value of disability benefits: the marginal utility of
income and "counterfactual earnings"--earnings if not receiving disability benefits.
We model marginal utility using PSID consumption measures and a wide range of
assumptions about the functional form of utility. We model counterfactual earnings
using quasi-experimental evidence from the literature on the eects of being awarded
disability benefits. Our findings suggest that U.S. disability programs provide valu-
able insurance and increase welfare significantly. Under baseline assumptions, the
value of disability benefits exceeds that of cost-equivalent tax cuts by 64%, creat-
ing a surplus worth $8,700 of government revenue per recipient per year. Moreover,
we find that the high value of USDP is in part because of, not despite, mismatches
with respect to health. We estimate that benefits to less-severe recipients create a
value (insurance benefit less distortion cost) over cost-equivalent tax cuts of $7,700
per recipient per year, about three-fourths that of benefits to more-severe recipients
($9,900). As a result, benefits to less-severe recipients do not decrease the value of
USDP--they increase it considerably, accounting for about half of the total value.
The lack of benefits to more-severe non-recipients also appears to create value, as
providing such benefits would have a negative value ( $2,200 per hypothetical recipi-
ent per year). USDP mismatches with respect to health are so favorably selected that
U.S. disability programs are more valuable than a hypothetical, infeasible program
that would target perfectly on severity. In other words, even somehow eliminating
all mismatches at no administrative cost would significantly decrease the value of
USDP. The estimates and conclusions are similar considering the cash benefits alone
or the cash benefits combined with health insurance. Including health insurance mod-
estly decreases the ratio of per-recipient surplus of benefits to less-severe relative to
more-severe recipients, from 0.78 to 0.74­0.77 depending on the exact specification.
    The high values of U.S. disability programs and their mismatches with respect to
health are driven by favorable selection on both marginal utility and counterfactual


                                           3
earnings. Much of the favorable selection into disability receipt is on the basis of non-
health shocks. Using a decomposition analysis, we find that about one-half of the
insurance value of USDP comes from insuring risk within observable health groups.
This suggests that much, or even most, of the value of USDP comes from insuring
non-health risk. USDP insurance of non-health risk in turn depends crucially on the
strong selection into application, rather than on selective awards conditional on appli-
cation. We estimate that a hypothetical disability program with similar adjudication
standards but no systematic selection into application would have negative value, far
below the large positive value of USDP. Although we lack direct evidence on what
drives selection into application, additional simulation results suggest that earnings
restrictions on recipients could play a key role.
    We emphasize several points relevant for interpreting our results. First, our anal-
ysis, like most welfare analyses, takes other policies as given. That U.S. disability
programs provide valuable insurance against a wide variety of risks may in part reflect
gaps in the existing social safety net and does not imply that these programs are the
most e cient way to insure these risks. Expanding other insurance programs like
unemployment insurance or creating new programs like wage insurance or temporary
disability insurance would potentially reduce the value of USDP, a point we revisit
in Section 5.5. Second, our normative analysis focuses on insurance and welfare ef-
fects and does not explicitly incorporate non-welfarist considerations.4 Third, our
results do not speak to the eects of changes to particular features of USDP, such
as the earnings limit or the weight on health in the adjudication process, since such
changes would induce application responses, evidence on which is sparse. Nor does
our analysis speak to the alignment of U.S. disability programs with their program
rules, since mismatches with respect to health are distinct from programmatic errors
   4
    Such considerations might include the view that disability benefits should be received only by
individuals with certain health conditions or the view that certain individuals are more deserving
of benefits than others. Because quantitative evidence on the strength of such views is limited,
rather than incorporate such considerations in our main analysis, we instead quantify how strong
such considerations would have to be, in terms of their eects on generalized social marginal welfare
weights (Saez and Stantcheva, 2016), in order to overturn our key conclusions. We find that a non-
welfarist planner who discounted the value of disability benefits to less-severe recipients (viewing
each dollar of such benefits as being worth $(1-d), where d is the discount) would get positive
surplus from the actual disability benefits to less-severe recipients as long as the discount did not
exceed about 35% (d = 0.35). That same planner would get positive surplus from disability benefits
as a whole as long as the discount on benefits to less-severe recipients did not exceed about 75%
(d = 0.75).



                                                 4
with respect to their rules, which include both health and non-health considerations.
Fourth, the results do not imply that expanding disability receipt to new groups
would increase social welfare--in fact, our analysis highlights that the value of USDP
depends crucially on selective receipt. Finally, our normative analysis relies on several
assumptions, including about behavioral responses to disability benefits, about which
relatively little is known. Better understanding such behavioral responses and the
benefits and costs of reforms to other policies is a high priority for future research.
    Acknowledging these caveats, our results have implications for the current debate
over disability programs. The most contentious question in the debate is whether
benefits to individuals without more-severe health conditions are diluting the value of
disability programs. Our results suggest that in the case of U.S. disability programs,
such benefits are not diluting value but enhancing it. Whereas eliminating such
benefits would significantly reduce the value of USDP, "doubling down" on them by
increasing benefit levels--which, among other things, further increases transfers from
more-severe non-recipients to less-severe recipients--would increase it.
    The primary contribution of this paper is to quantify the extent to which U.S. dis-
ability programs and their mismatches with respect to health insure non-health as
well as health risk and to determine the welfare implications of this insurance. Our
findings help reconcile two seemingly contradictory strands of the literature on dis-
ability programs. The first is a positive, empirical strand that has raised serious
concerns about disability programs. The key findings of this literature are that mis-
matches with respect to health are prevalent, negative labor market shocks increase
disability enrollment, and disability programs reduce the labor supply of marginal
recipients.5 These findings suggest that disability programs may provide benefits to
many individuals without severe health conditions and that it discourages work. Our
paper extends this literature by going "beyond health" to characterize more-severe
and less-severe disability recipients and non-recipients on a wide variety of dimensions
and to quantify the implications for the value of disability programs. The second,
normative strand of literature on disability programs quantifies the welfare eects of
various reforms. This strand typically finds that expanding disability programs would
   5
    Mismatches: Benitez-Silva, Buchinsky and Rust (2004); Von Wachter, Song and Manchester
(2011). Labor market shocks: Autor and Duggan (2003, 2006); Black, Daniel and Sanders (2002);
Charles, Li and Stephens Jr (2018); Rege, Telle and Votruba (2009). Labor supply: Maestas, Mullen
and Strand (2013); French and Song (2014).




                                               5
increase welfare.6 Our paper extends this literature by quantifying, with a flexible
approach, the value of disability benefits in dierent types of states of the world and
by illuminating the mechanisms underlying the welfare eects of disability programs,
particularly the role of non-health risk.
    How could expanding U.S. disability programs increase welfare despite prevalent
mismatches with respect to health, non-health drivers, and reductions in work? Our
results help reconcile this tension. The strong selection into disability receipt on
the basis of non-health shocks means that mismatches with respect to health do not
greatly decrease--and in fact appear to increase--the value of USDP. Non-health
drivers of enrollment do not just drive up the costs of USDP, they also drive up the
benefits in terms of insuring non-health risk. With respect to eects on labor supply,
we do not provide new evidence on this question but instead quantify the implications
of existing evidence for the value of USDP. Our analysis highlights the importance of
a less-discussed aspect of the existing evidence: that marginal disability recipients,
despite their non-negligible counterfactual labor force participation, have extremely
low counterfactual earnings.7
    This paper also contributes to the broader literature on the take-up and targeting
of government programs. The main focus of this literature has been incomplete take-
up (see Currie, 2006, for a review), with more recent work shedding light on the
normative implications of incomplete take-up by studying the characteristics of those
who do versus do not take up benefits.8 We find, in the context of USDP, that
   6
     Bound et al. (2004) find that the typical worker would gain from a government budget-neutral
marginal expansion of SSDI. Chandra and Samwick (2009) and Meyer and Mok (2019) find that
disability programs, together with other programs, provide valuable but incomplete insurance against
health risk. Low and Pistaferri (2015) estimate a structural life-cycle model and find that expanding
USDP would increase welfare. Cabral and Cullen (2019) use the demand for private disability
insurance to bound the value of public disability benefits and find a high lower bound. The finding
by Gelber, Moore and Strand (2018) that larger SSDI payments reduce mortality is in keeping with
these welfare results.
   7
     For example, using the quasi-random assignment of applicants to adjudicators, Maestas, Mullen
and Strand (2013) find that SSDI reduces the labor force participation of applicants on the margin
of program entry by 28 percentage points, but that such applicants have average counterfactual
earnings of just $6,000­$9,000 per year. Using a similar strategy, French and Song (2014) find that
in the ten years after the SSDI/SSI decision, counterfactual earnings actually decline in later years
after reaching a maximum of about $5,000 per year around year five. Of course, these estimates
do not reveal why counterfactual earnings are so low--whether because of health, skills, work ethic,
etc.--which is relevant for certain non-welfarist perspectives.
   8
     See, e.g., Bhargava and Manoli (2015); Alatas et al. (2016); Deshpande and Li (2019); Finkelstein
and Notowidigdo (2019); Lieber and Lockwood (2019); Homono and Somerville (2020).



                                                  6
incomplete take-up among more-severe individuals significantly increases the ex ante
value of the program. Improper take-up, by contrast, has received much less attention
in economic research, despite being central to public debates, from that in the 1970s
about "welfare queens" to those more recently about disability awards and EITC
overpayments.9 Our paper finds that benefits to less-severe individuals, which can be
thought of as improper take-up relative to a specific benchmark, account for nearly
one-half of the high value of USDP. Given that the risk of experiencing a more-severe
work-limiting health condition might be the biggest risk that people face, our finding
that the value of USDP is driven to such a large extent by mismatches with respect to
health--i.e., by selective take-up with respect to other risks--suggests that selective
take-up with respect to risks beyond a program's primary aim might be important in
other applications as well.


2       Theory: Non-health risk, mismatches with re-
        spect to health, and the value of disability in-
        surance
Our goal is to go "beyond health" to determine the value of disability programs and
their mismatches with respect to health accounting for non-health risk. Consider a
simple model in which an individual faces two kinds of risk: health and non-health,
where h is the severity of the health shock and n is the seriousness of the non-health
shock. Consider a "health-based perspective" in which the objective of disability
insurance is to provide benefits to the individual if and only if they have suered a
health shock of severity h¯ or greater. This perspective divides the state space into
two sets: states in which the individual has versus has not experienced a qualifying
health shock: h ? h ¯ . We label states in which h     ¯ "health-shock" and states in
                                                       h
which h < h¯ "non-health-shock." There are two types of mismatches relative to this
perspective: awarding benefits in a non-health-shock state (an inclusion mismatch)
    9
    The main economic research on improper take-up is earlier work on disability programs (e.g.,
Parsons (1991); Diamond and Sheshinski (1995); Low and Pistaferri (2015)). Beyond disability,
recent work on the EITC by Jones and Ziliak (2019) finds that many of the households that receive
EITC benefits despite being ineligible have low incomes. Kleven and Kopczuk (2011) analyze in
theory how eorts to establish eligibility for a program trade o inclusion and exclusion errors.
They find that optimal programs feature errors of both kinds.



                                               7
and failing to award benefits in a health-shock state (an exclusion mismatch).
     Now consider an alternative, "value-maximizing" perspective in which the goal
is to maximize the ex ante value of disability insurance by providing benefits if and
only if the insurance benefit exceeds the distortion cost--i.e., if and only if doing
so produces positive (ex ante) surplus value, s(h, n) > 0. As we derive formally in
Section 5, the insurance benefit depends mainly on the marginal utility of income,
and the distortion cost depends mainly on what earnings would have been in the
absence of disability benefits ("counterfactual earnings"), reflecting the reduction in
labor supply from receiving disability benefits. This perspective divides the state
space into two sets: states in which the value of receiving disability benefits is greater
or less than zero: s(h, n) ? 0. There are two types of mismatches relative to this
perspective: awarding benefits when doing so reduces the value of disability insurance,
and failing to award benefits when doing so would have increased the value of disability
insurance.
     Figure 1 shows how these two perspectives divide the state space into four mutu-
ally exclusive, exhaustive sets. It depicts a hypothetical joint (h, s(h, n)) distribution
in the natural case in which health is a strong but noisy indicator of surplus. Health
is likely a strong indicator of the value of receiving disability benefits because health
shocks increase health spending and limit earning opportunities, and so tend to in-
crease marginal utility and decrease counterfactual earnings. These two perspectives
agree on providing benefits in the "Northeast" quadrant, states in which the individ-
ual suers a health shock and receiving disability benefits produces positive surplus.
They also agree on not providing benefits in the "Southwest" quadrant (likely the
vast majority of states), states in which the individual does not suer a health shock
and receiving disability benefits produces negative surplus.
     Yet the value of receiving disability benefits in a particular state is not entirely
determined by the health shock. Insurance value is likely increasing in the seriousness
of the non-health shock since transfers into states in which marginal utility is high
provide valuable insurance, regardless of why marginal utility is high. In terms of
distortions, benefits in states in which counterfactual earnings are low tend to have
low e ciency costs regardless of why counterfactual earnings are low. In Figure 1,
while s(h, n) is increasing in h on average, variation in n causes it to vary around that
average. As a result, the two perspectives occasionally disagree on whether benefits
should be provided. They disagree about states in the "Southeast" quadrant, in which


                                            8
the individual suers a health shock but the non-health shock is su ciently favorable
(e.g., high spousal earnings) to make surplus negative. The perspectives also disagree
about states in the "Northwest" quadrant, in which the individual does not suer a
health shock but the non-health shock (e.g., productivity shock not insured by UI) is
su ciently unfavorable to make surplus positive.

             Figure 1: Health-based vs. value-maximizing classifications of states




Notes: Figure shows how health-based and value-maximizing perspectives classify states of the world
into those in which disability benefit receipt is versus is not desired. The x-axis measures the severity
of the health shock, h. The y-axis measures the ex ante surplus of receiving disability benefits. From
a health-based perspective, disability benefit receipt is desired if and only if h h    ¯ . From a value-
maximizing perspective, disability benefit receipt is desired if and only if s(h, n) > 0, where n is the
seriousness of the non-health shock. These two perspectives both desire disability benefit receipt
in states in the Northeast quadrant and non-receipt in states in the Southwest quadrant, but dier
in their assessment of states in the Northwest and Southeast quadrants. E (s|M ) denotes mean
surplus for h h  ¯ states, and E (s|L) denotes mean surplus for h < h    ¯ states. The blue dots depict a
hypothetical joint (h, s(h, n)) distribution in the natural case in which health is a strong but noisy
indicator of surplus.

    In settings with substantial non-health risk, the value of disability insurance and
the costs of its mismatches with respect to health depend crucially on the extent to
which they insure or exacerbate non-health risk, which in turn depends on selection
into disability receipt on the basis of non-health shocks. Mismatches with respect
to health necessarily reduce the extent to which disability insurance insures health

                                                   9
                                                                  ¯ )--by reducing the
risk--in this context, the risk of experiencing a health shock (h h
extent to which disability insurance transfers from non-health-shock to health-shock
states. But mismatches could either insure or exacerbate non-health risk, making
their net eect on the insurance value of disability insurance theoretically ambiguous.
If individuals with more-serious non-health shocks are more (less) likely to receive
disability benefits conditional on health, then mismatches with respect to health
insure (exacerbate) non-health risk.10 Assuming that health is a strong indicator of
the value of receiving disability benefits, a representative exclusion mismatch--the
failure to provide benefits in a state with surplus E (s(h, n)|M )--would forego cost-
eective insurance. Similarly, a representative inclusion mismatch--providing benefits
in a state with surplus E (s(h, n)|L)--would both exacerbate risk (by transferring to
a state with below-average marginal utility) and involve substantial e ciency costs
(by creating a large labor supply distortion).
    But the actual inclusion and exclusion mismatches of a particular disability pro-
gram may not be representative if the program's tags and screens lead to systematic
selection into applying for and being awarded disability insurance. The U.S. SSDI
and SSI programs, for example, use a vocational grid that takes into consideration
certain non-health characteristics ("tags") in award decisions, such as an applicant's
age, education, and work experience. SSDI and SSI also impose restrictions on ap-
plicants and recipients ("screens"), such as earnings restrictions and a complicated
application process.11 Systematic selection could either increase or decrease the cost
of actual mismatches relative to representative ones. For example, Deshpande and
Li (2019) find that higher application costs disproportionately discourage individuals
with relatively severe conditions and limited resources from applying for SSDI and
SSI benefits. In Figure 1, such an unfavorable exclusion mismatch would be in the
  10
      More precisely, exclusion mismatches insure risk within the set of states with health shocks--
which we will mostly refer to as "non-health risk," though it could reflect a mix of health and
non-health risk as defined by h and n--if and only if mean marginal utility in health-shock recipient
states exceeds that in health-shock non-recipient states, and inclusion mismatches insure risk within
the set of states without health shocks (also "non-health risk") if and only if mean marginal utility
in non-health-shock recipient states exceeds that in non-health-shock non-recipient states. The less
variable is health within health-shock and non-health-shock states, the greater the extent to which
within-health-shock and within-non-health risk reflects non-health risk as defined by n.
   11
      Some screens are chosen intentionally to try to improve targeting, such as the restrictions on
the earnings of applicants and recipients. Others, such as the complicated application process and
the uncertainty in award decisions, are unintentional byproducts of program administration but can
still be crucial to a program's targeting properties (Kleven and Kopczuk, 2011).



                                                 10
"Northeast" quadrant (health shock and high surplus). On the other hand, strict
earnings limits might discourage applications in states in which the individual can
find suitable employment despite a health shock. In Figure 1, such a favorable exclu-
sion mismatch would be in the "Southeast" quadrant (health shock but low surplus).
Whether a disability program's tags and screens create value-enhancing or -reducing
selection is ultimately an empirical question, one we aim to answer for U.S. disability
programs in the following positive and normative analyses.


3      Institutional setting and data
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
(collectively "USDP") are intended to provide assistance to Americans who cannot
work because of a severe health condition. SSDI and SSI use the same definition
of disability.12 Non-health factors, such as age and education, factor in through
the medical-vocational grids.13 For SSDI, eligibility is limited to individuals with
qualifying earnings histories. The average annual SSDI cash benefit is around $15,000,
and beneficiaries qualify for Medicare after a two-year waiting period.14 Disabled
workers are not permitted to earn more than the substantial gainful activity (SGA)
level, which was $1,260 per month ($15,120 per year) in 2020. SSI is a means-tested
program that has the same medical eligibility requirements and SSA adjudication
process as SSDI but does not require a work history. The maximum federal SSI benefit
for an individual was $783 per month ($9,396 per year) in 2020, and the SSI benefit
is reduced by 50 cents for each dollar of earnings. SSDI and SSI recipients receive
periodic medical reviews in which the adjudicator considers the recipient's medical
condition and work activity. To provide a comprehensive picture of U.S. disability
  12
      Under Social Security rules, someone is considered disabled if (i) "[they] cannot do work that
[they] did before," (ii) "[SSA] decide[s] that [they] cannot adjust to other work because of [their]
medical condition(s)," and (iii) "[their] disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one
year or to result in death" (see https://www.ssa.gov/benefits/disability/qualify.html).
   13
      This is a key dierence between SSDI and SSI's eligibility rules, which account for certain non-
health factors, and our classification of individuals on the basis of health alone. As a result, some
correct awards under SSDI and SSI's rules are mismatches with respect to health by our definition,
and some incorrect awards under SSDI and SSI's rules are not mismatches with respect to health
by our definition. Our goal is not to judge SSDI and SSI's alignment with their rules but to
characterize the health and non-health characteristics of recipients and non-recipients and to derive
the implications for the value of benefits to dierent groups.
   14
      Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability Insurance Program, 2018.



                                                  11
programs, we consider the SSDI and SSI programs together in our main analysis. We
provide estimates for SSDI alone in Appendix J.
    In Section 4, we use a combination of survey data and administrative data to study
the characteristics of dierent groups of working-age households by their USDP status
and severity. The first data source is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),
which we use to estimate dierences by severity and USDP status in consumption,
adverse non-health events (e.g., job loss), and resources (e.g., marriage). The main
advantages of the PSID are its measures of consumption and adverse events and its
long panel structure. We also use Social Security Administration data to measure ad-
verse non-health events for more- and less-severe recipients. In particular, we measure
mass layos as well as bankruptcy, eviction, and foreclosure from the data compiled
by Deshpande, Gross and Su (2019). In Section 5, we use PSID data on consump-
tion and earnings, together with quasi-experimental estimates from French and Song
(2014), to estimate the surplus from disability benefits to dierent groups. Appendix
A includes more detail on all data sources, and Appendix B discusses the robustness
of the main results to measurement error in severity and disability receipt. Our find-
ings suggest that measurement error usually, though not always, works against our
main conclusions.


4     Positive analysis: Non-health risk and selection
      into U.S. disability programs
Our goal is to understand selection into U.S. disability programs on the basis of non-
health shocks conditional on health. To that end, we characterize mismatch groups--
less-severe recipients (L-DI) and more-severe non-recipients (M-DI)--on non-health
dimensions. We focus on non-health characteristics likely to be predictive of the
key determinants of the value of receiving disability benefits: the marginal utility of
income and counterfactual earnings.15
  15
     For simplicity, in the main text we present raw comparisons without controls or error bars.
Results with dierent sets of controls for ability and with confidence intervals are presented in
Appendix Figure F1. Within-ability comparisons are relevant for the insurance and welfare values of
disability insurance, since across-ability insurance or redistribution can be accomplished (or oset) by
the income tax and transfer system. Controlling for measures of ability tends to reduce the dierences
between recipients and non-recipients, but the dierences remain large and the key conclusions are
unchanged. Appendix Figure G1 compares education level, our main measure of ability group,



                                                  12
Fact 1: On average, more-severe households are worse o than less-severe
households by all measures, health and non-health, but there is substantial
variation. Figure 2a shows that average consumption for households with more-
severe conditions is just one-half that of households with less-severe conditions. This
pattern is consistent across all of the measures that we observe: Having a more-severe
health condition is strongly associated with lower living standards, lower earnings, and
more adverse non-health events, even after controlling for proxies for ability group.
Yet these strong average tendencies mask substantial variation within each severity
group. For example, Figure 2a also shows that the bottom decile of households with
less-severe conditions have consumption significantly below the mean among house-
holds with more-severe conditions, while the top decile of households with more-severe
conditions have consumption above the mean among households with less-severe con-
ditions. More generally, across dierent measures, we find that although health is
strongly associated with better circumstances, it is far from a perfect indicator.
Fact 2: Less-severe recipients (L-DI) are much worse o than less-severe
non-recipients (L-NDI), and by many non-health measures are even worse
o than more-severe recipients (M-DI). Figure 2a shows that average con-
sumption among L-DI is just over one-half that of L-NDI. This pattern is consistent
across all of the measures that we observe: L-DI are substantially worse o than
L-NDI, with substantial dierences even after controlling for proxies for ability group
(Appendix Figure F1). In fact, L-DI are so strongly selected that on non-health
dimensions they are comparable to, and even sometimes worse o than, M-DI. Fig-
ure 2a shows that L-DI and M-DI have similar current consumption levels. To avoid
measuring the causal eect of receiving disability benefits, we also go back to the
year before each recipient started receiving benefits and find that L-DI and M-DI are
equally likely to be at the bottom of the consumption distribution prior to receiving
benefits (see Appendix Figure G2).16
   In SSA administrative data, we find that L-DI experience adverse non-health
across USDP-by-severity groups. Appendix Figures J1 and J2 show the main results for SSDI
only (excluding SSI). The results for SSDI are similar to the main results, with the exception that
more-severe non-(SSDI)recipients look worse o because they include a substantial number of SSI
recipients. Sample sizes for SSI-only are too small to generate precise estimates.
  16
     To be sure, consumption and the other measures we study are determined by both health and
non-health shocks. Since L-DI are by definition better o on health than M-DI, the fact that L-DI
look similar to or worse than M-DI on these measures suggests that non-health shocks are worse for
L-DI.


                                                13
     Figure 2: Fact 2: L-DI similar to or worse o than M-DI on non-health measures

                 (a) PSID: Consumption            (b) Admin data: Prior to USDP receipt




               (c) PSID: Outside resources              (d) PSID: Earnings at age 35




Notes: Figures 2a, 2c, and 2d present data from the PSID. Figure 2a presents statistics on consump-
tion in the 2017 PSID for less-severe non-USDP-recipients (6,312 L-NDI), more-severe non-recipients
(250 M-NDI), less-severe recipients (443 L-DI), and more-severe recipients (316 M-DI). Household
consumption excludes health care and is divided by the square root of household size. Figure 2c
presents rates of marriage, banking relationship, and homeownership for M-DI and L-DI (exact
PSID questions in Appendix Table I4). Figure 2d presents average earnings at head age 35 (in 2016
dollars) for households that did not receive USDP benefits before age 36 and can be tracked back to
age 35: 1,923 L-NDI, 90 M-NDI, 93 M-DI, and 152 L-DI. In all three PSID figures, "more-severe"
is defined as self-reporting that a health condition limits "a lot" the amount of work one can do
(vs. "somewhat," "just a little," or "not at all" [or no condition]). Figure 2b presents rates of ad-
verse financial events in the three years before receiving USDP for individuals who receive USDP
benefits in SSA administrative data. The mass layo sample (510,000 L-DI, 1.4M M-DI) is USDP
recipients in the 831 records between 1990 and 2016 that appear in the Continuous Work History
(CWHS). The bankruptcy sample is USDP recipients in the 831 files between 1995 and 2009 (4.9M
L-DI, 8.4M M-DI). The foreclosure sample is approved USDP applicants in the 831 files between
2005 and 2014 who are homeowners (700,000 L-DI, 1.4M M-DI). The eviction sample is approved
USDP applicants in the 831 files between 2005 and 2014 who are not homeowners (590,000 L-DI,
1.5M M-DI). "More-severe" in Figure 2b indicates recipients allowed at the initial state DDS level,
and "less-severe" indicates recipients allowed upon appeal.




                                                 14
events at rates that are similar to or higher than those of M-DI. Figure 2b shows that
L-DI are more likely than M-DI to have experienced a mass layo prior to receiving
disability benefits. The mass layo rate is 10.2% for L-DI and 7.3% for M-DI in the
three years before entry, and this dierence remains even after conditioning on work-
ing.17 Figure 2b, on adverse financial events in SSA administrative data linked to
nationwide financial records, shows a similar pattern. In the years prior to receiving
disability benefits, L-DI are more likely than M-DI to have experienced bankruptcy
(3.5% vs. 2.6%), foreclosure (3.8% vs. 3.2%), and eviction (4.7% vs. 3.8%).18 PSID
measures of adverse non-health events reinforce the results from the SSA administra-
tive data: L-DI and M-DI in the PSID experience similarly high rates of involuntary
job loss, distressed moves, and divorce in the four years prior to receiving disability
benefits (Appendix Figure G3). Overall, the likelihood of experiencing any of these
events in the four years prior to receiving disability benefits is 57% for L-DI and 50%
for M-DI.19
    In addition to adverse non-health events, we also analyze how L-DI are selected
on resources available to cope with adverse events. As shown in Figure 2c, we find
that L-DI are less likely than M-DI to be married (28% vs. 33%) or to have a banking
relationship (68% vs. 75%), and are similarly likely to own a home (45% vs. 44%).
To account for the possible causal eect of receiving disability benefits on resources,
we go back to the year before disability receipt and find a similar pattern (Appendix
Figure G8a). Prior to disability receipt, L-DI are also less likely to have either private
or public health insurance (67% vs. 75%, from Appendix Figure G8b), less likely to
receive public transfers (37% vs. 40% for food stamps, from G8c), and less likely to
receive help from relatives (23% vs. 25%, from G8d).20
    These results suggest that L-DI are highly selected on one key determinant of
the value of receiving disability benefits: marginal utility. What about the other key
  17
      Overall, mass layo rates for disability recipients at entry are about twice those of non-recipients
at the same ages (see Appendix Figure G4).
   18
      Appendix Figure G5 breaks down the rates of adverse financial events into finer groups: initial
allowance at Step 3 (meets medical listings), initial allowance at Step 5 (based on vocational grid),
allowed on appeal, and never allowed.
   19
      These likelihoods far exceed the baseline level among non-recipients: at entry, disability recipi-
ents are 70% more likely than non-recipients of the same age to experience these adverse events (see
Appendix Figure G6).
   20
      Relative to the baseline severity definition, the results are even stronger when using the broader
"a lot + somewhat" definition and are similar when using the "physical + mental health" definition
(see Appendix Figure G7).



                                                   15
determinant, counterfactual earnings? Although we do not have a direct measure of
counterfactual earnings, Figure 2d shows average earnings of the household head at
age 35, well before most individuals start receiving disability benefits but after at
least some health and non-health shocks are realized. Households who later become
L-DI have head earnings at age 35 similar to the age-35 head earnings of households
who later become M-DI.21
    These results suggest that L-DI benefits are less costly than benefits to representa-
tive less-severe individuals would be. How do L-DI come to receive disability benefits
in the first place? From the PSID, about 25% had a more-severe condition when
they applied, even though they no longer have a more-severe condition. Another 15%
received UI immediately before applying for disability benefits, suggesting that they
may have turned to U.S. disability programs as a form of permanent insurance follow-
ing a qualifying job loss. Another 40% experienced some observable shock (job loss,
distressed move, or divorce) before applying for disability benefits but never received
UI. The remaining 20% have no observable shock prior to applying for disability
benefits but have low resources on average.22
Fact 3: More-severe non-recipients (M-NDI) are better o on non-health
measures than both more-severe and less-severe recipients. Figure 2a shows
that M-NDI consumption is on average slightly greater than M-DI consumption,
though still well below L-NDI consumption. Figure 3a shows a similar pattern in the
likelihood of experiencing an adverse non-health event (specifically, job loss, distressed
move, or divorce) at dierent ages in the PSID. For each age range (25­34, 35­44,
45­54, 55­64), we plot on the "more-severe" side the rate of adverse non-health events
for M-NDI at that age and for M-DI who begin receiving disability benefits in that
age range at that age. We find that M-NDI are 10­30% less likely in every age range
to have experienced an adverse non-health event.23 Turning to outside resources,
we find in Figure 3b that M-NDI are more advantaged than M-DI in the year of
  21
     Because disability receipt tends to last many years, the value of USDP depends not only (or even
primarily) on counterfactual earnings at the time of entry but on counterfactual earnings for many
years thereafter. We discuss quasi-experimental evidence on this key issue in the normative analysis
(Section 5). Research suggests that events like mass layos, which are more common for L-DI than
M-DI, are associated with long-term earnings losses (e.g., Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan, 1993).
  22
     From the 2014 SIPP linked to SSA data, among L-DI, 30% are allowed due to being deemed to
meet medical eligibility criteria (Step 3 of the disability determination process), 41% due to being
deemed to have no capacity for any work based on the vocational grid (Step 5), and 25% on appeal.
  23
     Appendix Figures G9 and G10 show results for head and spouse job loss, distressed move, and
divorce separately.


                                                 16
disability onset. M-NDI are more likely than M-DI to be married (49% vs. 35%), to
have a banking relationship (66% vs. 58%), and to own a home (47% vs. 45%). With
respect to counterfactual earnings, Figure 2d shows that the age-35 head earnings of
households that later become M-NDI are almost 50% greater than those of households
that later become M-DI, though still substantially lower than those of households that
later become L-NDI.

           Figure 3: Fact 3: M-NDI better o than M-DI on non-health measures

          (a) PSID: Any adverse life event             (b) PSID: Resources at more-severe onset




Notes: Figure 3a presents rates of experiencing an "adverse life event"--head or spouse job loss,
involuntary move, or divorce--at various ages for households in the PSID, by USDP status, health
status, and age at USDP entry. Households are first categorized by their USDP status: whether they
ever received USDP (DI) or never received USDP (NDI). DI are further classified by their health
status at USDP entry and their age at entry, and NDI are further classified by whether they ever
had a more-severe health condition. The figure plots the share experiencing an adverse life event in
a specific age range (e.g., 25­34 and 35­44) among M-NDI and among M-DI who also entered USDP
at that age. The sample sizes for age groups 25­34, 35­44, 45­54, and 55­64 are 896, 1199, 1054,
and 848 for M-NDI; and 97, 211, 243, and 348 for M-DI. Job loss includes "involuntary" reasons
for separation: strike/lockout, laid o/fired, or company going out of business or leaving town
(exact PSID question in Appendix Table I2). Distressed move includes external events like eviction,
contraction of housing (less space/less rent), and other reasons potentially indicating distress, such
as saving money (exact PSID question in Appendix Table I3). Divorce is defined as being married
in a previous survey year but not in this survey year (see Appendix Table I2). Figure 3b presents
rates of marriage, banking relationship, and homeownership one year prior to the year of more-severe
onset for M-NDI (207) and M-DI (240) (exact PSID questions in Appendix Table I4). "More-severe"
is defined as self-reporting that a health condition limits "a lot" the amount of work one can do (as
opposed to "somewhat," "just a little," or "not at all" [or no health condition]). Markers for the two
groups are oset to facilitate easier reading of the graph, not as a representation of relative severity.


   These results suggest that were M-NDI to receive disability benefits, such benefits
would be less valuable than benefits to representative more-severe individuals. Why
do M-NDI not receive disability benefits? From the SIPP-SSA linked data, we find
that about 45% of M-NDI can be explained by mistakes in the decision process:

                                                  17
individuals with more-severe conditions who applied but were rejected by SSA on
medical grounds.24 The remaining 55% of M-NDI do not apply. This self-selection
out of applying for disability benefits appears likely to insure non-health risk: Relative
to M-NDI who apply, M-NDI who do not apply have higher educational achievement
(3.0% vs. 11% college degrees), higher rates of marriage and homeownership (46%
vs. 55%, and 52% vs. 61%), and lower rates of "very low" food security (23% vs. 17%).
Still, a nontrivial share of M-NDI who do not apply are disadvantaged.


5      Normative analysis: Estimating the value of U.S.
       disability programs and their mismatches
5.1     Theory: Value of receiving disability benefits in dierent
        states
Our goal is to estimate the ex ante net value of disability benefits in dierent states
of the world: the extent to which their ex ante value exceeds their cost, including cost
from the distortions created by disability benefits receipt.25 Like all welfare analyses,
ours relies on assumptions for mapping observable characteristics into unobservable
welfare. In our case, the key assumptions are that individuals optimize and that there
are no externalities beyond "fiscal externalities": eects of behavioral responses on net
government spending. In the empirical implementation, discussed in Section 5.2, we
also make assumptions about marginal utility that determine the value of transferring
resources from some states to others and so the insurance value of disability benefits.
Ex ante value of disability benefits in states b : EAW T P (b ). Ex ante "risk
type"  faces a given set of possible ex post states of the world,  . We wish to assess
the ex ante value to  of disability benefits in states b   (e.g., states in which the
individual is a non-recipient with a health shock). To first order, the ex ante value
  24
      From the 2014 SIPP linked to SSA data, among M-NDI who apply and are rejected, 12% are
rejected due to being deemed to have no severe impairment (Step 2 of the disability determination
process), 13% due to being deemed to have capacity for previous work (Step 4), and 67% due to
being deemed to have capacity for any work based on the vocational grid (Step 5).
   25
      To simplify the exposition, we refer to "states of the world" ! rather than "state-times" !t , but
the distributions, probabilities, and conditional means of interest are across state-times: across both
lifetime states of the world and time periods within each lifetime state of the world, as in Chetty
(2006).



                                                  18
to type , in terms of income in states  , of disability benefits in states b is the
EAW T P (b ) that solves

          p ( b |  ) E (   !    W T P! |, b ) = p( |)E (          ! | ,  )EAW T P (b ),      (1)
          |                    {z          } |                       {z                  }
           MB of disability benefits in states b   MC of giving up EAW T P (b ) in states 


where p(·) is the probability operator, ! is the marginal utility of income in state ! ,
W T P! is the ex post value of disability benefits in state ! , and here, with some abuse
of notation, X refers to the event that the realized state ! is in the set of states X
(! 2 X ). The left-hand-side is the ex ante marginal benefit of disability benefits in
b states. The right-hand-side is the ex ante marginal cost of giving up EAW T P (b )
worth of income in  states. Solving for EAW T P (b ) and rearranging yields
                                                   2                                 3
                                                      
                            p ( b |  ) 6
                                       6       !
                                                                   7
                                                                   7
             EAW T P (b ) =           E6                W T P! , b 7 .                       (2)
                            p (  |  ) 4 E ( ! |  ,  )              5
                            | {z }       |   {z       }
                                                        (1+M! )


The first term,  , is the no moral hazard actuarially fair price of income in b states
in terms of income in  states. The term in the expectation that multiplies the ex
post value of disability insurance, W T P! , is one plus the "markup" on transfers from
 to ! :
                                        !     E ( |  ,  )
                                M!                        .                          (3)
                                          E ( |  ,  )
The markup is the amount by which marginal utility in ! exceeds mean marginal
utility in the states used to value disability insurance ( ), as a share of the latter.
One dollar worth of expected income in ! is worth $(1+M! ) of expected income in
 states, so M! is the marginal insurance value of transferring resources across these
states per dollar of such transfers.
Ex ante cost to the government of providing disability benefits in states
b : EAG (b ). The ex post cost to the government of the individual receiving
disability benefits in state ! , G! , includes not only the cost of the disability benefit
itself but also fiscal externalities on other aspects of the government budget from any
induced behavioral responses, such as reductions in the net taxes paid by a recipient's
household due to labor supply responses to receiving disability benefits. The ex ante
expected cost to the government of type  receiving disability benefits in states b ,

                                                   19
per state of the world in which type  pays associated taxes, is

                                 EAG (b ) =  E (G! |, b ).                                     (4)

Ex ante surplus from disability benefits for type  in states b : s (b ). Ex
ante surplus from disability benefits for type  in states b , per state of the world in
which type  pays associated taxes, is

                        s (b ) = g  EAW T P (b )             EAG (b ),                         (5)

where g is the marginal cost to the government of providing $1 worth of surplus
to  through the income tax and transfer system (the "inverse-optimum weight" in
Hendren, 2020).26 The first term, g  EAW T P (b ), is how much it would cost the
government to provide EAW T P (b ) of surplus to  via income tax cuts in  states.
The second term, EAG (b ), is how much it would cost the government to provide
EAW T P (b ) of surplus to  via disability benefits in b states. The dierence,
s (b ), therefore measures the surplus from disability benefits for type  in states b
in terms of net government revenue. It answers: How much net revenue would the
government raise from the combination of (i) providing disability benefits to type 
in states b and (ii) raising taxes on  exactly enough to leave  indierent between
this hypothetical combined disability-insurance-and-tax policy and the status quo?
The surplus is positive if and only if it is cheaper for the government to help  by
providing disability benefits in b states than by cutting 's income taxes in  states.
The surplus is greater when: the value of disability benefits in b states is greater
(greater EAW T P ), the e ciency cost of disability benefits in b states is smaller
(smaller EAG), and the e ciency gain from cutting income taxes in  states is
smaller (greater g ).27
Overall mean surplus to all types: s({b ()}2 ). The overall mean social
surplus from each type  receiving disability benefits in states {b ()}2 , in terms
  26
     The inverse-optimum weight, g , is the marginal rate of transformation from surplus to  to net
revenue to the government through the income tax system. An income tax cut that makes  $1
better o costs the government $g of net revenue, and an income tax hike that makes  $1 worse o
brings the government $g of net revenue. Inverse-optimum weights are the social planning weights
that would rationalize the status quo tax schedule as optimal.
  27
     The ratio of the value of disability benefits to those of a cost-equivalent tax cut is
EAW T P (b )/(M V P F (tax cut)  EAG (b )) = g  EAW T P (b )/EAG (b ) = (s (b ) +
EAG (b ))/EAG (b ).


                                                20
of net government revenue per taxpaying state, is the mean surplus across types,

                                s({b ()}2 ) = E [s (b ())].                                        (6)


5.2     Empirical implementation
Ex post value and cost. Our aim is to quantify, for dierent risk types , the ex
ante surplus from disability benefits, s (b ) from equation (5), in each of four sets of
states of the world: b = h-di 2 {more-severe recipient (M-DI), less-severe recipient
(L-DI), more-severe non-recipient (M-NDI), less-severe non-recipient (L-NDI)}. The
key building blocks are the ex post value and ex post cost of disability benefits in
dierent states.
    We assume that the ex post value of disability benefits in state ! is

                                              DI =0
                                  W T P! = 1(z!     z
                                                    ¯)  b,                                         (7)

         DI =0
where z!       is counterfactual earnings in state ! , z
                                                       ¯ is the USDP earnings limit, and
b is the USDP benefit. The indicator function indicates whether earnings in state
! would exceed the earnings limit if, counterfactually, the individual did not receive
disability benefits and so was not subject to the earnings limit. This is a conservative
first-order approximation that tends to understate the value of a disability benefit-like
expansion of the budget constraint.28 The earnings limit, z     ¯, is the annualized value
of the Social Security Administration's earnings limit for SSDI recipients ($1,260 per
month in 2020, or $15,120 per year).
    As a baseline, the benefit, b, is $13,000, roughly the average annual cash benefit of
disability recipients in recent years. This follows the literature on the welfare eects
of USDP in excluding the health insurance component of disability benefits as a
baseline given the likelihood that for many recipients it mainly displaces other forms
  28
     For simplicity and because of measurement issues with determining SSDI and SSI eligibility for
non-recipients in the PSID, we quantify the value of a SSDI-like expansion of the budget constraint
rather than modeling SSI and SSDI separately. Equation (7) is a conservative approximation to
this value in that it assumes that the ex post value of disability benefits is zero in states in which
counterfactual earnings exceed the earnings limit z   ¯, no matter how small the excess, whereas in
reality someone whose counterfactual earnings were up to (¯     z + b) could work less and consume
more with disability benefits--and so potentially gain significantly. This assumption means that
extended disability receipt in "lifetime states of the world" in which counterfactual earnings exceed
the earnings limit is extremely socially costly on net, since it is all cost and no benefit, year after
year.


                                                  21
of subsidized health care cost sharing they otherwise would have received (see, e.g.,
Liebman, 2015). In Appendix Section C, we consider a wide range of assumptions
about health insurance, including ones in which the health insurance component is
more valuable in states in which the individual has a more-severe health condition.
We find in those cases that the health insurance component tends to modestly reduce
the value of L-DI benefits relative to M-DI benefits (see Appendix Table F2).29
    To be sure, this first-order approximation to the value of disability benefits does
not account for any associated hassle or stigma costs. Moreover, this analysis of the
value of disability benefits in dierent states of the world does not speak directly to
specific policy reforms, since policies are limited by information and incentive com-
patibility constraints in the extent to which they can target particular states. This
analysis does not capture, for example, application responses to policy reforms, which
are potentially important for the costs of such reforms. In Appendix Section D, we
consider three frequently-discussed policy reforms taking into account the limited evi-
dence on application responses: limiting receipt by less-severe individuals, decreasing
benefit levels, and decreasing the allowance rate.
    The ex post cost to the government of the individual receiving disability benefits
in state ! is
                                     G! = b + ! ,                                   (8)

where ! is the increase in non-disability net government spending due to behavioral
responses to receiving disability benefits in state ! , such as losses in net tax revenue
from earnings responses and changes in transfers from other programs.30 We assume
   29
      Health insurance is a much smaller driver of the net value of USDP than of gross government
expenditures on USDP in part because it displaces other forms of health care cost-sharing, including
private health insurance (see the thoughtful discussion in Bound et al., 2004), other sources of
government health insurance, and "informal health insurance" from charity care, bankruptcy, and
bad debt. As Liebman (2015) notes, "[G]iven the expansions of Medicaid eligibility and subsidies
for insurance purchase enacted as part of the Patient Protection and Aordable Care Act of 2010,
many disability recipients would today be receiving free or heavily subsidized health insurance even
if they were not receiving disability benefits" (131). For this reason and others, most papers on
the value of USDP exclude health insurance, including Bound et al. (2004), Chandra and Samwick
(2009), Low and Pistaferri (2015), Cabral and Cullen (2019), and Meyer and Mok (2019). We find
that under plausible assumptions, health insurance decreases the ratio of the per-recipient surplus
of L-DI to M-DI benefits from its baseline value of 0.78 to 0.74­0.77 (see Appendix Table F2).
   30
      Together, these definitions of ex post value (equation (7)) and ex post cost (equation (8)) imply
that the fiscal externality F E --the increase in government costs due to behavioral responses as a
share of the cost were there no behavioral responses (the "mechanical eect" M E )--is F E (b ) =
                       DI =0
EAG (b )         [1 p(z!     z  ¯| ,b )]b+E (   ! |  , b )
M E  (b )   1=                DI =0 z
                         p (z !     ¯| ,b )b
                                                             1.



                                                             22
that ! is 20% of the causal reduction in earnings from receiving disability benefits
                         DI =0   DI =1
in state ! , ! = 0.2  (z!       z!     ). This is an estimate of the reduction in income
tax revenue due to labor supply responses to receiving disability benefits, based on
Hendren and Sprung-Keyser's (2019) estimate of the average marginal net tax and
transfer rate on the reduction in earnings from receiving disability benefits of 20%.31
Key determinants. The key determinants of both the ex post value and the ex
post cost of disability benefits are counterfactual earnings with and without disability
           DI =1         DI =0                                                      DI =0
benefits (z!      and z!       ). To construct counterfactual no-benefit earnings (z!     )
for individuals who actually receive disability benefits, we use French and Song's
(2014) quasi-experimental estimates of the eects of disability benefits on the earnings
of individuals with dierent types of health conditions three years after the disability
decision. We assume that counterfactual no-benefit earnings for individuals who
receive disability benefits are observed (with-benefit) earnings from the PSID plus
French and Song's (2014) estimated mean reduction in earnings due to disability
benefits by detailed health condition. We assume that counterfactual with-benefit
earnings (z DI =1 ) for individuals who do not receive disability benefits are the smaller
of predicted counterfactual earnings based on French and Song (2014) and the SSDI
earnings limit. It could be that these estimates of the eect of being awarded disability
benefits understate the full causal eect of USDP on earnings--for example, if the
long application process reduces the later earnings of individuals who are rejected
(Parsons, 1991; Maestas, Mullen and Strand, 2013). It also could be that the long-
term eects of disability benefits are larger than the short-term eects, especially if
the non-health shocks experienced by less-severe recipients are temporary in nature.
For these reasons, we test the robustness of our conclusions to much larger eects of
disability benefits on earnings, for both more-severe and less-severe recipients, and
find that our key conclusions are robust (see Appendix Table F3).32
  31
      In principle, ! includes changes in transfers from other programs as well, such as SNAP and
TANF. In practice, Bound et al. (2004) find that the change in other program expenditures from
marginal disability applications is less than 1% of the change in tax revenue from the earnings
response.
   32
      One consideration with using these estimates is heterogeneity in the earnings responses to dis-
ability benefits. French and Song (2014) estimate the (within-detailed health category) local average
treatment eects of being awarded disability benefits on earnings among applicants on the margin
of program entry. Applying these estimates to all states likely leads us to overstate earnings re-
sponses in states in which the individual receives disability benefits (since in many the individual
is inframarginal), which tends to decrease the implied value of USDP. Another consideration is the
time horizon. Receipt of disability benefits often lasts many years, so they are a costly way to insure


                                                  23
    The key determinant of the insurance value of disability insurance is marginal
utility ( ! ). We assume that marginal utility is a power function of non-health
consumption, = c (i.e., constant relative risk aversion utility), where is the
coe cient of relative risk aversion. We use PSID data on total household consump-
tion excluding health care, since including health care consumption could artificially
inflate the consumption level of households with more-severe health conditions. We
adjust for household size by dividing household consumption by the square root of
household size. We also impose an annual consumption floor at the 10th percentile
of the consumption distribution. Using observed consumption tends to overstate the
counterfactual no-benefit consumption of disability recipients (since it reflects disabil-
ity benefits), and so to understate their no-benefit marginal utility and the ex ante
value of disability benefits in that state. We measure the value of disability benefits
to the household in terms of income in states in which they do not receive benefits,
 = N DI .
    Our baseline specification uses a coe cient of relative risk aversion of two and
state-independent marginal utility. The functional form of marginal utility plays a
crucial role in determining the value of transferring resources from some states to
others and so in the insurance value of disability insurance. The assumed level of risk
aversion is critical because it determines the magnitude of the gap in marginal utilities,
and so the insurance value of transfers, for any given gap in consumption. For this
reason, we test robustness to dierent levels of risk aversion and to state-dependent
utility and find that our key conclusions are robust (see Appendix Table F4).33
transitory shocks. French and Song (2014) estimate counterfactual earnings for ten years after the
disability award decision and find that earnings actually decline in later years after reaching a max-
imum of about $5,000 per year around year five. This trajectory is in keeping with evidence from
Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) and Sullivan and Von Wachter (2009) that displaced workers
experience long-term earnings losses. Still, we probe the robustness of our estimates and find a pos-
itive surplus from disability benefits in less-severe recipient (L-DI) states for earnings reductions up
to four times those estimated by French and Song (2014). Our results would be qualitatively similar
using estimates from Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013), but they estimate only employment eects
(not earnings eects) by subgroup.
   33
      As Chetty and Looney (2006) emphasize, a small consumption gap is consistent with a large
marginal insurance value if the consumption gap is small because risk aversion is large (or vice
versa). The evidence on state-dependence of marginal utility of consumption is mixed. For example,
Finkelstein, Luttmer and Notowidigdo (2013) conclude that marginal utility is lower when health is
worse, whereas Lillard and Weiss (1997) conclude that it is higher and Brown, Goda and McGarry
(2016) find substantial heterogeneity across ages and disability types. We consider both directions
in our robustness calculations.




                                                  24
Risk types. As a baseline, we assume that an individual's risk type is determined
by their education:  2 { high school dropout, high school graduate, some college,
college plus }. The conceptual experiment is that someone ex ante, knowing only
what education group they will belong to, draws their state of the world from the
cross-sectional distribution of households with a working-age head and with that
education level. In other words, we take the cross-sectional distribution of households
of a given education level to represent the distribution of possible ex post states of
the world that someone with that education level faces ex ante. Ideally, the risk
type would both isolate risk from heterogeneity and separate the ex ante population
into groups with dierent ex ante earning ability, since the income tax and transfer
system can redistribute across groups with dierent earnings levels. We consider
other approaches for defining risk types and find that the key results are robust to
plausible alternatives (see Appendix Table H2). Each risk type 's inverse optimum
weight, g , is the within- average of Hendren's (2020) baseline estimates of inverse
optimum weights by household income centile.


5.3    Empirical estimates of the value of disability benefits in
       dierent states
Figure 4a shows the empirical analogue of the theoretical Figure 1, and Table 1 reports
related estimates. The results reveal two key findings. First, U.S. disability programs
generate substantial ex ante surplus. We estimate that disability benefits as a whole
are 64% more valuable than tax cuts with the same cost to the government would be.
As a result, the annual ex ante surplus from USDP, measured in terms of government
revenue, is $920 per household or $81 billion in aggregate (based on there being about
88 million working-age households in the U.S.). This means that were the government
to abolish USDP, the tax cuts necessary to leave individuals unharmed relative to the
status quo would cost the government $920 per household per year more than what it
would save from abolishing USDP. Second, USDP mismatches with respect to health
are not costly--they are highly valuable. We estimate that mismatches produce an
annual ex ante surplus, in terms of government revenue, of $510 per household or
$45 billion in aggregate. This is mostly attributable to benefits in less-severe states:
Such benefits are worth 57% more than cost-equivalent tax cuts and produce ex ante
surplus of $440 per household. In fact, benefits in less-severe states (L-DI) appear to


                                          25
       Figure 4: Surplus and its determinants: markup and counterfactual earnings

          (a) Surplus per recipient household    (b) Markup and counterfactual earnings




Notes: Figure 4a, the empirical analogue of Figure 1, plots surplus per recipient household,
p( )s/p(b ), against the fraction more-severe for the following sets of states of the world, b :
all states (Pop); states in which the household receives USDP benefits (DI), including when more-
severe (M-DI) and less-severe (L-DI); and states in which the household does not receive USDP
benefits (NDI), including when more-severe (M-NDI) and less-severe (L-NDI). Surplus s, defined
in equation (6), is in units of government revenue per  state, so p( )s/p(b ) is in units of
government revenue per recipient household. Figure 4b plots the mean markup on transfers from
non-recipient states (NDI) to dierent sets of states b , E (M! |b ), against mean counterfactual
no-benefit annual earnings in those states. Markup is defined in equation (3) and calculated us-
ing PSID consumption excluding health care expenditures. Counterfactual no-benefit earnings are
actual observed earnings for NDI states and are inferred from French and Song's (2014) estimates
of the eects of USDP awards on earnings for DI states, as described in the text. In both panels,
marker areas are proportional to population shares and monetary amounts are in 2016 dollars per
year. Sample sizes: 313 M-DI, 438 L-DI, 248 M-NDI, 6259 L-NDI.


be nearly as valuable as benefits in more-severe states (M-DI).
    That USDP mismatches are valuable rather than costly reflects strong selection
into disability receipt conditional on health. On average, health is a strong indica-
tor of the value of receiving disability benefits: Receiving disability benefits in the
average more-severe state generates substantial surplus ($5,000 on average), whereas
receiving disability benefits in the average less-severe state reduces surplus signifi-
cantly ( $16,800 on average). But USDP mismatches are highly-selected subsets of
their respective severity groups. The ex post states of the world in which an indi-
vidual would receive disability benefits despite not having a more-severe condition
(L-DI) have a large surplus from disability benefits ($7,700 on average), while the ex
post states of the world in which an individual would not receive disability benefits
despite having a more-severe condition (M-NDI) have a negative surplus from disabil-
ity benefits ( $2,200 on average). That USDP mismatches are so favorably selected


                                                26
                        Table 1: Value of disability benefits in dierent states

                Mean         Counterfactual    Surplus per       Surplus per      USDP value/value of
               markup          no-benefit     household ($)   recipient HH ($)     cost-equiv tax cuts
              (E (M! ))       earnings ($)      ( p (  ) s)    (p( )s/p(b ))       ((s + EAG)/EAG)
 DI              0.91             5,191            924               8,718                1.64
   M-DI          0.95             3,557            488              9,858                 1.73
   L-DI         0.88              6,623            436               7,719                1.57
 NDI             0.00            57,476          -15,930           -17,819                0.19
   M-NDI         0.64            22,591            -74              -2,203                0.86
   L-NDI        -0.02            58,838          -15,856           -18,429                0.17
 All states      0.10            51,932          -15,005           -15,005                0.29
   M            0.82             11,252            414              4,982                 1.34
   L             0.03            55,620          -15,420           -16,818                0.23
Notes: Table presents statistics (given by the column names) associated with receiving disability
benefits in each of several sets of states of the world (row names). These states are those in which the
household receives USDP benefits (DI), including when more-severe (M-DI) and less-severe (L-DI);
those in which the household does not receive USDP benefits (NDI), including when more-severe
(M-NDI) and less-severe (L-NDI); and all states (All states), including when more-severe (M) and
less-severe (L). Markup is defined in equation (3) and calculated using PSID consumption excluding
health care expenditures. Counterfactual no-benefit earnings are actual observed earnings for NDI
states and are inferred from French and Song's (2014) estimates of the eects of USDP awards on
earnings for DI states, as described in the text. Surplus s, defined in equation (6), is in units of
government revenue per  state, so p( )s is in units of government revenue per household and
p( )s/p(b ) is in units of government revenue per recipient household. Value relative to that of
cost-equivalent tax cuts is derived in footnote 27. Monetary amounts are in 2016 dollars per year.
Sample sizes: 313 M-DI, 438 L-DI, 248 M-NDI, 6259 L-NDI, 561 M, 6697 L.


on the value of receiving disability benefits is in keeping with the findings from the
positive analysis that USDP mismatches are favorably selected on a wide variety of
non-health factors.
    Figure 4b decomposes the selection on value into its two key determinants: marginal
utility and counterfactual earnings. USDP recipients as a whole, and less-severe re-
cipients (L-DI) in particular, are highly selected in terms of both marginal utility and
counterfactual earnings, and so in terms of both the insurance benefit and distortion
cost of receiving disability benefits. The markup on transfers from non-recipients
to L-DI states is 0.88, similar to that on transfers to M-DI states of 0.95. Mean
counterfactual annual earnings in L-DI states is $6,600, versus $3,600 in M-DI states
and $57,500 in NDI states. Hence, the large surplus from benefits in L-DI states is
driven not only by low consumption but also by low counterfactual earnings in those
states. Strong selection on counterfactual earnings is crucial because of the earnings
limit, which involves large private and fiscal externality costs in high-earning states.

                                                  27
Selection into USDP receipt on both marginal utility and counterfactual earnings is
so strong that awards to both M-DI and L-DI would generate positive surplus even
if markups were just 25 percent of their estimated values (Appendix Table F4) or
earnings responses were four times French and Song's (2014) estimates (Appendix
Table F3).
    The main conclusions that U.S. disability programs and their mismatches with
respect to health are highly valuable hold not only overall, averaging across the dif-
ferent risk (education) types, but also for each risk type individually (see Appendix
Table F1). They also hold under a wide range of assumptions about the key in-
gredients of the calculations, including the value and cost of the health insurance
component (Appendix Table F2); earnings responses to receiving benefits (Appendix
Table F3); risk aversion and state-dependence of utility (Appendix Table F4); the def-
inition of severity (Appendix Table H1); and the definition of risk types (Appendix
Table H2). Including the health insurance component tends to increase the surplus
from both M-DI and L-DI benefits, somewhat more for M-DI than L-DI given their
greater consumption of health care. As a result, the ratio of the per-recipient sur-
plus of L-DI to M-DI benefits falls from its baseline value of 0.78 to 0.74­0.77 when
using our main assumptions about the health insurance component and to 0.54­0.71
when using extreme, ratio-minimizing assumptions across the board (see Appendix
Section C for more details).


5.4    Key drivers: Non-health risk and selective applications
Non-health risk as a driver: About one-half of the value of USDP comes
from insuring risks other than that of having a more-severe health con-
dition. We investigate the connections between mismatches with respect to health
and insurance against health and non-health risk with a decomposition analysis. For
a given set of actual or hypothetical disability benefits in states b   , decom-
pose the benefit received in a particular state ! into the sum of (i) the mean benefit
received in states in the same health category as ! , h! 2 {L, M}, and (ii) a within-
health category transfer from states in which the individual does not receive a benefit
(h = h! and  b ) to those in which they do (h = h! and b ):

                   b! =       E ( b| h = h ! )        + [ b!    E (b|h = h! )] .   (9)
                              |       {z    }           |          {z        }
                          Health-contingent benefit       Within-health transfer


                                                 28
With this decomposition, the markup on transfers from all of 's states ( ) to states
b   can be decomposed as
                                              
                     p ( b | h )  b              p ( b | h )              h                                    i
 M (b ) = Covh                  , E |h + Eh                  [1   p(b |h)] E b|b , h              E b |  b , h   ,   (10)
                      p ( b )                     p ( b )
          |                {z          } |                                  {z                                   }
              Insurance against health risk                       Insurance against non-health risk



where b  E ( ) is marginal utility normalized to have unit mean in the population,
and the conditioning on  has been suppressed for notational ease. Details of the
derivation are in Appendix Section E.34
     The overall markup, M (b ), is the sum of two components. The "insurance
against health risk" component, from the health-contingent benefit in equation (9), is
from insuring the risk of having a more-severe health condition ("health risk"). The
more concentrated are benefits in states in which the individual has a more-severe
health condition (greater p(b |M ) relative to p(b |L)), the greater the insurance of
health risk. This component is necessarily reduced by mismatches with respect to
health, which by definition reduce the targeting of more-severe states. The "insurance
against non-health risk" component, from the within-health transfer in equation (9),
is from insuring "non-health risk," i.e., risk within health categories.35 The greater the
marginal utility gap between recipient
                                    and       non-recipient
                                                            states
                                                                 within more-severe and
less-severe states (i.e., greater E b|b , h       E b|  b , h ), the more valuable the
insurance of non-health risk. This component is zero in the absence of mismatches.
Mismatches make this component positive (negative) if appropriately-weighted se-
lection into receiving disability benefits on marginal utility conditional on health is
positive (negative).
     Table 2 shows the results. The insurance that USDP provide against the risk of
having a more-severe health condition is valuable, contributing 28 percentage points
  34
      We calculate the markups on transfers within each education group and take the mean across
education groups. These markups measure value in terms of income in all states of the world,
M (  b ;  )  E ( |  ,  b ) E ( | )
                    E ( | )        , rather than in terms of income in NDI states. We do this because it
simplifies equation (10) and facilitates comparison across dierent groups of benefits. It also leads
to somewhat smaller overall markups.
   35
      We term this component "non-health risk" partly as a shorthand for "within-health category
risk" and partly because the evidence suggests that much of this component is driven by factors that
would not ordinarily be called "health," such as labor market shocks. But it is important to keep
in mind that this component is technically within-health category risk, which both includes some
health risk (e.g., some states in a given health category have higher out-of-pocket health spending
than others) and excludes some non-health risk (to the extent that a risk is positively associated
with having a more-severe health condition, part of it is included in the "health risk" component).


                                                           29
           Table 2: Decomposition of the markup on transfers into dierent states
                         Surplus per recip ($)   Markup,   Contrib from insuring:   Share from insuring:
                           (p( )s/p(b ))         E ( M )   Health   Non-health      Health   Non-health
      DI                        8,718             0.75      0.28        0.48         37%       63%
        M-DI                    9,858             0.78     0.66         0.12         85%       15%
        L-DI                    7,719             0.73     -0.06        0.79         -8%       108%

      M-NDI                     -2,203            0.48      0.66        -0.18       136%       -36%

      Health-DI                 4,982             0.66      0.66        0.00        100%        0%

      Random-App-DI             -6,143            0.22      0.22        0.01         98%        2%

      Earnings-Test-DI          5,857             0.62      0.34        0.28         55%        45%
Notes: Table presents social surplus per recipient, overall markup, and markup components and
shares from insurance of health and non-health risk associated with disability benefits in each of
several sets of states of the world, defined by the row. Contributions of insurance of health and
non-health risk to overall markup are defined in equation (10). Shares of markup from insurance of
each type of risk is the contribution of insurance of that type of risk to the overall markup as a share
of the overall markup. The overall markup, E (M ), is the across-risk group (education) average of
the average within-risk group markup on transfers from all states (not just NDI states, as in the
main analysis) to the states in the table row. Surplus s (from equation (6)) is in units of government
revenue per  state per year, so p( )s/p(b ) is in units of government revenue per recipient per
year. "Health-DI" is a hypothetical program that pays benefits if and only if the individual has a
severe health condition. "Random-App-DI" is a hypothetical program whose award probabilities are
a function of severity and age, as estimated by Low and Pistaferri (2015), and with no systematic
selection into application, rather than the actual selective applications to DI. That Random-App-DI
provides a small amount of insurance against non-health risk arises from the dependence of its award
probabilities on age. "Earnings-Test-DI" is a hypothetical program whose award probabilities are
a function of severity and age, as estimated by Low and Pistaferri (2015), and with no systematic
selection into application (like Random-App-DI) except that the individual applies only in states in
which counterfactual no-DI earnings are below two times the SSDI earnings test threshold. This is a
simple model of the type of selection that an earnings test might produce. Sample sizes: 313 M-DI,
438 L-DI, 248 M-NDI, 561 Health-DI, 1060 Random-App-DI, 675 Earnings-Test-DI.


to the total markup. But the insurance that USDP provide against other risks con-
tributes even more: 48 percentage points, 63% of the total markup. Even when we use
additional health and disability measures to define finer health categories in equation
(10), we still find that a majority of the insurance value of USDP comes from insur-
ing risks within states with the same realizations of measured health. These results,
which are in keeping with the earlier result that roughly half of the ex ante surplus
from USDP comes from mismatches, suggest that a majority of the overall insurance
value of USDP comes from insuring risks beyond that of having a more-severe health
condition.
    Mismatches with respect to health drive this insurance of non-health risk, albeit

                                                     30
at the expense of necessarily reducing insurance against the risk of having a more-
severe health condition. Compared to a hypothetical, infeasible program that would
perfectly target states with more-severe health conditions ("Health-DI"), the across-
health component of USDP is less than one-half as large (0.28 for USDP versus 0.66
for Health-DI). Yet USDP more than makes up for their lesser insurance of the risk of
having a more-severe health condition by providing highly valuable insurance against
other risks. Insurance of other risks contributes 0.48 to the USDP markup (whereas
by definition Health-DI does not insure risks within health categories), elevating the
overall markup and surplus per recipient of USDP above those of Health-DI (0.75
versus 0.66 and $8,700 versus $5,000, respectively).
    Although both types of mismatches insure non-health risk, the vast majority of
such insurance comes from L-DI benefits. The "L-DI" row of the table decomposes
the markup on transfers from all states to L-DI states, using the same approach used
to decompose the overall markup (substituting "L-DI" for "DI" in equation (10)).
L-DI benefits exacerbate health risk, by transferring from all states to lower-marginal
utility L states, but provide highly valuable insurance against non-health risk, by
transferring from L-NDI states to much higher-marginal utility L-DI states. The
insurance against non-health risk provided by L-DI benefits accounts for over half
of the overall USDP markup and 85% of the "insurance of non-health risk" markup
component.
Selective applications as a driver: the insurance of non-health risk and
overall value of USDP are driven primarily by strong selection into appli-
cation (as opposed to selective awards given applications). We investigate
the importance of selective applications by comparing USDP to a hypothetical dis-
ability program with no systematic selection into application ("Random-App-DI").36
The results, shown in the second-to-last row of Table 2, suggest that selection into
application plays a crucial role in driving the overall value of USDP. Whereas USDP
generate $8,700 per recipient worth of annual surplus, Random-App-DI would gener-
ate negative surplus ( $6,100)--i.e., individuals would prefer cost-equivalent tax cuts
  36
    To simulate the distribution of benefits under Random-App-DI, we use Low and Pistaferri's
(2015) estimates of USDP award success probabilities, which are a function of an applicant's work
limitation status and age, and assume that each applicant applies for Random-App-DI up to two
times. Because actual USDP awards account for factors beyond those in Low and Pistaferri's
(2015) model (e.g., through the vocational grid), this analysis does not isolate the eect of selective
applications alone but the combined eect with richer award decisions as well.



                                                 31
to Random-App-DI. The dierence is driven almost entirely by USDP insuring risks
beyond that of having a more-severe health condition. The USDP markup exceeds
the Random-App-DI markup by 53 percentage points, 47 percentage points (89%) of
which are from within-health transfers. Selection into application is responsible for
the vast majority of the insurance against non-health risk provided by USDP, which
itself is highly important to the overall value of USDP. Of course, selective award
decisions likely play a major role in shaping selection into application, so the impor-
tance of selection into application does not imply that selective award decisions are
unimportant. Rather, it means that the net eect of USDP award decisions and other
features--including restrictions on applicants and recipients, awareness, hassle costs,
and stigma--is strongly favorable selection into application that greatly increases the
value of USDP.
    Which of these features in particular explains the strong, value-enhancing selec-
tion into application for disability benefits? Unfortunately there is little in the way of
compelling variation that would facilitate a direct empirical investigation of this im-
portant issue. But indirect evidence suggests that the stringent earnings limit could
potentially play a key role. We simulate the eects of the type of selection that an
earnings limit might produce by considering a hypothetical program ("Earnings-Test-
DI") that is equivalent to Random-App-DI except that the individual applies only in
states in which counterfactual no-benefit earnings are below two times the earnings
limit.37 The last row of Table 2 shows the results. Whereas Random-App-DI would
be quite costly (surplus per recipient of $6,100), Earnings-Test-DI would be quite
valuable (surplus per recipient of $5,900). The dierence arises because the assumed
self-selection out of application by individuals in states with high counterfactual no-
benefit earnings avoids the high-cost, low-value benefits in those states, and it greatly
increases the extent to which disability benefits insure non-health risk. To be clear,
  37
    The results are qualitatively similar if the threshold for applying is one or three times the
earnings limit instead. As with Random-App-DI, we report the results of a simulation in which
individuals rejected once re-apply a second time, but the results are similar if individuals apply only
once or up to three times. This simple model of selection may understate the screening eects of
the earnings limit by ignoring dynamics. Given the substantial fixed costs to individuals with non-
negligible earning opportunities of applying for disability benefits (especially the long application
process during which earnings must be low), the earnings limit likely deters applications even in
many states in which current no-benefit earnings are low but anticipated future earnings are higher.
Strong selection into application on the basis of future no-benefit earnings is consistent with French
and Song's (2014) finding that rejected applicants on the margin of program entry have low earnings
throughout the ten-year period following their application.



                                                  32
these results provide suggestive evidence on the potential screening eects of an earn-
ings limit alone and so do not isolate the marginal eect of the earnings limit on top
of the many other tags and screens of U.S. disability programs.


5.5    Policy implications
Together, the findings from the positive and normative analyses paint a picture of
U.S. disability programs that target well on the key determinants of the value of
receiving disability benefits. Subject to the caveats that we have discussed, our
results have important implications for some of the biggest questions in the debate
over these programs.
Is the provision of benefits to individuals with less-severe conditions di-
luting the value of U.S. disability programs? Our results suggest that the
benefits received by less-severe recipients are not diluting the value of USDP, at least
not in terms of insurance and welfare, but rather providing highly valuable insur-
ance against a variety of major risks. To the extent that more-severe recipients are
considered deserving of disability benefits on the basis of the ex ante value of such
benefits, less-severe recipients appear nearly as deserving. To be sure, our results
do not imply that USDP should reduce eorts to target individuals who have severe
health conditions or increase eorts to target based on non-health factors. The value
of such changes to tags or screens depends on the induced application responses, the
evidence on which is unfortunately sparse. It could be that eorts to target individu-
als with severe health conditions are an important driver of the strong selection into
application on non-health risk that we find to be so crucial to the value of USDP.
Would proposed reforms to U.S. disability programs increase or decrease
social welfare? We quantify the value of proposed reforms to U.S. disability pro-
grams, with details in Appendix Section D and results in Appendix Table F5. The
results suggest that proposed reforms to decrease benefit levels, allowance rates, or
awards to individuals with less-severe health conditions would each significantly de-
crease social surplus. Even a costless elimination of awards to individuals with less-
severe health conditions would decrease social surplus. That is not to say, however,
that increasing eligibility would increase social surplus, since we find that extreme




                                          33
selectivity is crucial to the value of USDP.38 Of course, a distinct question, and one
that this paper is not equipped to answer, is whether U.S. disability programs should
be expanded. Such a normative judgment depends on considerations beyond insur-
ance and welfare, including non-welfarist considerations about the appropriate role
of disability programs or about the extent to which dierent individuals or states
are deserving of benefits. Our results suggest that such considerations would have
to be fairly strong, in terms of their eects on generalized social marginal welfare
weights (Saez and Stantcheva, 2016), in order to overturn our main conclusions. To
overturn the conclusion that disability benefits to less-severe recipients are valuable
would require that each dollar of such benefits be viewed as being worth less than
65 cents. To overturn the conclusion that disability benefits as a whole are valuable
would require that each dollar of benefits to less-severe recipients be viewed as being
worth less than 25 cents.
Are disability programs the best way to insure non-health risk? Our finding
that U.S. disability programs provide cost-eective insurance against non-health risk
does not necessarily mean that they are the most cost-eective way to do so. The
earnings limit in particular makes disability benefits a costly way to insure risks that
do not involve prolonged low earnings prospects. For individuals with high earnings
capacity, insuring them through other means--perhaps by expanding UI or creating a
new wage insurance program--could be valuable. But the available evidence suggests
that the vast majority of disability recipients, including those with less-severe health
conditions, would earn little even if not receiving disability benefits.39 Moreover,
expansions of alternative programs would have e ciency costs of their own and may
  38
      An additional consideration for the eects of disability insurance on social welfare is possible
redistribution value. Throughout the paper, we have focused on e ciency--insurance of risk within
risk types, setting aside any redistribution across risk types--since redistribution across risk types
can be accomplished by the income tax and transfer system. But without osetting changes in
other policies, expanding USDP would redistribute from higher- to lower-ability groups, since lower-
ability groups both are more likely to receive disability benefits and pay lower absolute amounts
of the payroll taxes that fund USDP. Such redistribution would increase the overall social welfare
value of USDP under social welfare functions that value redistribution more than the income tax
and transfer implicitly does. We find that accounting for redistribution increases the value of USDP
to someone behind the veil by about 30%.
   39
      Only about 20­30% of SSDI recipients on the margin of allowance would earn at least the
"substantial gainful activity" threshold (about $16,000 in 2021) if they did not receive SSDI (Maestas,
Mullen and Strand, 2013; French and Song, 2014). This share would presumably be lower for
inframarginal recipients and at higher earnings thresholds, though we are unaware of direct evidence
on either.



                                                  34
lack the advantageous targeting properties that we find for USDP.40
    Setting aside overall welfare eects, how might changes in other programs aect
the value of U.S. disability programs? We provide suggestive evidence by estimating
how the value of disability benefits to less-severe individuals changes as certain sub-
sets of less-severe individuals are excluded. If individuals with less-severe conditions
who received UI prior to receiving disability benefits did not switch to disability--
for example, due to a major UI extension--the estimated surplus from L-DI benefits
would fall by 33%. Excluding individuals with less-severe conditions who experienced
an observable job loss prior to receiving disability benefits but did not receive UI--as
might occur under a major expansion of UI eligibility--would reduce the estimated
surplus from L-DI benefits by an additional 14 percentage points. While only sugges-
tive, these results indicate that USDP might continue to provide substantial insurance
against non-health risk even if there were large expansions of programs designed to
insure non-health risk.41


6      Conclusion
The public debate over disability insurance has centered on concerns about indi-
viduals with less-severe health conditions receiving benefits. In this paper, we go
beyond health risk alone to quantify the insurance provided by U.S. disability pro-
grams against all risks, non-health as well as health. We find that not only are these
programs highly valuable, but their mismatches with respect to health, including ben-
efits to individuals with less-severe health conditions, actually increase their value.
  40
     Acknowledging the substantial uncertainty about the fiscal externality costs of changes in USDP,
our analysis of potential changes in USDP policy, reported in Appendix Table F5, suggests that
USDP provide more cost-eective insurance than UI does. Our estimates of the ex ante MVPFs
of each of three key dimensions of disability policy--paying benefits to individuals with less-severe
conditions, changing benefit levels, and changing the award threshold--are about 1.42. This signif-
icantly exceeds Hendren and Sprung-Keyser's (2019) estimates of the ex ante MVPF of changes in
UI (main estimate of 0.61 with range 0.53­0.74). The higher MVPFs of changes in USDP arise from
reinforcing eects of higher insurance value markups (0.88­0.91 for USDP versus 0.20 for UI) and
lower fiscal externality costs (0.34 for USDP versus 0.95 for UI).
  41
     Of course, the changes in other programs required to have such an impact on disability enrollment
might be large given the long-lasting nature of disability receipt, the persistently low earnings among
individuals who apply for disability benefits, and the evidence that changes in UI have little eect
on disability receipt (Mueller, Rothstein and Von Wachter, 2016). Note also that expansions of
other programs would not necessarily decrease the value of USDP. They might even increase it by
improving USDP targeting further still, as Low and Pistaferri (2015) find in their structural model.



                                                  35
This is because disability recipients with less-severe conditions are a highly selected
group: Compared to non-recipients, less-severe recipients are more likely to have ex-
perienced adverse non-health events, are less likely to have the resources to insure
those events, and are more likely to have low earnings even if not for receiving dis-
ability benefits. In fact, recipients with less-severe conditions are so highly selected
that they look similar to or worse o than recipients with more-severe conditions on
these dimensions.
    As a result of this strong selection, disability benefits to both more-severe and less-
severe recipients produce insurance value substantially greater than distortion cost,
and so are significantly more valuable ex ante than cost-equivalent tax cuts. Our
results suggest that about one-half of the value of U.S. disability programs comes
from insuring non-health risk. For this reason, reforms to increase the emphasis of
these programs on health could significantly reduce their ex ante value.
    The importance of non-health risk for the value of U.S. disability programs may
be just one example of a broader phenomenon. No program exists in a vacuum: Its
eects reflect the diversity of risks in the economy, how well insured those risks are by
other programs and institutions, and how its tags and screens select on those risks.
We find that U.S. disability programs insure risks well beyond health, and that this
"incidental" role is central to their overall value. Other programs might be similar
in having their costs and benefits driven in large part by factors outside of their core
aims. The extent to which they do is an empirical question, one that future research
could investigate using similar methods.




                                            36
References
Alatas, Vivi, Ririn Purnamasari, Matthew Wai-Poi, Abhijit Banerjee,
 Benjamin A Olken, and Rema Hanna. 2016. "Self-Targeting: Evidence from
 A Field Experiment in Indonesia." Journal of Political Economy, 124(2): 371­427.

Autor, David H, and Mark G Duggan. 2003. "The Rise in the Disability
 Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(1): 157­206.

Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. "The Growth in the Social Secu-
 rity Disability Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 20(3): 71­96.

Benitez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky, and John Rust. 2004. "How Large
 Are the Classification Errors in the Social Security Disability Award Process?"
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. "Psychological Frictions and
 the Incomplete Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from An IRS Field Experi-
 ment." American Economic Review, 105(11): 3489­3529.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. "The Impact of Economic
  Conditions on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom
  and Bust." American Economic Review, 92(1): 27­50.

Bound, John, Julie Berry Cullen, Austin Nichols, and Lucie Schmidt. 2004.
 "The Welfare Implications of Increasing Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity."
 Journal of Public Economics, 88(12): 2487­2514.

Brown, Jerey R, Gopi Shah Goda, and Kathleen McGarry. 2016. "Hetero-
 geneity in State-Dependent Utility: Evidence from Strategic Surveys." Economic
 Inquiry, 54(2): 847­861.

Cabral, Marika, and Mark R Cullen. 2019. "Estimating the Value of Public
 Insurance Using Complementary Private Insurance." American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 11(3): 88­129.



                                         37
Chandra, Amitabh, and Andrew A Samwick. 2009. "Disability Risk and the
 Value of Disability Insurance." In Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Conse-
 quences of Declining Disability among the Elderly. 295­336. University of Chicago
 Press.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Yiming Li, and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2018. "Disability
 Benefit Take-Up and Local Labor Market Conditions." Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 100(3): 416­423.

Chetty, Raj. 2006. "A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance."
 Journal of Public Economics, 90(10­11): 1879­1901.

Chetty, Raj, and Adam Looney. 2006. "Consumption Smoothing and the Welfare
 Consequences of Social Insurance in Developing Economies." Journal of Public
 Economics, 90(12): 2351­2356.

Currie, Janet. 2006. "The Take-Up of Social Benefits." In Public Policy and the
 Income Distribution. , ed. Alan J. Auerbach, David Card and John M. Quigley,
 80­148. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation Publications.

Deshpande, Manasi, and Yue Li. 2019. "Who is Screened Out? Application Costs
 and the Targeting of Disability programs." American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 11(4): 213­48.

Deshpande, Manasi, Tal Gross, and Yalun Su. 2019. "Disability and Distress:
 The Eect of Disability Programs on Financial Outcomes." National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Diamond, Peter, and Eytan Sheshinski. 1995. "Economic Aspects of Optimal
 Disability Benefits." Journal of Public Economics, 57(1): 1­23.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Matthew J Notowidigdo. 2019. "Take-Up and Target-
  ing: Experimental Evidence from SNAP." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134(3): 1505­1556.

Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013.
  "What Good Is Wealth Without Health? The Eect of Health on the Marginal
  Utility of Consumption." Journal of the European Economic Association, 11: 221­
  258.

                                       38
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F. P. Luttmer. 2019. "The
  Value of Medicaid: Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Exper-
  iment." Journal of Political Economy, 127(6): 2836­2874.

Finkelstein, Amy, Neale Mahoney, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2018.
  "What Does (Formal) Health Insurance Do, and for Whom?" Annual Review of
  Economics, 10(1): 261­286.

French, Eric, and Jae Song. 2014. "The Eect of Disability Insurance Receipt on
  Labor Supply." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 291­337.

Gelber, Alexander, Timothy Moore, and Alexander Strand. 2018. "Disability
 Insurance Income Saves Lives." Unpublished Manuscript.

Greszler, Rachel, Robert E Mo t, and Nina Owcharenko Schaefer. 2019.
 "Social Security and Health Care Entitlement Reform." Blueprint for Balance: A
 Federal Budget for Fiscal Year 2020.

Hendren, Nathaniel. 2020. "Measuring Economic E ciency Using Inverse-
 Optimum Weights." Journal of Public Economics, 187: 104198.

Hendren, Nathaniel, and Ben Sprung-Keyser. 2019. "A Unified Welfare Analy-
 sis of Government Policies." National Bureau of Economic Research NBER Working
 Papers 26144.

Homono, Tatiana, and Jason Somerville. 2020. "Program Recertification
 Costs: Evidence from SNAP." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan. 1993. "Earn-
  ings Losses of Displaced Workers." The American Economic Review, 685­709.

Jones, Maggie R., and James P. Ziliak. 2019. "The Antipoverty Impact of the
  EITC: New Estimates from Survey and Administrative Tax Records." Center for
  Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau Working Papers 19­14.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2011. "Transfer Program
 Complexity and the Take-Up of Social Benefits." American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 3(1): 54­90.


                                       39
Lieber, Ethan MJ, and Lee M Lockwood. 2019. "Targeting with In-Kind
  Transfers: Evidence from Medicaid Home Care." American Economic Review,
  109(4): 1461­85.

Liebman, Jerey B. 2015. "Understanding the Increase in Disability Insurance Ben-
  efit Receipt in the United States." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2): 123­50.

Lillard, Lee A, and Yoram Weiss. 1997. "Uncertain Health and Survival: Ef-
  fects on End-of-Life Consumption." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
  15(2): 254­268.

Livermore, Gina, David Stapleton, Henry Claypool, et al. 2009. Health in-
  surance and health care access before and after SSDI entry. Commonwealth Fund.

Low, Hamish, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2015. "Disability Insurance and the Dynamics
  of the Incentive Insurance Trade-o." American Economic Review, 105(10): 2986­
  3029.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does
 Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Es-
 timate Causal Eects of SSDI Receipt." American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797­
 1829.

McCrery, Jim, and Earl Pomeroy. 2016. "SSDI Solutions: Ideas to Strengthen
 the Social Security Disability Insurance Program."

Meyer, Bruce D, and Wallace KC Mok. 2019. "Disability, Earnings, Income
 and Consumption." Journal of Public Economics, 171: 51­69.

Meyer, Bruce D, Wallace KC Mok, and James X Sullivan. 2015. "Household
 Surveys in Crisis." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4): 199­226.

Mueller, Andreas I, Jesse Rothstein, and Till M Von Wachter. 2016. "Un-
 employment Insurance and Disability Insurance in the Great Recession." Journal
 of Labor Economics, 34(S1): S445­S475.

Parsons, Donald O. 1991. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insur-
 ance Applicants: Comment." The American Economic Review, 81(5): 1419­1426.


                                         40
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle, and Mark Votruba. 2009. "The Eect of Plant Down-
 sizing on Disability Pension Utilization." Journal of the European Economic Asso-
 ciation, 7(4): 754­785.

Riley, Gerald F. 2006. "Health insurance and access to care among Social Security
 Disability Insurance beneficiaries during the Medicare waiting period." INQUIRY:
 The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 43(3): 222­
 230.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2016. "Generalized Social Marginal
  Welfare Weights for Optimal Tax Theory." American Economic Review, 106(1): 24­
  45.

Short, Pamela Farley, and France Marie Weaver. 2008. "Transitioning To
  Medicare Before Age Sixty-Five: The question is whether to eliminate, par-
  tially or entirely, the two-year waiting period for Medicare." Health Aairs,
  27(Suppl1): w175­w184.

Sullivan, Daniel, and Till Von Wachter. 2009. "Job Displacement and Mortality:
  An Analysis Using Administrative Data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(3): 1265­1306.

United States O ce of Management and Budget. 2020. Fiscal Year 2021: A
 Budget for America's Future. U.S. Government Publishing O ce.

Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011. "Trends in Em-
 ployment and Earnings of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security
 Disability Insurance Program." American Economic Review, 101(7): 3308­29.




                                       41
