                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INNOVATION AND HEALTH DISPARITIES DURING AN EPIDEMIC:
                            THE CASE OF HIV

                                      Barton Hamilton
                                      Andrés Hincapié
                                      Emma C. Kalish
                                   Nicholas W. Papageorge

                                      Working Paper 28864
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28864


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We are grateful for helpful suggestions and comments from seminar participants in the Hopkins
Economics Applied Micro Brownbag Seminar. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Barton Hamilton, Andrés Hincapié, Emma C. Kalish, and Nicholas W. Papageorge.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Health Disparities During an Epidemic: The Case of HIV
Barton Hamilton, Andrés Hincapié, Emma C. Kalish, and Nicholas W. Papageorge
NBER Working Paper No. 28864
May 2021
JEL No. I12,I14,I20,J2,O31

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine whether medical innovation can reinforce existing health disparities by
disproportionately benefiting socioeconomically advantaged patients. The reason is that less
advantaged patients often do not use new medications. This may be due to high costs of new
drugs, but could also reflect differences in how side effects of new treatments interact with labor
supply. To investigate, we develop a dynamic lifecycle model in which the effect of medical
treatment on labor supply varies across sociodemographic groups. We estimate the model using
rich data on treatment choices and employment decisions of men infected with HIV. In the
model, treatments can improve long-run health, but can also cause immediate side effects that
interact with the utility cost of work. Estimates indicate that HIV-infected men often forego
medication to avoid side effects, in part to remain employed. This effect is stronger for people
with fewer years of education, leading to lower use of treatment and worse health outcomes. As a
result, while a breakthrough HIV treatment - known as HAART - improved lifetime utility for all
patients, it disproportionately benefitted those with higher levels of completed education, thereby
reinforcing existing inequality. A counterfactual subsidy that increases non-labor income reduces
employment for all education groups, but only increases adoption of HAART and improves
health among lower-education individuals, who face a starker health-work tradeoff.

Barton Hamilton                                          Emma C. Kalish
Olin Business School                                     Johns Hopkins University
Washington University in St. Louis                       ekalish1@jhu.edu
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Dr.                                        Nicholas W. Papageorge
St. Louis, MO 63130                                      Department of Economics
hamiltonb@wustl.edu                                      Johns Hopkins University
                                                         3400 N. Charles Street
Andrés Hincapié                                          Baltimore, MD 21218 and
Department of Economics                                  IZA
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill              and also NBER
CB # 3305 Gardner Hall                                   papageorge@jhu.edu
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
andres.hincapie@unc.edu
1    Introduction

Research across several disciplines documents persistent health disparities across sociodemographic
groups, such as race, ethnicity, gender identity, income or education. For example, people without
a high school diploma are 6-7 times more likely to be in poor or fair health compared to those
with a bachelors degree or higher (Goldman and Smith, 2011). Health disparities reinforce exist-
ing economic inequality and are costly to society through a variety of channels, including public
health care expenditures, gaps in employment and lower labor market productivity (LaVeist et al.,
2011; Nanney et al., 2019).
    Health disparities also have implications for how we should assess the impact of medical break-
throughs, including their societal value (Horne et al., 2015). Given health gaps across socio-
demographic groups, an accessible and widely-adopted innovation could presumably reduce in-
equality by disproportionately benefitting sicker people who tend to be more disadvantaged. How-
ever, many new medications are not widely accessible (Chang and Lauderdale, 2009; Glied and
Lleras-Muney, 2008). For example, low-income patients may be unable to afford effective but
pricey new treatments. This not only reinforces existing health disparities, but also implies that the
value of medical innovation varies across socio-demographic groups. Often, however, such varia-
tion is ignored and an innovation is valued using the number of patients and life-years gained per
patient (Murphy and Topel, 2006; Testa and Simonson, 1996). Yet, for people who cannot afford a
new treatment, its value is essentially nil.
    Understanding variation in the value of medical innovation across sociodemographic groups
requires a broad assessment of reasons why new treatments are often not widely adopted by disad-
vantaged patients. Costs are one crucial factor, but there are other important barriers to adoption
that are often neglected (Chang and Lauderdale, 2009; Glied and Lleras-Muney, 2008; Groeneveld
et al., 2006). Consider the link between medical innovation, health investments and labor supply
(Garthwaite, 2012). New drugs often have side effects that make work difficult, which means that
individuals face a health-work tradeoff that compels them to take risks with their health by refrain-
ing from using effective treatments (Papageorge, 2016). To the degree that this tradeoff is starker
for more disadvantaged groups, it constitutes a channel through which the benefits of medical in-
novation are limited to more advantaged patients, potentially reinforcing existing inequality. This
channel also means that simply lowering costs of treatment may not be enough to reduce health
disparities. Rather, policies affecting employment or labor market structures may be required.1
    This paper investigates sociodemographic differences in the value of medical innovation in the
    1 The Covid-19 pandemic also highlights the interaction between labor market choices and health disparities, since
many low income employees were unable to work from home and so faced greater exposure to coronavirus through
their jobs (Cevik et al., 2020; Lou et al., 2020; Papageorge et al., 2021).



                                                          1
context of the AIDS epidemic that began in the United States in the 1980s. We use HIV and the
AIDS epidemic as an historical analogy to draw lessons about health behaviors and pandemics
in general, including the current health crisis.2 Like the Covid-19 pandemic, the AIDS epidemic
exacerbated existing health disparities. For example, in the early 1990s the 6-month mortality rate
for HIV-infected (henceforth: HIV-positive or HIV+) college graduate men was less than half that
for HIV+ men without a college degree. Moreover, the AIDS epidemic allows us to investigate
whether a breakthrough medical treatment (in this case, the introduction of HAART, or highly
active anti-retroviral treatment) eliminates education-related health disparities.3 If disparities do
indeed persist after this innovation, does this reflect individual factors such as limited access to
treatment, medication preferences, labor market concerns, or a combination of these channels?
    Using individual-level panel data covering the period from 1990-2008, we construct and es-
timate a lifecycle model of repeated medication and labor supply decisions. The introduction of
HAART in 1996 marked a massive improvement in effectiveness over existing treatments, but
also had side effects (e.g., nausea, fever, diarrhea and cramping) that potentially interfered with
employment. Thus, the model allows side effects along with health to interact with labor supply
decisions. Key model parameters, including those governing health-work tradeoffs, can vary by
education, capturing variation in the benefits of HAART. Finally, the model incorporates insurance
and out-of-pocket treatment costs to capture how price can reduce medication use. Notice, the
model frames non-use of effective medicine as reflecting a set of tradeoffs. This goes against a
typical narrative whereby behaviors underlying health disparities are implicitly characterized as
faulty decision-making, carelessness or recklessness among disadvantaged -- and often marginal-
ized -- groups (Adimora and Schoenbach, 2002; Robinson and Moodie-Mills, 2012; Stafford and
Wood, 2017).
     We match the model to rich data on treatment choices and labor supply decisions of HIV+
men.4 The estimated model reveals that side effects can disincentivize medication use directly
(i.e., by lowering utility) and indirectly through their impact on the utility cost of work. The effect
on work is stronger for people with less education, which means they face a more drastic tradeoff
between medication use and work. Not surprisingly, using limited data on broad occupational
categories, we show that lower-education HIV+ men in our sample tend to work in jobs that are
more physically demanding. This leads to less medication use, including later adoption of HAART,
   2 An   example from outside of economics that using HIV as an historical analogy to draw more general lessons
Marcus and Snowden (2020).
    3 A further advantage to studying health disparities in this context is that the educational investments of individuals

in our sample were completed prior to the (unexpected) onset of the AIDS epidemic so that we do not need to consider
the impact of health on education.
    4 Data for this study come from the Multi-Center AIDS Cohort Study, which has followed a sample of men who

have sex with men starting in the 1980s, when the AIDS epidemic began in the US. We introduce the data set in
Section 2.


                                                            2
even after accounting for prices and baseline health. In contrast, out-of-pocket treatment costs and
insurance have little impact on treatment use, largely because HIV drugs are generally covered and
inexpensive for men in the sample we study.
    Using the model, we compute the welfare impacts of HAART, measured as difference in life-
time utility between the first year after HAART entered the market compared to a counterfactual
scenario in which HAART is not invented. We find that, while HAART led to higher lifetime
utility across education groups, the change is larger for those with more education. In other words,
when we account for a broad set of factors, including labor supply, that drive health decisions,
we find that the innovation increases inequality because it disproportionately benefits more advan-
taged patients. Decompositions show that there are several factors driving variation in the value
of HAART, including higher earnings potential and lower baseline mortality rates for more highly
educated individuals along with a stronger health-work tradeoff that leads to lower usage among
those with less education.
    Since differences in health behaviors (and resulting health disparities) following an innovation
are in part due to difficulties working while taking medication, policies affecting labor market
structures may move the dial. To explore this possibility we analyze a counterfactual policy that
increases non-labor income.5 In particular, we raise non-employment income by $10,000 over a
six-month period and examine how agents in the model make health and employment decisions
in response. Unsurprisingly, we show declines in employment as people move out of the labor
market. We also find that higher-education people or those who were already using the most
effective medication available, HAART, exhibit few changes in behavior. In contrast, relatively
healthy HIV+ men with less education who are not using HAART increase their use of HAART by
roughly 69% percent. Given persistence of good health, this translates to a modest 0.2% percent
rise in the probability of being healthy in the following period compared to the same group absent
the policy. For men in relatively low health and not using medication, this policy change increases
their probability of using HAART by 6% (since many would have gone onto HAART anyway)
and of being healthy next period by 3.7%. There are no appreciable effects of the policy on health
behaviors of other groups, e.g., those with more education. In short, we find that policies affecting
labor supply can reduce incentives to engage in dangerous health behaviors and improve population
health, and that these effects are concentrated among disadvantaged groups.
   This paper relates to a vast literature in public health and other fields that documents and
examines the consequences of health disparities across socioeconomic or demographic groups
   5 Thispolicy is meant to mimic policies that many countries used during the Covid-19 pandemic, which is to
pay people to not work. The primary motivation behind these policies was to support people who faced sudden
unemployment with few prospects to find a new job. An additional consequence of this policy has been that some
workers could choose to avoid risks associated with staying at work.



                                                      3
(Adler and Rehkopf, 2008; Beer et al., 2011; Conti et al., 2010; Currie, 2009; Cutler et al., 2011;
Goldman and Smith, 2011; Williams and Jackson, 2005). In this literature, barriers to access are
frequently identified as the culprit (Lasser et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2010; Woolf et al., 2015).
Another literature, however, discusses how health disparities may result from persistent differences
in behavior across socioeconomic groups. Often, these differences are characterized as errors
in judgement (e.g., impatience or present bias) and sometimes they are (implicitly) presented as
reckless or careless choices (Adimora and Schoenbach, 2002; Robinson and Moodie-Mills, 2012).6
Our findings show that persistent behavioral differences across sociodemographic groups can lead
to different health outcomes, but need not reflect biases or carelessness. Rather they can reflect
rational responses to prevailing circumstances, constraints and market conditions.
    We also relate to literature examining ways to reduce health disparities. Policies studied in
this literature include lowering health care prices to expand access for low-income groups, paying
people to take care of their health, providing information about the risks and benefits of specific
health-related behaviors, and making health care more convenient (Sommers et al., 2012; Thornton
et al., 2016; Wherry and Miller, 2016; Gerber et al., 2005; Osborn et al., 2007; Avery et al., 2008).
While some policies have been effective, others have had mixed success or even no impact at
all (Sommers et al., 2012; Thornton et al., 2016; Wherry and Miller, 2016; Gerber et al., 2005).
This likely reflects an incomplete understanding of the full set of factors underlying disparities,
which thwarts efforts to close them. We argue that taking account of a broader set of factors,
such as relationships between health behaviors and labor market conditions. could lead to more
consistently effective policy. For example, if behaviors that maximize health also interfere with
work, people may need to compromise their health in order to maintain their economic well-being
(Cawley and Ruhm, 2012; Gilleskie, 1998).
    This approach to studying health decisions has its origins in the view that health is a form of
human capital in which individuals invest through their choices (Grossman, 1972; Becker, 2007).
One way to operationalize this insight is to build a structural model of dynamic decision-making
(Arcidiacono et al., 2007; Chan et al., 2016; Crawford and Shum, 2005; Cronin, 2019; Cronin
et al., 2020; Darden, 2017; Gilleskie, 1998; Chan and Hamilton, 2006; Papageorge, 2016). This
framework is useful to understand health-related behaviors as it posits that individuals make health
investments until the marginal costs of doing so exceed the benefits. Hence, risky health behaviors
such as not using effective medications can be seen as disinvestments in health (Cawley and Ruhm,
2012). An implication is that rational individuals who face higher costs of health investments will
exhibit worse health, and policies that lower these costs could reduce resulting health disparities
by encouraging health investments (Gilleskie, 1998).
   6 Forexample, in the public health literature Stafford and Wood (2017) discusses how health behaviors among
homeless populations that can appear careless can often be explained by the need to prioritize food and shelter.


                                                       4
    We are most closely related to papers applying insights from (Grossman, 1972) to health be-
haviors during the HIV epidemic (Chan et al., 2016; Hamilton et al., 2021; Lakdawalla et al., 2006;
Papageorge, 2016). In general, these papers envision agents as engaging in risky health behaviors
(either risky sex or medical non-compliance) as a function of preferences and prevailing market
conditions (ranging from the sex market, the labor market, rates of infection and the process of
innovation). We are closest to Papageorge (2016), who uses the same data set to examine the
interaction between health, side effects and work. The key difference is that we modify the frame-
work in Papageorge (2016) to examine differences in health-work tradeoffs by socio-demographic
groups. This captures the idea that patients, especially less advantaged ones, may find it optimal to
take health risks in order to work. Policy design needs to reflect this reality to be more effective.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data used for estimation
and presents key empirical patterns. Section 3 presents the structural model and describes the
estimation. Section 4 discusses parameter estimates and the value of innovation, and section 5.3
discusses results of counterfactual simulations. Section 6 concludes.


2     Data and Descriptive Patterns

2.1    MACS data

Data for this paper come from the Multi-Center AIDS Cohort Study (MACS), an ongoing study
beginning in 1984 following a sample of men who have sex with men semi-annually in four U.S.
cities: Baltimore, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Los Angeles.7 The study collects information on a
series of individual health measures, medical treatments use (including HIV drugs), insurance
and out-of-pocket payments for medicine. Importantly, the data contain an objective measure of
immune system health, the CD4 count, as well as physical ailments such as nausea and vomiting.
The study also collects labor market information including employment, income and occupation.
    7 Data in this manuscript were collected by the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS). MACS (Principal In-
vestigators): Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health (Joseph Margolick, Todd Brown), U01-
AI35042; Northwestern University (Steven Wolinsky), U01-AI35039; University of California, Los Angeles (Roger
Detels, Otoniel Martinez-Maza, Otto Yang), U01-AI35040; University of Pittsburgh (Charles Rinaldo, Lawrence
Kingsley, Jeremy Martinson), U01-AI35041; the Center for Analysis and Management of MACS, Johns Hopkins
University Bloomberg School of Public Health (Lisa Jacobson, Gypsyamber D'Souza), UM1-AI35043. The MACS
is funded primarily by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), with additional co-funding
from the National Cancer Institute (NCI), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH). Targeted supplemental funding for specific projects was also provided by the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), and the National Institute on Deafness and Communication Disorders (NIDCD).
MACS data collection is also supported by UL1-TR001079 (JHU ICTR) from the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences (NCATS) a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and NIH Roadmap for Med-
ical Research. The contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not represent the
official views of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Johns Hopkins ICTR, or NCATS. . The MACS website is
located at http://aidscohortstudy.org/.


                                                         5
It also contains the individuals' highest completed level of education. We split individuals into a
higher-education group containing those who obtained a four year college degree or more, and a
lower-education group containing everyone else.
    The initial enrollment of the MACS included 4,954 men. Our analysis focuses on the roughly
half of them who are HIV+, and uses data starting in 1991 through 2003. After removing observa-
tions with missing data, we are left with 1,156 individuals comprising 10,830 observations across
13 years.8 The panel structure of the data allows us to observe health and employment decisions
during different phases of the AIDS epidemic, distinguished by the characteristics of available
medications. A major change occurred when HAART hit the market in 1995. HAART is more
effective than earlier treatments, which means it led to dramatic decreases in mortality, but it did
so at the cost of severe side effects. This technological innovation shifted tradeoffs HIV+ patients
faced between health and other factors affecting well-being such as employment. For example,
while HAART extended life, its side effects led some patients using it to take time out of the labor
market, thus reducing consumption (Papageorge, 2016). Since the sample consists of people with
different levels of education, we are able to study the interaction between the introduction of med-
ical innovations, education, and decisions of work and health. In particular, we are able to study
how the ensuing tradeoffs affect sociodemographic health disparities.
    While there are many different HIV drugs, we follow Detels et al. (2001) and combine them
into three categories: mono-therapy, combo-therapy, and HAART. Each category is characterized
by its price, the likelihood that it improves underlying health (CD4 count), and its propensity to
cause side effects. Similar to Chan et al. (2016), and Papageorge (2016), health is defined as an
indicator of AIDS-level CD4 count, above or below 250. Below this threshold of immune system
health individuals are less able to fight off routine infections (AIDS), mortality rates spike (Hamil-
ton et al., 2021). We also measure physical health by patient reports of physical ailments, which are
a combination of symptoms of illness when CD4 counts are low and side effects of treatment. An
individual is coded as suffering from physical ailments if he reports one of the following ailments
for at least three days since their previous semi-annual interview: fatigue, diarrhea, headache, fever,
or sweating. Employment decisions are likewise binary: individuals work full-time or not.9 Work
experience accumulated prior to the beginning of the survey equals the individuals potential expe-
rience: the number of years since the graduation age given education status. After the beginning
   8 Specifically, we start with the full MACS sample of 139,288 observations for 7,175 individuals. After removing
HIV negative individuals and people with missing HIV status, we are left with 59,308 observations comprising 3,761
individuals. After restricting the sample to survey in visits the time period 1991-2003, we are left with 20,019 obser-
vations for 2,264 individuals. Removing individuals outside of the age range 30-65 leaves 19,210 observations from
2,111 people. Dropping observations with missing data leaves 11,370 observations for 1,437 individuals. Finally,
we drop 540 observations from 281 non-white individuals from a refresher sample to the panel due to the sampling
methodology used to select these individuals.
    9 Individuals working part-time are classified as not working.




                                                          6
of the survey work experience is obtained using the observed employment history. Income, which
we convert to year 2000 dollars, is a categorical variable that grows in increments of $10,000, with
the highest value being $50,000 or more.

2.2   Summary Statistics

Summary statistics are presented in Table 1 for the full analysis sample and then separately by
education level and era (pre- or post-HAART). The post-HAART is set to start with survey visit
24, roughly the second semester of 1995.10 In the full sample 64% of the men have a college degree
and the average age is 44. Individuals with less education are on average two years younger than
those with a college degree. Due to the panel nature of the data, the population ages over time, with
the average age increasing by 5 years between the pre- and post-HAART eras. In what follows we
discuss health, mortality, and choices of treatment and employment. Several key patterns emerge.
HAART was a technological innovation that drastically decreased mortality and improved health.
Yet, not everyone used HAART (or other treatments) as they also entailed toxic side effects that
can make work difficult. Finally, education seems to make the health-work trade off more severe.
This is consistent with the idea that lower-education individuals sort into occupations in which it
is specially difficult to work with side effects. The structural model developed in the section after
is based on these patterns and takes into account the various tradeoffs HIV+ individuals face.

2.3   Health and Mortality

According to Table 1, the probability of dying in a given six-month period is higher for those with
less education, regardless of whether HAART is available. For both education groups, HAART
drastically reduces the probability of dying, from 8% to 2% for those with less than a college
degree and from 5% to 1% for those with a college degree. Figure 2 shows mortality over time for
higher- and lower-education men. The vertical bar (1995-1996) indicates HAART introduction.11
The figure shows a precipitous drop in the probability of dying when HAART is introduced for
both education groups. Moreover, low-education individuals exhibit generally higher mortality
rates.
    Consistent with lower mortality rates, HAART introduction led to higher CD4 counts. Overall,
the average sample CD4 count is 460, well above the threshold for transition from HIV to AIDS
and reflecting survivor bias. For both education levels, CD4 counts are higher after HAART be-
comes available, increasing by 86 units for those with less education and 94 units for those with
  10 Results are robust to treating either survey visit 25 or 23 as the first post-HAART visit.
  11 Since interviews were staggered it is not possible to pinpoint at which exact survey visit individuals first had
access to HAART.



                                                         7
higher education. On average, those with less education are less healthy, but the differences across
education level are small compared to the differences across eras. Another way to measure immune
system health is to examine the probability of being above AIDS-level CD4 count. Both education
groups exhibit drastic increases in the probability of high CD4 once HAART is introduced: 66%
to 79% in the lower- and 69% to 83% in the higher-education group. Figure 3 shows the probabil-
ity of high CD4 over time. It shows a clear and swift post-HAART increase in high CD4 count,
though health disparities across education groups are evident.
    To further understand factors driving health, Table 2 presents coefficient estimates from logistic
regressions for being above AIDS-level CD4 count.12 The explanatory variables include current-
period health (to capture persistence), a second-order polynomial in age, along with an era-specific
time trend. We estimate this model for the full sample and then separately by education group.
The estimates confirm that health is significantly worse for people with less education even after
controlling for additional variables. In general, health is highly persistent. Age has a marginally
significant positive association with health, which may reflect survivor bias. Finally, we find de-
clining health in the pre-HAART era and improving health in the post-HAART era, which maps to
the evolution of treatment quality. The slope of the post-HAART positive trend is larger for people
in the higher-education group, suggesting they benefit more from the new technology. Next we
discuss whether this facts reflect different usage patterns.

2.4       Treatment Choices and Employment Decisions

The introduction of HAART is associated with large changes in the treatment choices of HIV+
individuals. Returning to Table 1, while the probability of using any treatment increased post-
HAART, consumption of older treatments, mono-therapy and combo-therapy, fell. After HAART
becomes available, 61% of those with less than a college degree and 69% of those with a college
degree use it. These shifts are illustrated in Figure 4, which shows treatment choices over time.
Prior to the introduction of HAART, a large portion of the sample (41% of the lower-education and
36% of the higher-education group) chose no treatment at all. Although pre-HAART treatments
were not very effective, prices were generally low, suggesting other factors could help explain
patient reluctance to consume treatment. Below, we argue that side effects is one such factor
explaining low consumption of medications with limited effectiveness.
    Of patients who used a treatment in the pre-HAART era, most were on mono-therapy, which
means they used one single drug to combat HIV. Starting in the late 1980s, recommended treatment
regimens tended to include multiple drugs. This did not immediately improve effectiveness, but did
  12 Inthis section, we present several descriptive regression models that are similar, but not identical, to the processes
estimated for the model, which are presented in section 4.3 and appendix A.



                                                            8
lead to more side effects. Once HAART was introduced, treatment consumption patterns shifted
dramatically. HAART use soared rapidly, reflecting its high level of effectiveness, as patients
substituted away from both mono- and combo-therapy. HAART also attracted patients who had
previously opted for no treatment. After its introduction, the probability of using any treatment
increased from 59% to 77% for those with less than a college degree and from 64% to 87% for
those with a college degree or more.
    While HAART did not produce fewer side effects than the previously available medications,
it was much more effective at improving health. Still, differences across groups persist. Lower-
education individuals report using HAART 61% of the time, while those with more education
use it 69% of the time. Figure 5 shows that HAART adoption was slower among lower-education
individuals, with usage rates converging at the end of our sample. While the majority of individuals
use treatment, there is a significant minority who do not. Papageorge (2016) argues that this can
be explained by side effects and their interaction with labor supply, showing that people cycle on
and off of HAART depending on their health: getting off treatment in an effort to work while in
relatively good health, and using live-saving medication when their health declines. The patterns
here suggest that the work-side effects tradeoff may be more salient for individuals in the lower-
education group, inducing even lower HAART consumption.
    To provide further insight into treatment patterns, Table 4 shows the transition matrix for treat-
ment choices by education level and HAART era. In general, we see a high degree of persistence
over time, which suggests it may be costly to switch treatments or to go into or off treatment. For
example, over 80% of individuals who are not using treatment will continue to not use treatment in
the following period. Pre-HAART, over 70% of those taking a given medication continue with the
same medication in the following period, with a substantial minority switching between treatments.
In the post-HAART era, however, many individuals switch from mono-therapy, combo-therapy or
no therapy at all to adopt HAART. Relatively few individuals go off treatment in any given period.
    To further explore treatment choices, we estimate a logit model to explain use of any treatment.
Estimates in Table 3 show that even after controlling for factors including health and employment,
individuals with less education are less likely to use treatment. Unsurprisingly, individuals already
in good health are less likely to use treatmen t across education categories. Medication use declines
over time until HAART is introduced. Thereafter, treatment use increases over time. In addition,
we find that those who are working are also less likely to use treatment, and this effect is larger
for those with less education. This finding is consistent with lower-education individuals having a
harder time working while using treatments with side effects. The structural model specified in the
following section formalizes this idea by allowing the utility cost of work to vary by ailments and
education.



                                                  9
    Table 5 shows that higher-education individuals are more likely to ever be observed using
treatment compared to lower-education people (89% versus 84%). They also spend more time on
medication: higher-education individuals use medication in 77% of survey visits compared to 69%
for lower-education people. Similarly, the higher-education group is more likely to use HAART
at all and to spend more time using it. Figure 5 shows that those with less education are slower
to adopt HAART when it becomes available. The average of first survey visit at which those with
a college degree start HAART is 27.05 (roughly the first semester of 1997). The corresponding
number for those with less than a college degree is 27.88, approximately 5 months later. The prob-
ability of switching treatment in a given visit is not significantly different for different education
groups. However, those with a college degree are more likely to have stopped HAART. Among
those that ever stop HAART, 78% of those with less than college and 73% of those with more than
college will restart, though these differences in means are not significant.
    One reason individuals may choose to forgo treatment is that these medications have side ef-
fects, such as fatigue, diarrhea, headaches, and fever. As we have mentioned, these physical ail-
ments could also be symptoms of illness. Hence, we understand ailments as being produced by
both underlying health and treatment choices. According to table 1, 39% of the sample suffers
from ailments at any given time. Those with less education are slightly more likely to suffer from
ailments compared to those with a college degree, 41% versus 39% respectively. The share of indi-
viduals suffering ailments does not differ significantly pre- and post-HAART. Papageorge (2016)
argues that this is due to the adoption of effective medication with side effects: while more effec-
tive treatments decrease ailments through their effect on underlying health, their toxicity increases
them so that there is no overall change.
     To further understand what drives physical ailments, Table 6 presents coefficients from logistic
regressions for not suffering ailments. These regressions are performed for the full sample and
separately by education group. Across education groups, HAART is associated with slightly more
ailments than other medications, though all treatments increase the probability of ailments. The
association between treatment use and ailments is slightly larger for those with more education. For
all groups, high CD4 is negatively associated with ailments. Interestingly, those with less education
are less likely not to have ailments, even after controlling for health, treatment, and time factors.
This could reflect that individuals in different education groups may be using HAART somewhat
differently. For example, higher-education individuals may be less likely to skip medication due
avoid side effects or may use more effective HAART regimens that have harsher side effects.
    Given that treatment decisions may affect or reflect employment decisions, we next consider
what drives labor supply in the sample. On average, individuals work in 67% of the observed
periods. Employment declines post-HAART for both groups as the cohort ages. In both the pre-
and post-HAART eras individuals with less education are approximately 10 percentage points less

                                                 10
likely to be employed. The transition matrix in Table 7 shows that unemployment is persistent,
especially for those with less education. Among those who were not working in a given period,
90.3% of the higher-education individuals will not be working next period; the corresponding
number for the lower-education individuals is 87.9%. Among those who are working this period,
those with less education are somewhat more likely to stop working next period, though at both
education levels employment is highly persistent.
    Table 8 presents coefficients from a logistic regression with employment as the outcome vari-
able controlling for a variety of factors. The regression is run for the overall sample and separately
by education groups. Individuals with less education are less likely to work. Ailments decrease
the probability of work, more so for those with less education. This is consistent with side effects
making work difficult, especially for those with less education. Having high CD4 is associated
with a higher probability of working, for all groups, while using medication is associated with a
reduction in the probability of work. This effect is also larger for those with less education.
    Several additional variables in the dataset can shed light on the patterns described above (Table
9). While individuals with less education are only slightly more likely to experience ailments, we
hypothesize that ailments have different implications for the two education groups. Individuals
with less education are significantly more likely to work in occupations that require manual labor,
which likely makes work more difficult while experiencing side effects. Indeed, 15% of those
with less than a college degree report stopping medications specifically because of side effects,
compared to 11% of those with more education. Similarly, those with less education are more
likely to report needing to change their job due to their HIV status (6% compared to 5%), though
this event is relatively rare.
    Evidence until now suggests that ailments from side effects can help to explain treatment and
employment decisions. In particular, individuals may stop using effective treatment with side
effects in order to work. A natural question to ask is why people infected with a deadly virus
would be willing to take such a risk. A key motivation seems to be to generate income as those
with less education have lower incomes. Individuals with less than a college degree earn $15,909-
15,214 on average per six-months (pre- and post-HAART), while those with a college degree earn
$23,108-22,337 on average.13 While incomes fall slightly for both groups post-HAART, likely
because individuals age out of the workforce, the major difference is across education categories.
Table 10 presents linear regression results for income overall and by education group. Individuals
with less education have lower incomes even after controlling for employment, experience, and
health. Health is more important for income for those with less education, again suggesting that
working while ill may be more difficult for those with less education.14
  13 This   numbers are averages of the upper and lower bounds of the income brackets
  14 In   addition to the side effects, cost barriers could prevent individuals from accessing medications. However, the


                                                           11
                                            F IGURE 1: Model Timing



                                  Expectation               Realization
                                   over Ft , Ct              of Ft , Ct



                            t                                                        t+1
                                                Decide     Receive
                       Realization               l , dm                           Realization
                                                dit   it Flow Utility
                         of Xt                                                     of Xt +1
 This figure shows the timing of the model including state variables and decisions.Treatment and
                     work choices are made simultaneously not sequentially.


   Overall, the empirical patterns suggest that HAART was an important but imperfect innovation.
Treatments improves health but also cause side effects that can make work difficult. The model
described below incorporates both the costs and benefits of treatment and its interactions with
work.


3   Model

At every period, forward-looking, HIV+ individuals in our model maximize their expected life-
time utility by choosing what antiretroviral treatment to consume and whether to participate in the
labor market. Their treatment choices affect their future health, which in turn affects their survival
and future income. Although potentially beneficial for their future underlying health, treatment
consumption can generate higher physical ailments and it directly increases current medical ex-
penditures. The latter are also affected by insurance coverage, which is determined through a
stochastic process that depends on labor market participation and health. Individuals have myopic
expectations with regards to technological change. In other words, they are surprised by changes
in technology that affect the health and ailments processes, and they always assume that the new
technological regime is permanent.
vast majority of the sample is insured at any given time, and medical expenditures are generally low relative to income.
Those with less education are less likely to be insured, but even this group has a 91% insurance coverage rate. Even
for those individuals who are not insured, HIV medications are generally available at low costs (Gable et al., 1996).




                                                          12
3.1   State Variables and Choices

Individuals are denoted by the subindex i. They enter period (semester) t with a vector zit of state
variables including their age ait -1  R+ , their completed education captured by the indicator si 
{0, 1} that takes the value of 1 if they have college or more, their labor market experience eit -1 
R+ , their prior treatment decision dit m , and their prior health status captured by the indicator
                                         -1
hit -1  {0, 1} that takes the value of 1 if their prior health was higher than AIDS level. Individuals
first enter the model at age a and age half-year at a time; they make choices until age a   ¯.15 Upon
reaching age a  ¯ individuals receive a termination payment equal to a bond whose yearly payment
equals the monetary value of the flow utility obtained in the last period of life.
    At every period individuals decide their labor market participation and their treatment. If they
decide to work, the labor indicator dit l takes the value of 1. There are two eras in terms of treat-

                                         ¯) there are three treatment alternatives: no treatment (d0
ment alternatives. In the first era (t < t                                                          m ),
                                                                                                     it
                  m                            m                             ¯
mono therapy (d1it ), and combo therapy (d2it ). In the second era (t  t ) an additional treatment
alternative called HAART becomes available (d3     m ). Treatments are mutually exclusive and individ-
                                                    it
uals must choose one. Hence, the collection of treatment-specific indicators drit   m  {0, 1} satisfies
  2+I{t t¯} m                                            m  {0, 1}3+I{t t ¯}
r=0        drit = 1. The treatment decision vector dit                       collects all the treatment-
specific indicators. Labor and treatment choices are made simultaneously. Therefore, there are six
labor-treatment alternatives available at any t < t¯ and eight at any t  t
                                                                         ¯. At every period individuals
receive a vector of alternative-specific preference shocks it before making their choice. The pref-
erence shocks are distributed Type I Extreme Value and are independent and identically distributed
across alternatives, individuals and over time.

3.2   Health and Mortality

Physical wellbeing is characterized by health and ailments. While health refers to the state of
the individual's immune system, ailments refer to all other afflictions that the individual may face
conditional on their immune system health. Health, which has a direct effect on survival, is what
efficacious treatments aim to improve.


Health. Health hit is determined in a two-step process. First, individuals draw a health booster
hit from a Bernoulli distribution with probability:

                                                             h  h )
                                                        exp(xit
                                              h
                                   P[hit = 1|xit ]=             h  h )
                                                                                                    (1)
                                                      1 + exp(xit
  15 Hence,   ait = ait -1 + 0.5



                                                  13
        h  [h           m                       2            h                h
where xit      it -1 , dit × hit -1 , ait -1 , ait -1 , si , t ]. The vector xit captures the efficacy of treatment
alternatives and its interaction with prior health and also permits variation by education and age.
The scalar th captures aggregate changes in health-boosting baseline technology at period t .
      Second, individuals transition into their next period health level according to:

                                                                    h  h)
                                                               exp(xit
                                                    h
                                         P[hit = 1|xit ]=              h  h)
                                                                                                                     (2)
                                                             1 + exp(xit

        h  [h                            h
where xit     it -1 × hit ]. The vector xit captures the effect of prior health and treatment (indirectly
through the health booster) on the transition into future health. This two-stage process allows us to
capture both the absolute level and the trajectory of health without having to rely on a continuous
health variable.16


Survival. Health has a direct effect on survival. At the beginning of every period after entry
individuals face death with probability:

                                                                    b  b)
                                                               exp(xit
                                                    b
                                         P[bit = 1|xit ]=              b  b)
                                                                                                                     (3)
                                                             1 + exp(xit

        b  [h                                         b
where xit     it -1 , ait -1 , hit -1 × ait -1 , si , t ]. Survival depends on the individual's health, age, and
education level, as well as aggregate changes in survival-boosting technology. Current treatment
consumption affects survival into next period indirectly through their effect on next period health
hit .

3.3     Ailments and Monetary Outcomes

Depending on their labor and treatment choices, at every period individuals realize their ailments,
income, insurance coverage and medical expenditures. These outcomes are collected in the vector
yit .


Ailments. Toxic treatments with strong side effects increase the likelihood that an individual
will suffer ailments. Denote yailments
                               it        as the no-ailments indicator that takes the value of 1 if the
individual does not suffer ailments in period t . The probability of not suffering ailments is given
by:
                                                              ailments  ailments )
                                                         exp(xit
                       P[yailments
                          it       = 1 |x ailments
                                          it       ] =           ailments  ailments )
                                                                                                   (4)
                                                       1 + exp(xit
  16 The two-stage process is preferred over a single discrete transition probability because it prevents drugs that keep
healthy people healthy from being classified as ineffective.


                                                          14
       ailments  [h          m              2            ailments ]. The vector xailments captures the side effects of
where xit           it -1 , dit , ait -1 , ait -1 , si , t                       it
treatment alternatives and it also controls for prior health, education and aging. The scalar tailments
captures aggregate changes in side effects baseline technology at period t .


Work Experience and Income. Individuals enter the model without prior work experience and
endogenously accumulate work experience eit in half-year increments as a function of their labor
market participation:
                                                       l
                                    eit = eit -1 + 0.5dit                                    (5)

Their labor market participation and experience determine their income according to:

                                        yincome
                                         it
                                                   income income
                                                = xit              income
                                                                 + it                                                (6)

       income  [d l h         2                          2          income ] and  income is an iid income shock with
where xit         it it -1 , ait -1 , ait -1 , eit -1 , eit -1 si , t            it
zero conditional mean. The biological processes of health evolution and aging affect individual
productivity through a direct effect on income. These processes also affect income indirectly
through the decision to participate in the labor market. The scalar tincome captures aggregate
changes in income.


Insurance Coverage and Medical Expenditures. Health insurance in the model is a stochastic
outcome that is realized after an individual makes his choice at t . An individual draws insurance
coverage with probability:

                                                                    insurance  insurance )
                                                               exp(xit
                         P[yinsurance
                            it
                                           insurance
                                      = 1|xit        ]=                insurance  insurance )
                                                                                                                     (7)
                                                             1 + exp(xit

        insurance  [h                   2                 2        l         insurance ]. By controlling for labor market
where xit             it -1 , ait -1 , ait -1 , eit -1 , eit -1 , dit si , , t
participation and experience the vector xit            insurance captures the fact that health insurance is often

employer-sponsored in the United States. The probability of insurance coverage also captures
age, education and health effects. The scalar tinsurance captures aggregate changes in insurance
coverage. In turn, insurance coverage affects the amount of medical expenditures an individual
pays out of pocket (MOOP) according to:

                                    yexpenses
                                     it
                                                 expenses expenses
                                              = xit                  expenses
                                                                   + it                                              (8)

        expenses                                                         2            expenses       expenses
where xit         [yincome
                    it     , yinsurance
                              it
                                           m , h × yailments , a
                                        × dit   it  it          it -1 , ait -1 , si , t        ] and it       is an
iid medical expenses shock with zero conditional mean.



                                                          15
3.4   Utility and the Value Functions

There is no borrowing or saving in the model. Individuals use the entirety of their current income
for consumption cit and medical expenses. Hence, the individual's budget constraint for period t is
given by:
                                     cit = yincome
                                            it     - yexpenses
                                                      it                                        (9)

                                                                       ~(cit ), their ailments and
Individuals with education level s draw utility from their consumption u
their treatment choices according to:

                               m                                  u             ailments     u        l
                u(yit , dit , dit -1 , s) =             ~(cit ) + 1
                                                        u           s f · (1 - yit       ) + 2 s f · dit
                                              f {0,1}
                                                   u      m            m
                                                  +3 f · d0it -1 (1 - d0it )                                     (10)
                                                   u               m               m        m
                                                  +4 f    ·   1 - d0 it -1   1 - (dit -1 · dit )
                                                   u          m       m               1[yit     ailments = f ]
                                                  +5 f · 1 - d0it -1 d0it + it (dit )]


     As equation (10) suggests, we allow all of the utility parameters to vary by ailments status, and
parameters 1   u and  u to vary by education level. Hence, people with different education levels
                sf      2s f
in our model may experience different disutility from working while ill (or well). The flow utility
captures direct utility from ailments (1  u ), direct utility from work ( u ), and switching cost for
                                           sf                               2s f
           u                 u                               u
starting (3 f ), changing (4 f ), and stopping treatment (5 f ).The utility from not suffering ailments
1 u is normalized to zero for both education levels. The flow utility also contains the idiosyncratic,
   s0
alternative-specific, preference shock it (dit ).


Value Function. Let zit denote the observable part of the state vector. Upon reaching age a              ¯,
individuals no longer make choices and receive a bond that pays the monetary equivalent of their
age a¯ flow utility forever. The bond is their only source of utility from a  ¯ forward. They discount the
returns from this bond by their discount factor and their annual probability of survival that remains
fixed at its age a¯ level. Let zit (a) be the state of an individual when he is of age a and let Kt denote
the number of alternatives in the choice set at period t . Hence, his conditional value function (net
of the taste shock) from choosing alternative k  Kt at age a       ¯ is given by:

                                                        1                          m
                             vkit (zit (a
                                        ¯)) =                     uk (yit , dit , dit -1 , s)                    (11)
                                                   1 -  (zit (a
                                                              ¯))




                                                              16
                                   b , age = a
             ¯))   (1 - P[bit = 1|xit
where  (zit (a                               ¯]). For any age a < a
                                                                  ¯ his conditional value function
                                          it
is given recursively by:

                                                    m
                  vkit (zit (a)) = uk (yit , dit , dit -1 , s) +  Ek [Vit +1 (zit +1 (a + 1))|zit (a)]   (12)

where Ek denotes the expectation of the state conditional on choosing alternative k. Given that the
taste shocks are distributed Type I EV, the ex-ante value function Vit (zit (a)) is given by:

                                                           Kt
                              Vit (zit (a)) =  + ln         exp{vk it (zit (a))}                         (13)
                                                          k =1

At any age a  a
              ¯ individuals choose an alternative k  Kt to solve the discrete maximization
problem:
                                 max{vkit (zit (a)) + kit }                           (14)
                                             kKt


4     Estimation and Results

In this section we first specify some of the details of the empirical implementation of the model.
Then we present the estimation method and briefly discuss identification. We finish the section by
discussing parameter estimates and model fit.

4.1    Empirical Implementation

Individuals enter the model at age a = 30 and make choices until age a ¯ = 65. The period t¯ at which
HAART is introduced is the first semester of 1996. The health booster variable hit is an indicator
constructed from the continuous measure of health (i.e. the CD4 count) and takes the value of
one if CD4it  CD4it -1 and zero otherwise. In other words, the health booster captures health
improvement that can occur within a health state hit . The aggregate processes for technological
change in health and ailments and the aggregate processes for income and medical expenses are
captured using era-specific, linear time trends. Hence, t in all processes it appears is given by:

                                                        ¯}, t · I{t  t
                                         t = [t · I{t < t            ¯}]                                 (15)

                                                      ~(cit ) to be logarithmic, i.e. u
Finally, we specify the flow utility from consumption u                               ~(cit ) = ln(cit ).




                                                          17
4.2   Estimation and Identification

Let  xy , the vector that collects all parameters governing processes and transition probabilities, be
 xy  [ h ,  h ,  b ,  ailments ,  income ,  insurance ,  expenses ], and let and let  u be the vector of parame-
ters of the flow utility function. We estimate the model parameters  = [ u ,  xy ] following a nested
procedure. In the inner step, given a set of proposed parameters, we use backwards induction to
solve the dynamic programming problem for each set of observable state variables. This procedure
generates choice probabilities that maximize utility given the parameters. The search algorithm in
the outer step uses the probabilities generated by the inner step to search for the parameters that
maximize the likelihood of the data. The likelihood contribution of each individual is:

                                      Ti                    Ti
                           Li ( ) =  P(dit |Xit ;  ) ×  f (Xi,t +1 |Xit , dit ;  xy )                      (16)
                                     t =1                  t =1

    where f denotes the density function derived from the processes. Because the log likelihood is
additively separable, we estimate the processes separately from the utility parameters in a first step
to reduce computational burden while retaining consistency. In the second step, we search for the
utility parameters using the nested procedure described above.
    Our first stage processes are identified by their data counterparts. In particular, the evolution
of health as well as treatment effects are identified off of the panel variation in CD4 counts for
individuals with different levels of initial health and different treatment choices. The variation
in the data that identifies flow utility parameters comes from observed, conditional choice proba-
bilities. For example, the disutility of ailments is identified by differences in choices by ailment
status, given state variables. Additionally, because HAART is a quasi-experimental, unexpected
intervention that occurs in the middle of our panel of data, this unanticipated variation in the set
of available treatments to chose from helps identify utility parameters. We assume the discount
                                                         u
factor  = 0.95 and we normalize the parameter 1           s, f =1 to zero. Given data on transitions and
choices, as well as the choices of  , the distributional assumption of taste shocks, and the flow util-
ity normalization, identification follows from the arguments made by Magnac and Thesmar (2002)
showing that under these assumptions there will be a unique parameter vector that maximizes the
likelihood function.
    Since our measures of health are based on an objective immune system measure, it likely con-
tains a number of otherwise assumed unobservable factors. That said, we do not allow for unob-
served heterogeneity. So we are at some risk of missing whether some patients fare systematically
better on the new treatment HAART than others, or suffer more side effects, for unobservable rea-
sons. In such a case we would be attributing lack of use to utility when, for some people, it might
be due to individual-specific treatment characteristics. Papageorge (2016) allows for unobserved


                                                      18
heterogeneity in a similar model and finds some evidence of unobserved differences but consistent
basic patterns across types.

4.3   Parameter estimates

This section presents estimates of preference parameters and parameters governing outcomes and
transitions. Table 11 presents estimates of the utility parameters  u along with standard errors
calculated using the delta method. 1     u
                                          , f =0 represents the disutility of ailments for those with less
than a college degree, while the sum of 1       u           u
                                                 , f =0 and 1, f =0,s=1 represents the disutility of ailments
for those with a college degree. Ailments are 40% more costly for those with less education, in line
with hypotheses from the reduced form results. Regardless of educational attainment, individuals
not suffering from ailments get utility from work (rows 4 and 5). This effect is stronger for those
with more education. However, when agents suffer from ailments, working decreaes utility (rows
6 and 7). For those with less than a college degree, the disutility of working with ailments is -2.22
(2 u                                                                           u       u
    , f =0 ) while for those with more education the cost is less, -1.45 (2, f =0 +2, f =0,s=1 ).
    Given that individuals with less education have a stronger aversion to ailments, we would
expect the tradeoff between health and ailments to differ across education groups. Figures 6 and 7
plot indifference curves by education and employment for the health-ailment tradeoff, separately
by health status. The point at which the indifference curves cross represents the health and ailments
probabilities generated by HAART for a higher-education agent. For both high and low CD4
agents, individuals with less education are more willing to trade health for ailments. The cross-
education differences are larger when agents are working, because the disutility of working with
ailments is larger for those with less education. The difference across education groups is larger
for high CD4 agents, because for low CD4 agents, health is critical.
    The utility function includes switching costs for starting, changing, and stopping treatment.
These switching costs vary by ailment status but not by education. Stopping treatment is the most
costly, followed by switching among treatments. For all three types of switches, the costs are lower
(benefits are higher) when individuals suffer from ailments. This may be because the medication
transitions are made in service of attempting to reduce ailments, or that doctors are more supportive
of treatment changes when treatments are causing ailments.
    In addition to flow utility parameters, we estimate parameters for the health, survival, and ad-
ditional processes included in yit . The estimated parameters for these processes are presented in
Appendix A. Table 16 shows the estimates for the two-step health process. The estimated param-
eters suggest that all medications increase the probability of health improvements, with HAART
being the most effective. The difference between HAART and other medications is especially pro-
nounced for individuals in poor health. In the second stage of the process, both previous period


                                                     19
health and health improvements are associated with current period health. There is no statistically
significant relationship between health and education, though the parameter estimate suggests a
positive relationship between education and health improvements.
    Table 17 shows parameter estimates for the death process. Individuals with high CD4 are
much less likely to die, though that relationship weakens as individuals age. Before HAART, the
probability of dying increased over time, but post-HAART the probability decreases over time.
The parameter estimates for the no ailments process are shown in Table 18. Individuals in good
health are less likely to suffer ailments. All three treatment options reduce the probability of no
ailments, but HAART produces more ailments than mono-therapy or combo-therapy. Individuals
with less education are more likely to suffer ailments.
    Parameter estimates from the income process show that employment and education have strong
positive relationships with income 19. In addition, health is associated with higher incomes, and
income grows over time. Age and experience are also associated with increases in income, though
the increases slow over time. Table 20 shows parameter estimates for the insurance process. Em-
ployment is associated with a significant increase in the probability of insurance coverage, as is
higher education. High CD4 is associated with a small decrease in the probability of insurance
perhaps capturing slight adverse selection. In all, the vast majority of those in the sample are
covered by insurance. Medical expenditures increase with income and decrease when insured (Ta-
ble 21). Unsurprisingly, bot medication usage and ailments are associated with increased medical
costs. In line with the results shown in Table 1, individuals with less education have lower medical
expenditures, but the difference is not large, .

4.4   Model Fit

Table 12 shows the model predicted probabilities of work and HAART use for the sample com-
pared to the actual probabilities from the data. To construct the comparison, we match choice
probabilities from the model to state variables in the data. Overall, the model predictions closely
match the data. Both the data and the model predict that agents will be employed 67% of the time.
The results are similar for HAART use, with the model predicting HAART use in 36% of periods
and the data showing HAART use in 38% of periods. When fit is disaggregated by health and
education, the model performs less well. The model slightly over-predicts employment among un-
healthy people and slightly under-predicts employment among healthy people, but both the model
and data show that healthy individuals work more and that those with less education work less.
The model slightly underpredicts medication use among those with high CD4 and overpredicts it
among those with low CD4. However, the model predicts that these individuals are slightly less
likely to use treatment. Both the model and the data show that individuals with less education are


                                                20
less likely to use treatment.


5     Results

5.1    The Value of HAART

HAART was an important innovation with major implications for HIV+ individuals. Figures 8
and 9 show total expected lifetime value for a 30 year old individual in each period by education
status for those with high and low CD4 respectively. In our model, HAART is an unanticipated
innovation, so by comparing expected lifetime value just before and just after it was introduced,
we can see the impact it has on agents in the model. Table 13 shows expected lifetime value in
1995 and 1996 by health and education status for an individual on the best available treatment
at the time. Regardless of health or education level, HAART's introduction had a large impact.
HAART is more important, in percentage terms, for agents with low CD4, because this group is
more in need of the positive health effects. However, since health is not permanent and HAART is
beneficial for health regardless of current CD4 count, HAART's introduction increases value across
the board. For agents with low CD4, HAART's introduction is associated with a 94.9%-105.9%
increase in expected lifetime value, compared to an increase of 59.6%-50.2% for those with high
CD4. In absolute terms, the gains were larger for those with more education, because they are more
likely to take advantage of the innovation. However, in percentage terms the innovation increased
expected lifetime value slightly more for those with less education, because their expected lifetime
value was lower to begin with.

5.2    Decomposing Differences in the Value of HAART

In order to understand why HAART was more important for those with more education, we de-
compose the differences in lifetime value in Table 14. Panel 1 replicates the results from Table 13,
showing expected lifetime value pre- and post-HAART by education and health status. The fol-
lowing panels gradually cumulatively replace processes and parameters faced by lower-education
agents with those faced by higher-education agents. Panel 2 shows the effect of giving the lower-
education group the income process of the higher-education group. Total lifetime value increases
for those with less education, as would be expected, but only slightly. This suggests that lower
incomes are not the primary reason why those with less education expect lower lifetime value.
In panel 3, we also replace the insurance and medical expenditures processes, which actually de-
creases value for those with less education relative to just replacing the income process. This is
because people with more education tend to have more out of pocket medical expenditures.
      Changing the health (panel 4) and ailments (panel 5) process have small positive effects on


                                                21
lifetime value for those with less education, but the results again are not drastic. Changing the
survival process in the next panel has a large impact for those with less education, who otherwise
are much more likely to die, thus forgoing the value they otherwise would have received. This
change helps more pre-HAART than post-HAART because the chances of death are higher in the
pre-HAART period. Thus, changing this survival process not only closes about half of the gap
between the education groups but also decreases the percent increase in value after HAART was
invented. While we do not explore the mechanisms that make those with less education more likely
to die, it is likely that policy interventions could help boost survival for those with less education.
Finally, panel 7 shows the effects of changing the structural utility parameters. This fully closes
the gap (mechanically, as there are no other differences in the model). Since preferences are often
deep individual characteristics, unlike with the other processes, it is less clear whether policy can
close this part of the gap.

5.3   Social Determinants of Health

We use the estimated model to examine the effects of a targeted policy that increases by $10,000-
per-six-months income for non-workers. We focus on the effect on employment, medication use
and health. Figures 10­12 show the effect of this policy change on the probability of working,
using HAART, and having a high CD4 count next period. The four sets of bars show four possible
combinations of current-period health status and medication use, with each bar representing the
percentage point change in the probability of the given outcome next period by education level.
We also write the percent change in italics and the baseline probability of the outcome without the
policy change in parentheses.
    For all groups, increasing the amount of income they earn while not working leads to a decrease
in the probability of work (Figure 10). This change is larger for people with low CD4 counts and for
those with less education. Across health and medication categories, people with less than a college
degree are between 19 and 26 percentage points less likely to work after the policy, compared with
a 10 to 15 percentage point decrease for those with a college degree or more. This disparity is
the result of two mechanisms. First, people with less education might respond more because the
policy represents a larger share of their potential income from work. Second, the estimated model
parameters show that the disutility of working when experiencing side effects is larger for those
with less education, perhaps due to the nature of their jobs. Thus, HIV+ with less education are
more likely to be on the margin such that the policy is enough to induce them to leave work.
    In addition to the direct effects on employment, the increase in non-labor income induces peo-
ple to take up HAART (Figure 11). The policy allows people to stop working, which reduces
incentives to avoid treatment with side effects. Even without the policy, the model predicts that


                                                  22
people who are already using medication will often continue to use it. Consistently, the largest
effects of the policy change on medication use are for those individuals who were not taking med-
ication. Among those with AIDS-level CD4 counts not previously on medication, 84% of those
without a college degree and 91% of those with a college degree will start using HAART with-
out the policy change. The policy change increases that probability by 5.0 percentage points for
the less educated group and by 1.5 percentage points for the more educated group. However, the
largest proportional change is for those individuals with higher than AIDS-level CD4 counts, who
are less likely to take-up HAART without the policy. After the policy change, the share of those
with less than a college degree who will start HAART increases by 69%, from 8% to 13%. For
those with more education, HAART use increases by 22%, from 13% to 16%.
    Finally, the increases in medication use lead to increases in the probability of having a CD4
count above AIDS levels (Figure 12). Health changes are concentrated among those who changed
their treatment decisions, primarily individuals not previously using HAART. The probability of
being healthy next period changes more for those who were unhealthy this period, because those
who were healthy are highly likely to be healthy next period, regardless of medication use. For
individuals with AIDS-level CD4 counts who were not on treatment, the probability of having a
high CD4 count next period increased by 3.7% for those with less than a college degree and by
1.0% for those with a college degree. The results of this policy simulation suggest that transfers
can ease the burden of life-saving treatments, especially for those individuals for whom treatment
makes work difficult. While the magnitudes of the health changes may be small, there are (unmod-
eled) externalities to even small changes to health status, as individuals on treatment are at much
lower risk of transmitting the virus.
    People optimally engage in risk in ways that depend on sociodemographic differences. That
people with less education face a more difficult tradeoff is perhaps as depressing as it is unsurpris-
ing. Yet, people do respond to incentives and policy can help. In the case of HIV, people who are
very sick tend to use medication. Hence, increases in non-labor income have their biggest impacts
on people who are not as sick, but who could still benefit from treatment. Understanding which
segments of society have the most trouble engaging in health behaviors with positive externalities,
such as lower infection risk, is crucial in the design of policies.
    There are two key reasons why those with less education may respond more to this policy
change. As mentioned above, their incomes are lower, so the $10,000 increase in non-labor in-
come represents a larger change to their consumption, resulting in a stronger response. Addi-
tionally, lower-education individuals experience more disutility from working, so it is easier to
encourage them to leave work. Figures 13-15 replicate figures 10-12 but hold the income process
constant across education groups, while Figures 16-18 replicate figures 10-12 removing differ-
ences in the disutility of work and ailments. For both sets of figures, we give the lower-education

                                                 23
group the parameters for the higher-education group, meaning that the darker bars representing
higher education do not change. In Figure 13, giving the lower-education group the income pro-
cess of the higher-education group reduces the gap in the employment effect, though there are still
significant gaps, especially when looking at percent change rather than percentage point change.
This suggests that income differences account for part of the differential response, but not all of it.
Similarly, Figures 14 and 15 show that changing the income process reduces the gap in response
between those with more and less education, but it does not come close to eliminating the gap.
Changing the parameters for the disutility of work and ailments also has the effect of reducing but
not eliminating the gaps between the education groups. The changes to employment (Figure 16)
are small, relative to the effect of changing the income process, but the effects on HAART use (Fig-
ure 17) and health (Figure 18) are comparable. These simulations suggest that both mechanisms
are at play, so the effects of the policy are not solely due to the effects of differential income.
     Table 15 shows the effects of the simulations shown in Figures 10-12 across two periods. The
first three rows of each panel show the impact of the simulated increase in non-labor income in the
following period (small differences from Figures 10-12 are due to simulation error). The following
three rows show the effects in the following period, a year out from baseline. For individuals who
start with high CD4, regardless of their treatment history, the probability of maintaining their health
status is high. Those who start the simulation on HAART are already highly likely to continue
with the treatment, so the policy change does not have a large effect on their treatment choice. For
those individuals with high CD4 who were not using treatment before, the simulation induces a
large change to HAART use at both time t + 1 and t + 2. This group would not have been likely
to switch to HAART in the absence of the intervention because they were already highly likely
to stay healthy regardless of treatment choice. Thus, one year after the policy is introduced the
probability of using HAART is 8.6 percentage points higher than it would be in the absence of the
policy for those with less than a college degree and 4.0 percentage points higher for those with a
college degree. However, because health is highly persistent, this translates to only small gains in
health.
     Individuals with low CD4 have a lot to gain from using HAART, even in the absence of the
policy intervention. For those already using HAART, the policy therefore has a very small effect
on HAART use, since these individuals would have continued the treatment with a 99-100% prob-
ability at t + 1 and a 98-99% probability at t + 2. Given this, the policy change does not have a
meaningful impact on health. However, for those individuals with low CD4 and no treatment use
at time t , the impacts are larger. In the absence of the policy, 84% of those with less education
and 91% of those with a college degree would have started HAART in t + 1, while 95% and 98%
would have started HAART by t + 2, respectively. With the policy intervention, HAART take-up
happens faster, with 89% of those with less education and 92% of those with a college degree start-

                                                  24
ing HAART in t + 1. Thus, while the health impacts of the policy attenuate over time, the policy
change does induce individuals to improve their health sooner than they otherwise would have.


6   Conclusion

This paper develops a model for assessing variation in the value of medical innovation across
socio-demographic groups. We focus on an innovation for the treatment of HIV, HAART, which
was introduced in the mid-1990s. While HAART is far more effective than earlier treatments, it had
harsh side effects, which interfered with employment, especially so for patients with less education.
As a result, HAART provided less value (measured as gains in lifetime utility) for people with less
education, thus exacerbating existing inequality. Policies that make it easier to use medications,
including those that directly target the health-work tradeoff, could increase uptake and broaden the
set of patients who benefit from medical innovation.
    An important feature of our model is how we envision health disparities. They may arise
from out-of-pockets costs, but could also reflect persistent differences in behavior, e.g., non-use
of effective medication. Yet, we do not characterize such behavior differences as recklessness,
carelessness, lack of information or some kind of decision-making bias concentrated among disad-
vantaged groups. Rather, agents in the model we posit face health-work tradeoffs and we find that
these are starker for people with less education. We argue that this approach to modeling patient
behavior aids in our understanding of tradeoffs agents face that lead them to optimally choose be-
haviors that exacerbate health disparities. Effective policy could modify these tradeoffs to reduce
health disparities.
    While our focus is on HIV, we view the AIDS epidemic as a useful historical analogy that
provides lessons for other worldwide health crises, including Covid-19. Like HIV, Covid-19 has
unequal consequences in part because protective health actions imply different costs for different
groups. In the case of HIV, effective medication has side effects that make work difficult, especially
for less educated people. In the case of Covid-19, staying at home is more difficult for people in
cramped housing or who are unable to tele-work. In both cases, policies often amount to blaming
and shaming behaviors that put health at risk. Then as now, a more useful approach, one that can
contribute to risk mitigation, is to understand the circumstances and tradeoffs that people face and
to design policy accordingly.




                                                 25
Tables and Figures


                      TABLE 1: Summary statistics by education and HAART-era

                                                 Pre        Post         Pre        Post
                                       All     HAART HAART             HAART HAART
                                                    <College                College+
            College +                 0.64      0.00       0.00         1.00       1.00
            Age                        44         40         45           42         47
            Death                     0.04      0.08       0.02         0.05       0.01
            CD4 Count                 460        401        487          413        507
            High CD4 ( 250)           0.76       0.66       0.79         0.69       0.83
            Treatment                 0.75       0.59      0.77         0.64       0.87
              Monotherapy             0.20       0.36       0.06         0.35      0.09
              Combotherapy            0.17       0.23       0.10         0.29      0.09
              HAART                   0.38       0.00       0.61         0.00      0.69
            Ailments                  0.39       0.41      0.41         0.38       0.39
            Full Time Work            0.67       0.64      0.58         0.74       0.67
            Income ($/half year)     20,524    15,909     15,214       23,108     22,377
            Insurance                 0.95       0.89      0.93         0.95       0.97
            MOOP ($/half year)        543        316        425          433        748
            N (t)                    10,830     1,705      1,624        3,177      4,324


Notes: The pre-HAART era contains observations from 1991 until mid 1995 (9 half-year periods), the
post-HAART era contains observations from mid 1995 until mid 2003 (18 periods). Each entry represents
the mean over person-visit observations for the given time period, except for education which is measured
once per person. All measures are proportions, except age is measured in years (30-64), CD4 count is a
continuous measure, and income and medical expenditures are in year 2000 dollars per half year. 10,830
person-visit observations for 1,156 individuals.




                                                   26
      TABLE 2: Next Period High CD4, by Education


                      All        <College     College+

<College            -0.197**
                     (0.077)
Health (hit )       4.245***     4.487***    4.119***
                     (0.074)       (0.136)     (0.088)
Age (ait )           0.093*         0.051       0.100
                     (0.055)       (0.097)     (0.068)
Age2 (a2
       it )          -0.001*        -0.000     -0.001*
                     (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)
Pre-HAART t        -0.080***     -0.071***   -0.083***
                     (0.015)       (0.027)     (0.018)
Post-HAART t        0.064***      0.045***    0.075***
                     (0.009)       (0.017)     (0.011)
Constant           -3.485***       -3.382     -3.340**
                     (1.227)       (2.121)     (1.546)

Observations         10,425       3,156         7,269
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Logit models
for 1,156 individuals in the sample. Health is defined as
CD4>250. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                            27
               TABLE 3: Treatment Use, by Education

                          All        <College         College+

<College                -0.449***
                          (0.053)
Health (hit )           -2.026*** -1.743***           -2.271***
                          (0.089)   (0.127)             (0.129)
Insurance (yinsurance
              it      ) 1.040***  1.204***             0.878***
                          (0.098)   (0.141)             (0.138)
         l
Work (dit +1 )          -0.558*** -0.646***           -0.500***
                          (0.059)   (0.094)             (0.076)
Age (ait )               0.095**     0.069             0.117**
                          (0.040)   (0.062)             (0.052)
Age2 (a2it )              -0.001*   -0.001              -0.001*
                          (0.000)   (0.001)             (0.001)
Pre-HAART t             -0.089*** -0.073***           -0.098***
                          (0.011)   (0.018)             (0.013)
Post-HAART t             0.074*** 0.065***             0.079***
                          (0.006)   (0.011)             (0.008)
Constant                   -0.401    -0.539              -0.576
                          (0.887)   (1.366)             (1.159)

Observations             10,425       3,156            7,269
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Logit models for 1,156
in the sample. Treatment is an indicator for whether the individual
is taking any medication. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                28
TABLE 4: Period-by-period HIV treatment choice transitions from periods t to t+1

                                                Time t+1
                                  None Mono Combo HAART
                                        Pre-HAART, <College
       Time t No Treatment 88.97 7.74                 3.3        ­
                Monotherapy       3.62 77.24 19.14               ­
                Combotherapy 3.09 20.27 76.63                    ­
                                        Pre-HAART, College+
       Time t No Treatment 89.45 7.98                2.57        ­
                Monotherapy       2.82      72.7    24.48        ­
                Combotherapy 0.97 21.53              77.5        ­
                                        Post-HAART, <College
       Time t No Treatment 85.68 1.02                4.09      9.21
                Monotherapy        3.6     58.56 10.81        27.03
                Combotherapy 2.63           3.16    63.16     31.05
                HAART             1.57      2.58     1.23     94.62
                                        Post-HAART, College+
       Time t No Treatment 84.29 0.65                4.09     10.97
                Monotherapy       1.19 66.51         6.65     25.65
                Combotherapy 1.98           2.98     62.3     32.74
                HAART             1.06      3.08     0.95     94.91
       Notes: This table presents a transition matrix for medication
       choices by HAART era and education level. Before HAART,
       medication use/non-use was highly persistent. After HAART,
       individuals using other medications often switch to HAART.




                                      29
             TABLE 5: Medication spell characteristics by education level for analysis sample

                                                                          <College      College +    p-value
 Ever Use Treatment                                                         0.84          0.89        0.012
 Share of Survey Visits Using Treatment                                     0.69          0.77        0.002
 Ever Use HAART                                                             0.72          0.81        0.013
 Share of Survey Visits Using HAART (when available)                        0.52          0.60        0.012
 First Used HAART                                                          27.88         27.05        0.019
 Treatment Transitions (per visit)                                          0.15          0.16        0.558
 Ever Stopped HAART                                                         0.19          0.26        0.045
 Ever Started HAART After Stopping                                          0.15          0.19        0.199
 Ever Started HAART After Stopping (conditional on stopping)                0.78          0.73        0.493


Notes: One observation per person for 1,156 individuals. Treatment in this context means using one of the
three medications. Ever use treatment is an indicator for if the individual is observed using treatment during
the sample period. The first visit where HAART was available is 24, so an individual first using HAART in
visit 27 started approximately a year and a half after it was introduced. Ever stopped HAART means that
the individual was observed using HAART and then later observed not using HAART.




                                                     30
                     TABLE 6: No Ailments, by Education

                            All       <College          College+

     <College            -0.175***
                           (0.046)
     Health (hit )        0.802***     0.885***         0.763***
                           (0.051)      (0.089)          (0.063)
     Mono                -0.694***    -0.519***        -0.784***
                           (0.066)      (0.111)          (0.083)
     Combo               -0.748***    -0.657***        -0.810***
                           (0.069)      (0.119)          (0.086)
     HAART               -0.847***    -0.811***        -0.888***
                           (0.067)      (0.120)          (0.083)
     Age (ait )          -0.137***     -0.139**        -0.144***
                           (0.033)      (0.055)          (0.042)
     Age2 (a2
            it )          0.001***      0.001**         0.001***
                           (0.000)      (0.001)          (0.000)
     Pre-HAART t            -0.014       -0.020          -0.010
                           (0.010)      (0.017)          (0.012)
     Post-HAART t          0.013**      0.024**           0.010
                           (0.005)      (0.011)          (0.006)
     Constant             3.723***     3.368***         4.008***
                           (0.747)      (1.225)          (0.951)

     Observations          10,425        3,156            7,269
     Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Logit models
     for 1,156 individuals in the sample. No ailments is an indicator
     for if the individual suffered no ailments in the period.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


TABLE 7: Period-by-period employment choice transitions from periods t to t+1

                                       Time t+1
                                      Not Working Working
                                              <College
            Time t Not Working            90.31         9.69
                     Working               8.34        91.66
                                              College+
            Time t Not Working            87.94        12.06
                     Working               7.16        92.84
            Notes: This table presents a transition matrix for
            employment choices by education level. Working
            is defined as full time work.


                                     31
                                  TABLE 8: Full Time Work, by Education


                                                   All        <College       College+

                      <College              -1.185***
                                              (0.059)
                      Ailments (yailments
                                    it    ) -0.981***        -1.214***       -0.869***
                                              (0.047)          (0.086)         (0.057)
                      Health (hit +1 )       0.822***         0.782***        0.835***
                                              (0.056)          (0.098)         (0.069)
                      Using Treatment       -0.258***        -0.326***       -0.225***
                                              (0.061)          (0.098)         (0.078)
                      Age (ait )             -0.112**        -0.424***          0.010
                                              (0.044)          (0.081)         (0.059)
                      Age2 (a2it )           -0.001**          0.002**       -0.002***
                                              (0.000)          (0.001)         (0.001)
                      Experience (eit )     0.136***          0.138***       0.141***
                                              (0.011)          (0.024)         (0.014)
                                   2
                      Experience (eit )2    -0.001***           -0.000       -0.001***
                                              (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
                      Pre-HAART t              0.006            -0.002          0.009
                                              (0.010)          (0.018)         (0.013)
                      Post-HAART t           0.031***         0.058***        0.023***
                                              (0.006)          (0.012)         (0.007)
                      Constant              4.387***         10.704***          1.375
                                              (0.926)          (1.650)         (1.236)

                      Observations            10,425       3,156       7,269
                      Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Logit models for
                      1,156 individuals in the sample. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
                      * p<0.1

                          TABLE 9: Additional characteristics by education level

                                                         <College    College +     p-value
                   Manual occupation                       5.11        4.49         0.000
                   Stopped meds for side effects           0.15        0.11         0.000
                   Changed job due to HIV                  0.06        0.05         0.010

Notes: These questions are not asked of all participants in all visits so have substantial missing data relative
to analysis sample. Occupation is measured once at the beginning of data collection and not updated after
that. We use occupation definitions from Autor et al. (2003), occupations are scored by the amount of
manual labor they require based on DOT task measures. Stopped meds is only measured for those taking
medications in the given period. Changing jobs is asked regardless of employment.


                                                      32
                TABLE 10: Income, by Education


                      All      <College          College+

<College          -5.644***
                    (0.189)
Experience (eit ) 0.132***        0.061          0.144***
                    (0.037)     (0.071)            (0.047)
             2 2
Experience (eit ) -0.003***      -0.001          -0.003***
                    (0.001)     (0.001)            (0.001)
Age (ait )        0.612***     0.632***          0.642***
                    (0.140)     (0.239)            (0.187)
Age2 (a2it )      -0.004***    -0.005**           -0.004**
                    (0.002)     (0.003)            (0.002)
Health (hit )     0.942***     1.194***          0.826***
                    (0.190)     (0.318)            (0.237)
         l
Work (dit +1 )    9.378***     9.890***          9.102***
                    (0.174)     (0.297)            (0.215)
Pre-HAART t           0.002      -0.020             0.013
                    (0.034)     (0.058)            (0.042)
Post-HAART t -0.096***         -0.087**          -0.099***
                    (0.019)     (0.034)            (0.022)
Constant             -3.726     -8.233*             -4.758
                    (2.962)     (4.945)            (3.919)

Observations         10,425        3,156            7,269
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Linear regression models
for 1,156 individuals in the sample. Income is in thousands
of year 2000 dollars per half year. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1




                              33
           TABLE 11: Estimated Structural Utility Parameters

                                                                Standard
Definition                          Parameter Estimate            Error
No Ailments                          u
                                   1, f =1          0           --
Ailments                             u
                                   1, f =0       -1.47            0.130
Ailments, College +                  u
                                   1, f =0,s=1      0.41          0.140
Work, No Ailments                    u
                                   2, f =1          1.18          0.056
Work, No Ailments, College +         u
                                   2, f =1,s=1      0.36          0.068
Work, Ailments                       u
                                   2, f =0       -2.22            0.079
Work, Ailments, College+             u
                                   2, f =0,s=1      0.77          0.099
Start Treatment, No Ailments         u
                                   3, f =1          0.33          0.569
Start Treatment, Ailments            u
                                   3, f =0          1.15          0.525
Change Treatment, No Ailments 4      u           -  5 .45         0.143
                                      , f =1
Change Treatment, Ailments           u
                                   4, f =0          2.16          0.159
Stop Treatment, No Ailments          u
                                   5, f =1       -9.13            0.533
Stop Treatment, Ailments             u
                                   5, f =0       -2.09            0.944
Notes: Parameters are for equation 10. 1, f =1 is set to 0. Fit =1 means
no ailments. Standard errors calculated using the delta method.




                         TABLE 12: Model Fit

                               Pr(Work)       Pr(HAART)
        Healthy Coll. + Data Model Data Model
            0         0      0.42    0.47 0.29         0.36
            1         0      0.68    0.65 0.31         0.27
            0         1      0.53    0.57 0.35         0.43
            1         1      0.75    0.72 0.42         0.38
        All                  0.67 0.67       0.38      0.36
        Notes: Estimates from model simulations compared
        with data from analysis sample. Comparison is
        facilitated by matching on all observable state
        variables.




                                  34
             TABLE 13: Expected Total Lifetime Value

                               <College              College+
                         Low        High       Low       High
                        CD4         CD4       CD4        CD4
Combotherapy (1995) 33.5              68.0       59.2     100.0
HAART (1996)               68.9      102.2     115.4      149.6
Absolute Gain              35.5       34.2       56.2      49.6
Percent Gain             105.9        50.2       94.9      49.6
Notes: Estimates from model simulations. Total expected lifetime
value for a 30 year old male on best available treatment, 1995
(visit 23) versus 1996 (visit 26). High education, high CD4,
Combotherapy normalized to 100.




                               35
                                    TABLE 14: Value Decomposition

                                               <College                College+
                                          Low     High             Low     High
                                         CD4       CD4             CD4     CD4
                  All education differences
                  Combotherapy (1995)       33.5     68.0            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)              68.9    102.2           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             35.5     34.2            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain            105.9      50.2            94.9        49.6
                  Same Income Process
                  Combotherapy (1995)       37.5     74.9            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)              77.1    112.5           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             39.6     37.7            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain            105.7      50.3            94.9        49.6
                  +Insurance & MOOP
                  Combotherapy (1995)       37.4     74.8            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)              76.9    112.3           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             39.5     37.6            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain            105.6      50.3            94.9        49.6
                  +Health
                  Combotherapy (1995)       38.2     76.3            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)              78.9    114.5           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             40.8     38.2            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain            106.8      50.0            94.9        49.6
                  +Ailments
                  Combotherapy (1995)       39.2     78.3            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)              81.4    117.5           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             42.1     39.2            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain            107.4      50.1            94.9        49.6
                  +Survival
                  Combotherapy (1995)       52.4     89.3            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)            101.6     133.3           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             49.2     43.9            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain              93.9     49.2            94.9        49.6
                  +Utility Parameters
                  Combotherapy (1995)       59.2    100.0            59.2       100.0
                  HAART (1996)            115.4     149.6           115.4       149.6
                  Absolute Gain             56.2     49.6            56.2        49.6
                  Percent Gain              94.9     49.6            94.9        49.6

Notes: Estimates from model simulations. This table decomposes the value of HAART by education group
by gradually changing processes and parameters to give the agents with lower education the processes and
parameters of those with higher education. The first panel shows the results with all differences intact, as
shown in table 13. Total expected lifetime value for a 30 year old male on best available treatment, 1995
(visit 23) versus 1996 (visit 26). Higher education, high CD4, combo-therapy normalized to 100.
                                                    36
                           TABLE 15: Non-Labor Income Simulation t+1 & t+2

                          <College                                             College+
                 No Subs Subsidy PP                    %          No Subs     Subsidy PP           %
   High CD4, on HAART
   t+1 Work        72.7   50.8    -21.9               -30.1         78.1        65.9      -12.2   -15.6
        HAART      95.6   96.5     0.9                 0.9          97.6        97.8       0.2     0.2
        Health     94.1   94.1     0.0                 0.0          94.4        94.4       0.0     0.0
   t+2 Work        70.9   49.1    -21.7               -30.7         76.8        64.2      -12.6   -16.4
        HAART      92.0   93.7     1.6                 1.8          95.5        96.0       0.4     0.5
        Health     90.2   90.3     0.1                 0.1          90.7        90.7       0.0     0.0
   High CD4, No Treatment
   t+1 Work        80.4   61.2    -19.2               -23.9         82.7        72.7      -10.1   -12.2
        HAART       7.0   12.4     5.4                76.7          12.5        15.3       2.7    21.9
        Health     91.9   92.1     0.1                 0.2          92.4        92.5       0.1     0.1
   t+2 Work        77.5   56.7    -20.8               -26.9         80.3        69.7      -10.6   -13.2
        HAART      18.8   27.5     8.6                45.8          27.3        31.2       4.0    14.5
        Health     86.8   87.2     0.4                 0.4          87.8        88.0       0.2     0.2
   Low CD4, on HAART
   t+1 Work        60.1   34.3    -25.8               -42.9         67.7        52.1      -15.6   -23.0
        HAART      99.0   99.3     0.2                 0.2          99.6        99.7       0.1     0.1
        Health     26.0   26.0     0.0                 0.1          27.1        27.1       0.0     0.1
   t+2 Work        61.9   38.1    -23.9               -38.5         69.3        54.9      -14.4   -20.8
        HAART      98.0   98.5     0.5                 0.5          99.1        99.2       0.1     0.1
        Health     43.8   43.9     0.1                 0.2          45.4        45.4       0.0     0.0
   Low CD4, No Treatment
   t+1 Work        61.2   35.6    -25.6               -41.8         68.2        52.8      -15.4   -22.6
        HAART      84.2   89.1     4.8                 5.7          90.9        92.3       1.4     1.5
        Health     23.6   24.4     0.7                 3.1          25.6        25.9       0.2     0.9
   t+2 Work        62.0   38.0    -24.0               -38.7         69.1        54.8      -14.3   -20.7
        HAART      94.9   96.8     1.9                 2.0          97.7        98.2       0.4     0.5
        Health     41.8   42.5     0.7                 1.7          44.2        44.4       0.2     0.5

Notes: This table shows the effects of a simulated permanent $10,000 per-six-months increase in income
for non-workers. Each panel of the table shows the results for a different combination of starting health and
treatment for a 30 year old individual in 1996 by education level. Columns 1 and 5 show results without
the subsidy (for those without and with a college degree respectively), while columns 2 and 6 include the
subsidy. The following columns show the percentage point and percent difference with and without the
subsidy. The first three rows of each panel show results for one period ahead, while the following rows
show results for two periods ahead. We simulate 20,000 observations to reduce simulation error, though t+1
values differ slightly from figures 10-12 due to simulation error.




                                                     37
                     Pr Death Next Year




    10
    8
    6
%
    4
    2
    0




         1990           1995              2000              2005
                                 Year

                     College+                        <College
                     HAART Introduction



F IGURE 2: Death probability over time, by educational attainment




                                38
                      High CD4 Probability
   80 100
      90
   %
      70
      60




            1990          1995              2000             2005
                                   Year

                       College+                       <College
                       HAART Introduction



F IGURE 3: High CD4 count (>250) over time, by educational attainment




                                  39
                        Treatment Choice
    100
    80
    60
%
    40
    20
    0




          1990              1995            2000            2005
                                     Year

                     None                          Mon-Therapy
                     Combo-Therapy                 HAART
                     HAART Introduction



             F IGURE 4: Treatment consumption over time




                                   40
                        HAART Choice
      100
      80
      60
  %
      40
      20
      0




            1990        1995              2000             2005
                                 Year

                     College+                       <College
                     HAART Introduction



F IGURE 5: HAART consumption over time, by educational attainment




                                41
                                F IGURE 6: Indifference Curves: High CD4

Notes: This figure shows simulated indifference curves for medications that generate combinations of health
and ailment probabilities. The point at which the indifference curves cross is the health and ailment proba-
bilities from HAART for an agent with high CD4 and without a college degree. The slope of the simulated
indifference curve is smaller for those with more education, which means that they are more willing to expe-
rience side effects in exchange for health improvements. The across-education difference is larger for agents
forced to work, because the disutility of working with ailments is higher for those with less education. The
simulated agent had high CD4 last period, is 30 years old, has 10 years of work experiences, and is in visit
26 (1996)




                                                     42
                                F IGURE 7: Indifference Curves: Low CD4

Notes: This figure shows simulated indifference curves for medications that generate combinations of health
and ailment probabilities. The point at which the indifference curves cross is the health and ailment proba-
bilities from HAART for an agent with low CD4 and without a college degree. The slope of the simulated
indifference curve is slightly smaller for those with more education, which means that they are slightly more
willing to experience side effects in exchange for health improvements. The across-education difference is
larger for agents forced to work, because the disutility of working with ailments is higher for those with less
education. The simulated agent had low CD4 last period, is 30 years old, has 10 years of work experiences,
and is in visit 26 (1996)




                                                      43
 F IGURE 8: Total Lifetime Utility by Visit and Education, Healthy




F IGURE 9: Total Lifetime Utility by Visit and Education, Unhealthy




                                44
                       F IGURE 10: Non-Labor Income Simulation: Work Changes

Notes: This figure shows the change in the probability of working in the next period for HIV+ men across
four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-six-months increase in non-labor
income for non-workers. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in italics and base-
line probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.




                     F IGURE 11: Non-Labor Income Simulation: HAART Changes

Notes: This figure shows the change in the probability of using HAART in the next period for HIV+ men
across four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-six-months increase in non-
labor income for non-workers. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in italics and
baseline probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.


                                                    45
                      F IGURE 12: Non-Labor Income Simulation: Health Changes

Notes: This figure shows the change in the probability of having a high CD4 next period for HIV+ men
across four possible current-period health-treatment states given $10,000-per-six-months increase in non-
labor income for non-workers. Bars represent percentage point change. Percent change in italics, probability
of high CD4 next period pre-policy-change in parentheses.




                                                    46
References

Adimora, Adaora and Victor Schoenbach, "Contextual Factors and the Black-White Disparity
 in Heterosexual HIV Transmission," Epidemiology, 2002, 13 (6), 707­712.

Adler, Nancy and David Rehkopf, "U.S. Disparities in Health: Descriptions, Causes, and Mech-
 anisms," Annual Review of Public Health, 2008, 29, 235­252.

Arcidiacono, P., H. Sieg, and F. Sloan, "Living Rationally under the Volcano? Heavy Drinking
  and Smoking among the Elderly," International Economic Review, 2007, 48 (1), 37­65.

Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murane, "The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1279­
  1334.

Avery, Rosemary, Donald Kenkel, Dean Lillard, Alan Mathios, and Hua Wang, "Health Dis-
  parities and Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceutical Products," Advances in Health
  Economics and Health Services Research, 2008, 19.

Becker, G.S., "Health as Human Capital: Synthesis and Extensions," Oxford Economic Papers,
  2007, 59 (3), 379­410.

Beer, Linda, Christine Mattson, Heather Bradley, and Jacek Skarbinski, "Understanding
  Cross-Sectional Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Disparities in Antiretroviral Use and Viral Sup-
  pression Among HIV Patients in the United States," Medicine, 2011, 95 (13), 1­9.

Cawley, John and Christopher Ruhm, "The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors," Handbook
  of Health Economics, 2012, 2, 95­199.

Cevik, Muge, Julia Marcus, Caroline Buckee, and Tara Smith, "SARS-CoV-2 Transmission
  Dynamics Should Inform Policy," Clinical Infections Disease, 2020, Forthcoming.

Chan, Tat Y. and Barton H. Hamilton, "Learning, Private Information, and the Economic Eval-
 uation of Randomized Experiments," Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (6), 997­1040.

  , , and Nicholas W. Papageorge, "Health, Risky Behaviour and the Value of Medical Inno-
  vation for Infectious Disease," Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (4), 1465­1510.

Chang, Virginia and Diane Lauderdale, "Fundamental Cause Theory, Technological Innovation,
 and Health Disparities: The Case of Cholesterol in the Era of Statins," Journal of Health and
 Social Behavior, 2009, 50, 245­260.

Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman, and Sergio Urzua, "The Education-Health Gradient," Amer-
  ican Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2010, 100, 234­238.

Crawford, Gregory S. and Matthew Shum, "Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical De-
  mand," Econometrica, 2005, 73 (1), 1137­1173.




                                             47
Cronin, Christopher, "Insurance-Induced Moral Hazard: A Dynamic Model of Within-Year
  Medical Care Decision Making Under Uncertainty," International Economic Review, 2019, 60
  (1), 187­218.

  , Matthew Forrstrom, and Nicholas Papageorge, "What Good Are Treatment Effects Without
  Treatment? Mental Health and the Reluctance to Use Talk Therapy," Working Paper, NBER WP
  27711 2020.

Currie, Janet, "Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
 and Human Capital Development," Journal of Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (1), 87­122.

Cutler, David, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl, "Socioeconomic Status and Health: Di-
 mensions and Mechanisms," The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics, 2011.

Darden, Michael, "Smoking, Expectations, and Health: A Dynamic Stochastic Model of Lifetime
  Smoking Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (5), 1465­1522.

Detels, R., P. Tarwater, J.P. Phair, J. Margolick, S.A. Riddler, and A. Muñoz, "Effectiveness
  of Potent Antiretroviral Therapies on the Incidence of Opportunistic Infections Before and after
  AIDS Diagnosis," AIDS, 2001, 15 (3), 347.

Gable, C., J. Tierce, D. Simison, D. Ward, and Motte K., "Costs of HIV+/AIDS at CD4+
 Counts Disease Stages Based on Treatment Protocols," Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency
 Syndromes and Human Retrovirology, 1996, 12 (4), 413­420.

Garthwaite, C., "The Economic Benefits of Medical Innovations: The Case of Cox-2 Inhibitors,"
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2012, 4 (3), 116­137.

Gerber, Ben, Irwin Brodsky, Kimberly Lawless, Louanne Smolin, Ahsan Arozullah, Everett
 Smith, Michael Berbaum, Paul Heckerling, and Arnold Eiser, "Implementation and Evalua-
 tion of a Low-Literacy Diabetes Education Computer Multimedia Application," Diabetes Care,
 2005, 28 (7), 374­378.

Gilleskie, Donna, "A Dynamic Stochastic Model of Medical Care Use and Work Absence,"
  Econometrica, 1998, 66 (1), 1­45.

Glied, Sherry and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Technological Innovation and Inequality in Health,"
  Demography, 2008, 45 (3), 741­761.

Goldman, Dana and James P. Smith, "The Increasing Value of Education to Health," Social
 Science and Medicine, 2011, 72, 1728­1737.

Groeneveld, Peter, Seema Sonnad, Anee Lee, David Asch, and Judy Shea, "Racial Differences
 in Attitudes Toward Innovative Medical Technology," Journal of General Internal Medicine,
 2006, 21, 559­563.

Grossman, M., "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health," The Journal of
 Political Economy, 1972, 80 (2), 223­255.


                                               48
Hamilton, Barton, Andrés Hincapié, Robert Miller, and Nicholas Papageorge, "Innovation
 and Diffusion of Medical Treatment," International Economic Review, 2021, Forthcoming.

Horne, Rob, John Bell, Jonathan Montgomery, Morten Ravn, and John Tooke, "A New Social
 Contract for Medical Innovation," Lancet, 2015, 385, 1153­1154.

Lakdawalla, D., N. Sood, and D. Goldman, "HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual Behavior,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (3), 1063­1102.

Lasser, Karen, David Himmelstein, and Steffie Woolhandler, "Access to Care, Health Status,
  and Health Disparities in the United States and Canada: Results of a Cross-National Population-
  Based Survey," American Journal of Public Health, 2006, 96 (7), 1300­1307.

LaVeist, Thomas, Darrell Gaskin, and Patrick Richard, "Estimating the Economic Burden of
  Racial Health Inequalities in the United States," International Journal of Health Services, 2011,
  41 (2), 231­238.

Lou, Jiehong, Xingchi Shen, and Deb Niemeier, "Are stay-at-home orders more difficult to
  follow for low-income groups?," Journal of Transport Geography, 2020, 89.

Magnac, Thierry and David Thesmar, "Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes,"
 Econometrica, 2002, 70 (2), 801­816.

Marcus, Julia L and Jonathan M Snowden, "Words Matter: Putting an End to "Unsafe" and
 "Risky" Sex," Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 2020, 47 (1), 1.

Murphy, K.M. and R.H. Topel, "The Value of Health and Longevity," The Journal of Political
 Economy, 2006, 114 (5), 871­904.

Nanney, Marilyn, Samuel Myers, Man Xu, Kateryna Kent, Thomas Durfee, and Michele
  Allen, "The Economic Benefits of Reducing Racial Disparities in Health: The Case of Min-
  nesota," International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 2019, 16.

Osborn, Chandra, Michael Paasche-Orlow, Terry Davis, and Michael Wolf, "Health Literacy:
  An Overlooked Factor in Understanding HIV Health Disparities," American Journal of Preven-
  tive Medicine, 2007, 33 (5), 374­378.

Papageorge, Nicholas, Matthew Zahn, Michéle Belot, Eline van den Broek-Altenburg, Syn-
  gjoo Choi, Julian Jamison, and Egon Tripodi, "Socio-demographic Factors Associated with
  Self-protecting Behavior During the Covid-19 Pandemic," Journal of Population Economics,
  2021, 34, 691­738.

Papageorge, Nicholas W., "Why Medical Innovation is Valuable: Health, Human Capital, and the
  Labor Market," Quantitative Economics, 2016, 7 (3), 671­725.

Robinson, Russel and Aisha Moodie-Mills, "HIV/AIDS Inequality: Structural Barriers to Pre-
  vention, Treatment, and Care in Communities of Color," Technical Report, Center for American
  Progress and Berkeley Law 2012.


                                                49
Sommers, Benjamin, Katherine Baicker, and Arnold Epstein, "Mortality and Access to Care
  among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions," The New England Journal of Medicine, 2012,
  367 (11), 1025­1034.

Stafford, Amanda and Lisa Wood, "Tackling Health Disparities for People Who Are Homeless?
  Start with Social Determinants," International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
  Health, 2017, 14.

Testa, Marcia and Donald Simonson, "Assessment of Quality of Life Outcomes," New England
  Journal of Medicine, 1996, 334 (13), 835­840.

Thornton, Rachel, Crystal Glover, Crystal Cené, Deborah Glik, Jeffrey Henderson, and
  David Williams, "Evaluating Strategies For Reducing Health Disparities By Addressing The
  Social Determinants Of Health," Health Affairs, 2016, 35 (8), 1416­1423.

Wherry, Laura and Sarah Miller, "Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects of the
 Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-Experimental Study," Annals of Internal
 Medicine, 2016, 164 (12), 795­803.

Williams, David and Pamela Jackson, "Social Sources of Racial Disparities in Health," Health
 Affairs, 2005, 24 (2), 325­334.

  , Selina Mohammed, Jacinta Leavell, and Chiquita Collins, "Race, Socioeconomic Status
  and Health: Complexities, Ongoing Challenges and Research Opportunities," Annals of the New
  York Academy of Sciences, 2010, 1186, 69­101.

Woolf, Steven, Laudan Aron, Lisa Dubay, Sarah Simon, Emily Zimmerman, and Kim Luk,
 "How Are Income and Wealth Linked to Health and Longevity?," Technical Report, The Urban
 Institute and the Center on Society and Health 2015.




                                              50
A   Appendix Tables and Figures


                                             TABLE 16: Health Process

                                                                             (1)
                            VARIABLES                                        hit

                            Health (hit -1 )                                  -0.019
                                                                             (0.169)
                                                    m
                            Health X Mono hit -1 · d1                       0.141**
                                                      it
                                                                             (0.069)
                                                     m
                            Health X Combo hit -1 · d2                     0.329***
                                                       it
                                                                             (0.074)
                                                     m
                            Health X HAART hit -1 · d3                     0.542***
                                                       it
                                                                             (0.064)
                                                               m
                            Low Health X Mono (1 - hit -1 ) · d1              0.045
                                                                 it
                                                                             (0.182)
                                                                m
                            Low Health X Combo (1 - hit -1 ) · d2             0.088
                                                                  it
                                                                             (0.183)
                                                                m
                            Low Health X HAART (1 - hit -1 ) · d3          1.213***
                                                                  it
                                                                             (0.184)
                            Age (ait -1 )                                  0.103***
                                                                             (0.032)
                            Age2 (a2
                                   it -1 )                                 -0.001***
                                                                             (0.000)
                            Pre-HAART t                                    -0.040***
                                                                             (0.010)
                            Post-HAART t                                      0.002
                                                                             (0.005)
                            <College                                          -0.062
                                                                             (0.045)
                            Constant                                       -2.662***
                                                                             (0.730)

                            Observations                                    10,425
                                                                                 (1)
                        VARIABLES                                            Health hit

                        Health (hit -1 )                                     5.119***
                                                                              (0.332)
                        Health Booster X Low Health ^hit · (1 - hit -1 )     4.314***
                                                                              (0.362)
                        Health Booster X Health ^hit -1 · hit                3.125***
                                                                              (0.583)
                        Constant                                             -3.815***
                                                                              (0.208)

                        Observations                                           10,425

Notes: Parameter estimates for two-step health process for structural model. Health is defined as CD4>=250.




                                                       51
                                       TABLE 17: Death Process


                                                              (1)
                               VARIABLES                   Death bit +1

                               Health (hit )               -5.484***
                                                             (0.885)
                               Age (ait )                     0.012
                                                             (0.009)
                               Age X Health (ait · hit )    0.062***
                                                             (0.019)
                               <College                     0.421***
                                                             (0.109)
                               Pre-HAART t                    0.013
                                                             (0.021)
                               Post-HAART t                -0.095***
                                                             (0.017)
                               Constant                    -2.443***
                                                             (0.394)

                               Observations                  10,830

Notes: Parameter estimates for survival process for structural model. This process has more observations
than the others because people who die between t & t+1 are not included in other models.




                                                  52
                                    TABLE 18: No Ailment Process

                                                        (1)
                          VARIABLES           No Ailments 1 - yailments
                                                               it

                          Health (hit -1 )             0.802***
                                                         (0.051)
                          Mono                         -0.694***
                                                         (0.066)
                          Combo                        -0.748***
                                                         (0.069)
                          HAART                        -0.847***
                                                         (0.067)
                          Age (ait -1 )                -0.137***
                                                         (0.033)
                          Age2 (a2
                                 it -1 )                0.001***
                                                         (0.000)
                          Pre-HAART t                    -0.014
                                                         (0.010)
                          Post-HAART t                  0.013**
                                                         (0.005)
                          <College                     -0.175***
                                                         (0.046)
                          Constant                     3.723***
                                                         (0.747)

                          Observations                   10,425

Notes: Parameter estimates for ailment process for structural model. The outcome is equal to one if the
individual does not experience ailments.




                                                  53
                                      TABLE 19: Income Process

                                                            (1)
                               VARIABLES               Income yincome
                                                                it

                               Experience (eit -1 )       0.132***
                                                           (0.037)
                               Experience2 (e2
                                             it -1 )     -0.003***
                                                           (0.001)
                               Age (ait -1 )              0.612***
                                                           (0.140)
                               Age2 (a2
                                      it -1 )            -0.004***
                                                           (0.002)
                               Health (hit -1 )           0.942***
                                                           (0.190)
                                      l)
                               Work (dit                  9.378***
                                                           (0.174)
                               <College                  -5.644***
                                                           (0.189)
                               Pre-HAART t                  0.002
                                                           (0.034)
                               Post-HAART t              -0.096***
                                                           (0.019)
                               Constant                    -3.726
                                                           (2.962)

                               Observations                10,425
                               R-squared                   0.342

Notes: Parameter estimates for income process for structural model. Income in $1000 of year 2000 dollars
per half year.




                                                  54
                                      TABLE 20: Insurance Process

                                                              (1)
                              VARIABLES                Insurance yinsurance
                                                                  it

                              Health (hit -1 )             -0.823***
                                                             (0.122)
                              Age (ait -1 )                -0.278***
                                                             (0.089)
                              Age2 (a2
                                     it -1 )                0.003***
                                                             (0.001)
                              Experience (eit -1 )           0.053**
                                                             (0.021)
                              Experience2 (e2
                                            it -1 )           -0.001
                                                             (0.000)
                                     l)
                              Work (dit                     0.861***
                                                             (0.096)
                              <College                     -0.973***
                                                             (0.107)
                              Pre-HAART t                     -0.029
                                                             (0.018)
                              Post-HAART t                  0.058***
                                                             (0.013)
                              Constant                      8.327***
                                                             (1.840)

                              Observations                   10,425

Notes: Parameter estimates for insurance process for structural model. Insurance is a binary indicator for
health insurance coverage.




                                                      55
                               TABLE 21: Medical Out of Pocket Process

                                                                         (1)
       VARIABLES                                             Medical OOP Expenses yexpenses
                                                                                   it

       Income yincome
               it                                                         0.011***
                                                                           (0.001)
       Insurance yinsurance
                  it                                                     -0.244***
                                                                           (0.079)
       Insurance X Mono yinsurance
                         it
                                      m
                                   · d1 it                                0.309***
                                                                           (0.038)
       Insurance X Combo yinsurance
                          it
                                       m
                                    · d2 it                               0.365***
                                                                           (0.041)
       Insurance X HAART yinsurance
                          it
                                       m
                                    · d3 it                               0.425***
                                                                           (0.038)
       No Insurance X Mono (1 - yinsurance
                                 it
                                                m
                                           ) · d1 it                      0.691***
                                                                           (0.154)
       No Insurance X Combo (1 - yinsurance
                                  it
                                                 m
                                            ) · d3 it                       0.173
                                                                           (0.151)
       No Insurance X HAART (1 - yinsurance
                                  it
                                                 m
                                            ) · d3 it                       -0.061
                                                                           (0.140)
       Health (hit )                                                        -0.025
                                                                           (0.042)
       No Ailments (1 - yailments
                         it       )                                      -0.147***
                                                                           (0.051)
       Health X Ailments hit · yailments
                                it                                         -0.073
                                                                           (0.058)
       Age (ait )                                                           -0.019
                                                                           (0.019)
       Age2 (a2
              it )                                                           0.000
                                                                           (0.000)
       <College                                                          -0.127***
                                                                           (0.028)
       Pre-HAART t                                                         -0.001
                                                                           (0.006)
       Post-HAART t                                                       0.018***
                                                                           (0.003)
       Constant                                                             0.710
                                                                           (0.434)

       Observations                                                        10,425
       R-squared                                                            0.054

Notes: Parameter estimates for medical out of pocket expenditure process for structural model. Medical out
of pocket expenses (MOOP) in $1000 of year 2000 dollars per half year.


                                                   56
B   Non Labor Income Simulations, Removing Key Differences Between Education Groups




    F IGURE 13: This figure shows the change in the probability of working in the next period for
    HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-six-
    months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the in-
    come process. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in italics and baseline
    probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.




                                                   57
F IGURE 14: This figure shows the change in the probability of using HAART in the next period
for HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-
six-months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the
income process. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in italics and
baseline probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.




F IGURE 15: This figure shows the change in the probability of having a high CD4 next period
for HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given $10,000-per-six-
months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the in-
come process. Bars represent percentage point change. Percent change in italics, probability of
high CD4 next period pre-policy-change in parentheses.




                                              58
F IGURE 16: This figure shows the change in the probability of working in the next period for
HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-six-
months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the util-
ity of work and ailments. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in italics
and baseline probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.




F IGURE 17: This figure shows the change in the probability of using HAART in the next period
for HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given a $10,000-per-
six-months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the
utility of work and ailments. Bars represent percentage point changes. Percent changes are in
italics and baseline probabilities (absent the policy) are in parentheses.




                                               59
F IGURE 18: This figure shows the change in the probability of having a high CD4 next pe-
riod for HIV+ men across four possible current-period health-treatment states given $10,000-per-
six-months increase in non-labor income for non-workers, removing education differences in the
utility of work and ailments. Bars represent percentage point change. Percent change in italics,
probability of high CD4 next period pre-policy-change in parentheses.




                                              60
