                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EVIDENCE AND LESSONS ON THE HEALTH IMPACTS OF PUBLIC HEALTH FUNDING
                  FROM THE FIGHT AGAINST HIV/AIDS

                                      Marcus Dillender

                                     Working Paper 28867
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28867


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




I thank Shila Azodi, Kitt Carpenter, Joy Getzenberg, Sherry Glied, Lisa Powell, Joshua
Rosenfeld, Lesley Turner, and seminar participants at the LGBTQ+ Econ Seminar, the NBER
Health Economics 2021 Spring Meeting, and Vanderbilt University for helpful discussions and
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Marcus Dillender. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Evidence and Lessons on the Health Impacts of Public Health Funding from the Fight against
HIV/AIDS
Marcus Dillender
NBER Working Paper No. 28867
May 2021
JEL No. H51,I14,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

HIV/AIDS has been one of the largest public health crises in recent history, and the U.S. federal
government has spent hundreds of billions of dollars fighting the disease. This study examines the
impact of federal funding allocated to U.S. cities through the Ryan White CARE Act, which is
the largest program for combating HIV/AIDS in the United States. The empirical approach
identifies the impact of the funding by studying funding variation that comes from Ryan White
policy features that resulted in large funding differences among cities that were originally on
parallel HIV/AIDS trajectories and finds that Ryan White's city-level funding has improved HIV/
AIDS outcomes in the cities receiving the funds. The estimates indicate that one HIV/AIDS death
has been avoided for every $314,000 allocated through the program and that the program has
saved approximately 60,000 lives through 2018. The estimates also indicate that funding
differences across cities have contributed to the uneven progress in combating HIV/AIDS across
the United States.


Marcus Dillender
School of Public Health
University of Illinois at Chicago
1603 W. Taylor Street
Chicago, IL 60612
and NBER
modillen@uic.edu
1       Introduction
    A common tool of the U.S. federal government for addressing public health issues is to allocate
federal funds to support local responses. This approach has been used in public health campaigns
against specific diseases, including HIV/AIDS, diabetes, opioid addiction, COVID-19, and heart
disease, and in addressing broader issues related to access to care for underserved areas and
people. Understanding the impacts of allocating federal funds to local areas for the purpose of
improving public health is important for forming optimal policy to address public health issues,
but few estimates of the effect of federal spending to support local public health responses exist.
    This paper examines the impact of the federal government providing funding to U.S. cities to
address the HIV/AIDS epidemic, which has been one of the largest public health crises in recent
history1 and has claimed the lives of tens of millions of people worldwide. While the burden of
HIV/AIDS in the United States has fallen hardest on gay men and intravenous drug users--two
groups that make up a relatively small share of the U.S. population--the impact of HIV/AIDS on
these groups has been so devastating that HIV/AIDS has been a major factor in aggregate health
statistics. For example, from 1993 to 1995 HIV/AIDS was the leading cause of death among all
people ages 25 to 44 in the United States. Though treatment emerged in 1996 that could drastically
lengthen the lives of people with HIV/AIDS, no cure for HIV exists, and nearly 40 million people
currently live with HIV worldwide. While HIV/AIDS death rates have fallen in the United States
over the past few decades, the progress in combating HIV/AIDS has been uneven across the
country, with large cities that were the early epicenters of HIV/AIDS having experienced much
larger reductions in AIDS death and case rates since the height of the AIDS crisis than many other
parts of the country have. The slow progress in certain parts of the country has contributed to
concerns that the U.S. response to HIV/AIDS is failing.2
    As HIV/AIDS treatment is expensive and lifelong, many resources have been spent treating

    1
       While comparing the overall impacts of various public health crises would require aggregating across different
metrics, HIV/AIDS stands out both for the large number of people that it has affected and for its persistence as a
public health concern. Having killed over 700,000 Americans, HIV/AIDS has resulted in the deaths of more Ameri-
cans than all military conflicts since the Civil War combined. All recent presidents have emphasized the importance
of fighting HIV/AIDS for their administrations, and public health leaders and policymakers often assess the impor-
tance of emerging public health crises by comparing their possible impacts to the impact of HIV/AIDS (e.g., Benjamin
2020; Joint Economic Committee 2017).
     2
       Refer to El-Sadr, Mayer, and Hodder (2010) and El-Sadr et al. (2019). See also the comments from Tom Frieden,
then-director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in "U.S. Still in Danger of Losing War on AIDS,
C.D.C. Director Says," which was published in The New York Times on December 1, 2015.

                                                         1
the disease. Because an untreated HIV infection can impose negative externalities by increasing
the spread of HIV and because many people in the United States who have contracted HIV or
are at risk of contracting HIV are socioeconomically disadvantaged, the U.S. federal government
has had a large role in funding HIV/AIDS treatment. In 2019 alone, the U.S. federal government
spent $34.8 billion on HIV/AIDS, with most of that funding spent on treating and limiting the
spread of HIV/AIDS domestically (Kaiser Family Foundation 2019a).3 HIV/AIDS funding levels
have been controversial. Some observers have argued that too many resources have been spent
combating HIV/AIDS (England 2007), and even though the U.S. federal government has the am-
bitious goal of eliminating the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the United States by 2030 (Fauci et al. 2019),
policymakers often target HIV/AIDS funding for budget cuts (Hatcher 2020).
   Despite HIV/AIDS having been one of the largest public health crises in modern history and
despite the federal government having spent hundreds of billions of dollars to combat the disease,
little is known about the impact of federal funding to combat HIV/AIDS or about the role that
the large amounts of federal funding have played in the trajectory of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
the United States. More generally, little is known about the ability of allocating funds to local ar-
eas to support flexible public health responses to improve population health. The lack of research
into the U.S. government's response to HIV/AIDS stands in contrast to economics research into
the health impacts of other U.S. public health campaigns (e.g., Anderson et al. 2019, Anderson,
Charles, and Rees 2020; Bleakley 2010; Bleakley 2007) and of various federal safety net programs
(e.g., Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2011; Goodman-Bacon 2018a; Hoynes, Miller, and Si-
mon 2015; Miller et al. 2019).
   The goal of this study is to understand the impact of federal funds allocated to cities to combat
HIV/AIDS and the role that this funding has had in the course of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
the United States. Specifically, I examine the impact of funding from the first title of the Ryan
White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency (CARE) Act. Since its passage in 1990, the
Ryan White CARE Act has been the U.S. federal government's main mechanism for combating
HIV/AIDS in the United States. Unlike many other federal programs, the Ryan White program
does not provide benefits directly to the targeted population. Instead, the Ryan White CARE Act

   3
      Note that this amount of annual spending is more than the federal government spends on many important safety
net programs, including Head Start, the Children's Health Insurance Program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Fam-
ilies, and the Federal Pell Grant Program. Refer to Center for Poverty and Inequality Research (2020) for a discussion
of federal spending levels for these programs.

                                                          2
provides funding directly to cities and states to support local efforts to develop, coordinate, and
operate systems to provide health care and support services to low-income individuals with HIV/
AIDS (Institute of Medicine 2004). Through its first title, which is the title that allocates funding
to cities and is the focus of this study, the Ryan White CARE Act has allocated over $20 billion (in
2018 dollars) to 52 U.S. cities through 2020.
   A challenge in studying the impact of federal funding is that funding mechanisms are often set
so that funding is allocated to areas with the most need. In the case of HIV/AIDS, targeted funding
means that places with greater HIV/AIDS burdens generally receive more federal funding to
combat HIV/AIDS than other places. Thus, naive ordinary least squares regressions of HIV/AIDS
outcomes on HIV/AIDS funding would suggest that increased funding leads to worse HIV/AIDS
outcomes.
   To identify the impact of Ryan White funding, this study implements a difference-in-differences
research design that uses variation in eligibility for Title 1 funds that comes from two aspects of
the Ryan White CARE Act. The first driver of the variation in Title 1 eligibility studied in this pa-
per comes from the staggered timing of cities gaining Title 1 status that resulted from the original
Ryan White legislation granting cities Title 1 status only after they had at least 2,000 AIDS cases.
The second driver of the variation in Title 1 status studied in this paper comes from a 1996 rule
change that stipulated that a new AIDS case would only count towards eligibility for five years
rather than in perpetuity and was implemented along with a grandfather clause that allowed
cities that had obtained Title 1 status under the original rules by March 31 of 1995 to maintain
their Title 1 status even if they did not meet the new standard. Immediately after these changes
were made, treatment was discovered that could prevent people with HIV from developing AIDS.
The interaction of the simultaneous occurrence of the rule change, the grandfather clause, and the
discovery of effective treatment resulted in the de facto criteria for receiving Title 1 funding in
the coming years largely being that cities had to have had at least 2,000 AIDS cases by March 31
of 1995 and led to cities that originally had similar HIV/AIDS burdens and that were initially
on parallel HIV/AIDS trajectories receiving dramatically different amounts of federal funding to
combat HIV/AIDS.
   Using variation in Title 1 eligibility that has arisen for these reasons, I identify the impact of
Title 1 status by estimating how the difference in HIV/AIDS outcomes between Title 1 cities and
other cities changed after Title 1 cities obtained Title 1 status. To keep the treatment and control

                                                 3
groups comparable, the main sample includes the final 25 cities to clear the threshold for Title 1
status under the original eligibility rules as the treatment cities and the 25 cities with the most
AIDS cases through 1995 not qualifying for Title 1 status under the original rules as the control
cities. In essence, cities that were near but not quite to 2,000 AIDS cases ever reported by March
31 of 1995--such as Birmingham, Cincinnati, Providence, and Richmond--serve as the control
group for cities that had just reached 2,000 cases by March 31 of 1995--such as Cleveland, Fort
Worth, Hartford, and Sacramento.
   The main outcome studied in this paper is cities' annual HIV/AIDS death rates from 1990 to
2018 calculated from the restricted-use Vital Statistics Multiple Cause of Death Files. Estimating
difference-in-differences models indicates that a city obtaining Title 1 status reduced the city's
annual HIV/AIDS death rates by about 17 percent on average. The composition of lives saved
corresponds to HIV/AIDS prevalence rates across demographic groups with disproportionately
large shares of the lives saved being male, prime-aged, and Black relative to these groups' shares
of non-HIV/AIDS deaths. The estimates imply that one HIV/AIDS death has been avoided for
every $314,000 allocated through Title 1 and that Title 1 has saved approximately 60,000 lives
through 2018. In addition to estimating the impact of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS deaths, I also
estimate the impact of Title 1 status on rates of new AIDS cases and find that a city obtaining Title
1 status reduced the city's annual rates of new AIDS cases by 19 to 21 percent on average.
   Descriptive analysis of long differences in HIV/AIDS measures from 1990 through 2018 high-
lights the role that Title 1 funding disparities have had in the disparities in HIV/AIDS progress
across cities. Even with changes in both the Ryan White CARE Act and the U.S. health care system
in recent years that would be expected to alleviate cross-city differences in HIV/AIDS progress
caused by Title 1 disparities, cities that obtained Title 1 status under the original Ryan White rules
experienced a 24 percent larger reduction in AIDS death rates from 1990 to 2018 than cities that
did not obtain Title 1 status under the original rules.
   The significant health impacts of this funding speak to the promise of providing targeted fed-
eral funding to local areas to improve health. Assuming a value of a statistical life of $10 million,
the estimates imply that the $19 billion allocated to cities from 1991 to 2018 has produced over
$600 billion of value in terms of lives saved. This funding yielding a benefit-cost ratio above 30
is especially notable in light of studies that find negligible health gains from marginal health care
spending (e.g., Doyle 2011; Doyle et al. 2015; Einav, Finkelstein, and Mahoney 2018). However,

                                                  4
the role that disparities in federal funding have had in establishing the disparities in HIV/AIDS
progress highlights the importance of funding mechanisms' allocation rules and points to issues
that can arise with place-based funding. The analysis presented in this paper indicates that city
differences in federal HIV/AIDS funding are a key driver of the disparities in progress combating
HIV/AIDS across the country.
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a brief overview of HIV/AIDS in
the United States and of the Ryan White CARE Act and discusses the expected effects of federal
funding to combat HIV/AIDS. Section 3 describes the eligibility rules for Title 1 funding in more
detail and discusses the empirical approach and data sources used in the study. Section 4 presents
the results, and Section 5 concludes.


2     Background
    This section first provides background information on the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the United
States. Since the timing and nature of the HIV/AIDS treatment that emerged in the mid-1990s
played a role in establishing the large disparities in federal funding studied in this paper, this
discussion includes a brief summary of the search for effective HIV/AIDS treatment. The sec-
tion then discusses the Ryan White CARE Act and describes the potential impact of HIV/AIDS
funding.

2.1   HIV/AIDS in the United States and the Search for Effective Treatment
    Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a retrovirus that can be spread through unprotected
sex, needle sharing, blood transfusions, and from mother to child during pregnancy, delivery,
or breastfeeding. HIV harms infected people by lowering their white blood cell counts and thus
weakening their immune systems. While HIV is a virus, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) is a set of symptoms that people with HIV develop after HIV has caused significant dam-
age to their immune systems. People with AIDS are susceptible to opportunistic infections and
cancers that a healthy immune system could typically combat but that aggressively take hold in
someone with AIDS. Infections that lead to diseases like pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, Ka-
posi's sarcoma, and cytomegalovirus, which can be easily controlled by healthy immune systems,
have been common killers of people with AIDS. Without treatment, HIV usually progresses to
AIDS within 8 to 10 years. Life expectancy for people with untreated AIDS is 1.5 years. Though


                                                5
deaths from AIDS occurred earlier, AIDS was first recognized in 1981. Annual deaths from AIDS
in the United States rose from 451 in 1981 to their height of over 50,000 in 1995.
   Prior to 1987, the care that HIV/AIDS patients received was largely palliative and aimed at
treating the opportunistic infections that developed as a result of HIV/AIDS. In 1987, the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved zidovudine (AZT, formerly azidovudine) as the first
medicine to treat HIV/AIDS. Originally developed in the 1960s to be a form of chemotherapy,
AZT received FDA approval to treat HIV/AIDS after it was shown to temporarily increase white
blood cell counts in people with HIV/AIDS. Despite early excitement about AZT, its side effects
proved to be unbearable for many people, and whether the transient increase in white blood cell
counts induced by AZT was meaningful remained an open question (Hamilton et al. 1992).
   In the early 1990s, the outlook for the HIV/AIDS epidemic looked bleak. AIDS had become the
leading cause of death for prime-aged adults in the United States, and the rapid rise in AIDS cases
and deaths showed no signs of slowing. The search for effective treatment was proving elusive.
Frustrated by a lack of progress and a perceived lack of research attention, HIV/AIDS activists
staged thousands of demonstrations between 1987 and 1996, including ones at the National In-
stitutes of Health and FDA campuses in the 1990s. At these demonstrations, protestors staged
die-ins, held signs that read "NIH­Nothing Is Happening" and "Federal Death Administration",
and set up mock graveyards with tombstone epithets stating "Dead from a Lack of Drugs" and
"Poisoned from AZT".4
   In 1996, however, a breakthrough in HIV/AIDS treatment emerged that would alter the course
of the fight against HIV/AIDS. Antiretroviral treatments were introduced that could prevent HIV
from replicating in the body and could reduce HIV's damage to the immune system. While the full
effects and implications of these drug cocktails were not understood immediately, studies would
eventually show that within 30 days of treatment initiation, these drugs could lead to HIV being
undetectable in the blood of a person with an HIV infection as long as treatment was maintained
and could prevent people with HIV from developing AIDS. Research would also eventually show
that these new antiretrovirals drastically reduce the likelihood that a person with an HIV infection
transmits the infection to others.
   The first of these new antiretrovirals was approved by the FDA in December of 1995 under

   4
    Refer to Fern´
                 andez, Parsa, and Viarengo (2019) and Mansour, Rees, and Reeves (2020) for discussions and studies
about the organizational efforts of AIDS activists.

                                                        6
an accelerated approval process that allows drugs to be used before their effectiveness has been
established. After being disappointed by several drugs that initially seemed promising only to
eventually turn out to be ineffective against HIV/AIDS, HIV/AIDS patients and physicians were
at first skeptical about the likely effectiveness of these new drugs. However, reports of emaci-
ated and demented HIV/AIDS patients whose deaths seemed imminent quickly returning to
health after taking these antiretrovirals would soon become common, and HIV/AIDS communi-
ties soon realized that these new antiretrovirals marked a turning point in the search for effective
HIV/AIDS treatment. In How to Survive a Plague, a book about the search for effective HIV/AIDS
treatment written by the director of the Oscar-nominated documentary of the same name, David
France describes the moment that many people realized that these new antiretrovirals were a mo-
mentous advance in HIV/AIDS treatment. At a 1996 event about the new treatment, a scientist
interrupted his otherwise technical presentation about a study showing the dramatic effect of the
antiretrovirals on HIV/AIDS survival rates to tell a room full of disoriented HIV/AIDS activists,
researchers, and health care providers the following:

     Maybe you are not understanding what I am saying. This is the biggest news ever in
     this epidemic...This is what we've been working for all these years. They're not a cure.
     We don't know what they are, in effect. But this is the first major piece of good news
     we have had in all these years. They're calling it the Lazarus effect. People who were
     in hospitals on their last breath are getting up and going back to work. We've never
     seen anything like it. (France 2016)

   The use of antiretroviral treatment accelerated throughout 1996 and became the standard treat-
ment for HIV/AIDS by the start of 1997. As a result of these new antiretrovirals, deaths from HIV/
AIDS began a major decline in 1996. The number of HIV/AIDS deaths fell by over 20 percent from
1995 to 1996 and by nearly 50 percent from 1996 to 1997, which has been the largest single-year de-
cline for a major cause of death ever recorded (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1998).
The life expectancy of a young adult who begins antiretrovial treatment immediately after con-
tracting HIV is now near the life expectancy of a similar person without HIV (Marcus et al. 2020).




                                                 7
While research into HIV/AIDS treatments has continued5 , the emergence of effective treatment
ushered in a new chapter in the fight against HIV/AIDS: How to ensure that people with HIV/
AIDS have access to these effective but expensive treatments and how to maximize the impact of
these new drugs in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
   Though progress has been made in the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the United States still faces many
issues related to HIV/AIDS.6 Despite initial speculation that antiretroviral therapy was a cure for
HIV, it was soon realized that the antiretrovirals suppress HIV only for as long as they are taken.
Though the antiretrovirals cause HIV to be undetectable in the blood, the HIV virus lies dormant
in a small number of cells and will take hold again if a person discontinues the antiretrovirals.
In the United States, over 700,000 people have died of HIV/AIDS, and approximately 1.2 million
people are currently infected. Half of all people with HIV infections in the United States do not
have their infections suppressed through antiretroviral therapy and can therefore still spread the
infections to others, which contributes to the number of HIV infections continuing to climb (Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention 2017). Large disparities in HIV/AIDS burden by race and
socioeconomic status exist in the United States, with low-income and Black people accounting for
disproportionately large shares of HIV/AIDS cases and deaths (Rubin, Colen, and Link 2010).

2.2    The Ryan White CARE Act
   The cost to treat a patient with the new antiretroviral drugs in 1996 was high at a mean annual
cost of $20,300 (in 1996 dollars) (Bozzette et al. 2001), but even before the emergence of the effec-
tive antiretroviral drugs, treating HIV/AIDS was expensive.7 Exacerbating access issues arising
from the cost of treatment are the facts that many people with HIV/AIDS have below-average
incomes and that people with AIDS are often unable to work for health reasons and have often

    5
      In addition to there being improvements in antiretrovirals since 1996, another major advance in HIV/AIDS pre-
vention occurred in 2012 with the emergence of pre-exposure prophylaxis as a daily pill that can prevent people from
developing an HIV infection after exposure to HIV. Along with the vast medical and public health literatures studying
HIV/AIDS treatments, several economics papers have examined aspects of these drugs. Using observational data,
Duggan and Evans (2008) provide evidence that the use of the effective antiretrovirals reduces mortality rates for
people with HIV infections in non-experimental settings. Lakdawalla, Sood, and Goldman (2006) show that by re-
ducing the cost and likelihood of HIV infections, access to effective HIV treatment increases risky sexual behavior of
gay men. Chan, Hamilton, and Papageorge (2016) develop a framework to measure the value of a medical innovation
to combat an infectious disease and apply the framework to HIV treatment.
    6
      While this paper focuses on HIV/AIDS in the United States, HIV/AIDS is a global issue and remains a leading
cause of death worldwide. Sub-Saharan Africa has been hit particularly hard. In 2017, HIV/AIDS accounted for over
a quarter of all deaths in South Africa and Botswana (Roser and Ritchie 2018).
    7
      Treating HIV/AIDS remains expensive and continues to cost around $20,000 per year (Gebo et al. 2010).

                                                          8
reported employment discrimination when they try to work.8 These challenges have resulted in
many people with HIV/AIDS having difficulties accessing and paying for health care.
   In response to growing pressure to provide financial resources to address the HIV/AIDS epi-
demic, Congress passed the Ryan White CARE Act on August 18, 1990.9 As the largest federally
funded program in the United States for people living with HIV/AIDS, the Ryan White program
is the backbone of the federal government's strategy to address the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the
United States and has a goal of improving access to health care for low-income, uninsured, and
under-insured people affected by HIV/AIDS who could not otherwise access treatment. Accord-
ing to the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the branch of the Department
of Health and Human Services that administers the Ryan White program, over half of people with
HIV/AIDS receive care through the Ryan White program, a majority of whom have incomes at
or below the federal poverty level (Health Resources and Services Administration 2019). Since
Ryan White funds are discretionary, the Ryan White CARE Act must be periodically reauthorized
and has been reauthorized in 1996, 2000, 2006, and 2009. With each reauthorization, Congress has
made changes to the Ryan White program.10 The amount appropriated to the program has grown
from $260 million in 1991 to $2.5 billion in 2020.
   Rather than establishing an entitlement program for people with HIV or having the federal
government directly provide HIV/AIDS treatment, Congress decided to structure the Ryan White
CARE Act to provide financial resources to state and local governments to support local re-
sponses to HIV/AIDS. Ryan White funds are administered through five titles, though most of
the funding--nearly 90 percent--is allocated through its first two titles. Title 1 administers funds
directly to eligible cities, while Title 2 administers funds directly to states. The remaining Ryan
White funds are allocated to community-based organizations to provide primary care to people

   8
       Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), people with HIV have also had difficulties accessing
health insurance coverage through the individual market. By requiring insurers in the individual market to accept
all who apply for coverage and by expanding Medicaid coverage for childless adults, the ACA has expanded health
insurance coverage for people with HIV/AIDS. Refer to Goldman et al. (2014) and Sood et al. (2014) for discussions
of the potential implications of the ACA for the Ryan White CARE Act.
     9
       The Ryan White CARE Act is named in honor of Ryan White, a hemophiliac who contracted HIV through a
blood transfusion and became an advocate for HIV/AIDS awareness and research before dying in his teens from
HIV/AIDS.
    10
       I summarize the Ryan White CARE Act and discuss the provisions that have led to the large funding disparities
analyzed in this study, as well as aspects of the Ryan White CARE Act that are relevant to interpreting the results.
The Ryan White CARE Act is a complex piece of legislation with many policy parameters and formulas that have
changed over time. Refer to Health Resources and Services Administration (2013), Institute of Medicine (2004), and
Kaiser Family Foundation (2019b) for additional information on the Ryan White CARE Act.

                                                         9
living with HIV, to AIDS education centers, and for dental care for people with HIV.
   The focus of this paper is on Title 1 funds. Title 1 funds are administered directly to mayors,
who then typically immediately turn the funds over to health departments (Health Resources
and Services Administration 2013). Cities receiving Title 1 funds are required to establish HIV
Health Services Planning Councils that set local priorities for care delivery. While cities have some
discretion in how they administer their programs, an initial step for most programs is to assign
low-income, HIV-positive people who might face barriers in accessing health care to Ryan White
                ´
case managers (Lopez, Shacham, and Brown 2018). These case managers assess financial needs
and can link people to health care that can be paid for by Ryan White funds if needed.
   Although a majority of Title 1 funds must go towards core medical services, an important
feature of the Ryan White program is that it aims to provide holistic care to low-income people
with HIV. As such, Title 1 funds can be used to pay for various health care services in addition to
basic HIV medications and provider office visits. For example, Title 1 funds can be used to pro-
vide counseling to people newly diagnosed with HIV about how to cope with the diagnosis and
on what they need to do to not spread the infection. Case managers can also arrange substance
abuse treatment or transportation services paid for by Title 1 funds for HIV-positive people strug-
gling with addiction or with traveling to health care appointments. Additional services that Ryan
White funds can pay for include early intervention services, like testing and contact tracing, and
mental health treatment more broadly.11 According to Ryan White Title 1 expenditure reports, a
majority of Title 1 funds go to HIV-related outpatient care, HIV medications, and case manage-
ment services, while the rest of the funds are spread over many different types of services (Health
Resources and Services Administration 2020a). Appendix Table A.1 shows the share of spending
for broad spending categories calculated from expenditure reports submitted by Title 1 cities to
HRSA for fiscal year 2010. The rules for obtaining Title 1 status and for allocating Title 1 funds are
crucial to the empirical approach of this study and are discussed in detail in Section 3.
   Title 2 funds are allocated to states to support the planning and coordination of HIV/AIDS
care and can be used for similar services as Title 1 funds. The Title 2 allocation rules are complex,
but most of the Title 2 funds are allocated independently of Title 1 funds. The partial double
counting of cases in Title 1 cities for Title 1 and Title 2 funding has led to disparities in total Ryan

  11
    Refer to Health Resources and Services Administration (2013) for the complete rules about how Title 1 funds
may be used.

                                                      10
White funds relative to HIV/AIDS burdens across states. I briefly summarize the Title 2 funding
rules as they relate to Title 1 funding. Refer to Health Resources and Services Administration
(2013), Institute of Medicine (2004), and Kaiser Family Foundation (2019b) for additional details
about Title 2 funding. While Title 2 funding initially did not take into account Title 1 funds, the
1996 reauthorization set aside approximately 5 percent of Title 2 funds to be allocated based on
a state's share of national AIDS cases that occur outside of Title 1 cities. Since 2000, Title 2 also
includes a separate category of funds that provides a small amount of additional funding to states
with non-Title-1 cities with high AIDS burdens. As discussed in more detail in Section 3, these
city-directed Title 2 funds are much lower than the funding provided by Title 1. Through 2020,
Title 2 has allocated $33 billion (in 2018 dollars) to states.
   Throughout its history, the Ryan White CARE Act has been the subject of contentious disagree-
ments. Although the initial bill received bipartisan support, politicians have expressed opposition
to the Ryan White CARE Act for both moral and fiscal reasons. For instance, Congressman Jesse
Helms objected to the bill based on his view that "deliberate, disgusting, revolting conduct" was
responsible for people contracting HIV, while then-Congressman Mike Pence argued unsuccess-
fully for directing Ryan White funds to organizations "which provide assistance to those seeking
to change their sexual behavior." Facing the threat of a veto, President George H. Bush signed
the Ryan White CARE Act into law, but the White House had initially expressed its opposition to
the bill, stating that "The bill's narrow approach, dealing with a specific disease, sets a danger-
ous precedent, inviting treatment of other diseases through similar arrangements." Throughout
Ryan White's history, Title 1 cities have fought efforts to allocate Ryan White funds more equi-
tably. For example, in 2005, areas struggling to address HIV/AIDS that received low Ryan White
funding relative to their HIV/AIDS burdens argued for implementing rules to distribute Ryan
White funds more equitably in the 2006 reauthorization. In response to these calls for changes
in funding, The New York Times--a newspaper from a city that had received over $1 billion in
Title 1 funds through 2005--published an editorial arguing that the lack of relative progress in
addressing HIV/AIDS in much of the country was the result of those areas not caring about the
plight of people with HIV/AIDS rather than from disparities in Ryan White funds. The editorial
argued that the progress that Title 1 cities had made in addressing HIV/AIDS relative to other
cities justified future funding disparities, seemingly ignoring the possibility that wide funding
disparities up to that point could have played a role in the disparities in HIV/AIDS outcomes

                                                   11
that had emerged by the mid 2000s.12

2.3    The Expected Effects of Federal Funding to Combat HIV/AIDS
   The effect of federal HIV/AIDS funding on HIV/AIDS deaths depends on the health care
paid for by the funds as well as on the health care that patients would have received absent the
funds. Since the Ryan White program is supposed to be the last payer for treatment, the care paid
for with Ryan White funds should in principle be care that people would not have otherwise
received. In practice, though, Ryan White funds have the potential to displace care paid for by
other sources. If patients receiving treatment paid for by Ryan White funds could have accessed
their desired health care absent the Ryan White program, the funding's health impacts would be
minimal. Similarly, if the productivity of additional health care provided by Ryan White funds is
low or if health departments use the funds inefficiently, HIV/AIDS funding could have no health
impacts.
   On the other hand, Ryan White funds also have the potential to have large health impacts,
especially since the program focuses on providing treatment to low-income people with an in-
fectious disease that spreads much more easily if untreated. Over 60 percent of people that Ryan
White programs serve have incomes under the federal poverty level, and 90 percent have in-
comes under 250 percent of the federal poverty level (Health Resources and Services Administra-
tion 2020b). For most of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, HIV would preclude someone from purchasing
health insurance on the individual market since HIV is a pre-existing condition, and childless
adults under 65 would not be eligible for Medicaid or Medicare until after HIV/AIDS had left
them disabled. Moreover, some of the health department services paid for by Ryan White funds,
such as HIV/AIDS outreach and case management services, could have large health impacts even
though they would typically not be provided by the private market. If Ryan White funds reduce
HIV transmission rates, the effects of the funding on health measures would likely grow over time
and persist even if the funds were discontinued.
   The main outcome of interest for the study is HIV/AIDS deaths. By reducing the spread of HIV
and by preventing or slowing the development of AIDS in HIV-positive people, federal funding
to combat HIV/AIDS would be expected to decrease HIV/AIDS deaths.

  12
    See "Guarding the Fight Against AIDS", which was written by The New York Times editorial board and published
on August 18, 2005.

                                                      12
    While data on HIV rates and prevalence were not widely tracked in the 1990s and are therefore
not assessed empirically in this study, federal funding would be expected to reduce new HIV
transmission rates. By reducing HIV transmission rates and by reducing the likelihood that HIV
leads to AIDS, federal funds would also be expected to reduce rates of new AIDS diagnoses.
    The sign of the expected effect of federal funding on HIV prevalence and on AIDS prevalence
is unclear. By reducing HIV transmissions and by limiting the progression of HIV to AIDS, HIV/
AIDS funding could reduce a city's prevalence of both HIV and AIDS. However, by reducing
HIV/AIDS deaths, federal funding also has the potential to increase the numbers of people living
with HIV and AIDS.


3     Empirical Approach and Data Sources
    This section discusses the rules for becoming a Title 1 city and how these rules led to vast
differences in Ryan White funds across cities. The section then discusses the empirical approach
and the data sources used for the study.

3.1   The Rules for Becoming a Title 1 City and the Empirical Approach
    As explained in more detail in the following paragraphs, the variation in Title 1 status exam-
ined in this study comes from the three following aspects of the Ryan White CARE Act: 1) The
original rules for Title 1 eligibility did not prioritize recent changes in AIDS cases and used a sharp
cutoff for determining eligibility that led to cities with similar AIDS burdens having different Title
1 statuses, 2) Once cities obtain Title 1 status, they do no lose it even if they no longer meet the
current eligibility criteria, and 3) The 1996 reauthorization changed the Title 1 eligibility rules in
a way that made obtaining Title 1 status much more difficult. The eligibility rules being changed
immediately prior to effective treatment emerging led to large differences in HIV/AIDS funding
across cities that were orthogonal to cities' initial HIV/AIDS trajectories.
    According to the original 1990 Ryan White legislation, cities that had reported a cumulative
total of 2,000 AIDS cases to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) by March 31 of
a particular year became eligible for Title 1 funding in the following fiscal year. Prior to reaching
the 2,000-case threshold, cities received no Title 1 funds. Under the initial rules, a reported AIDS
case would still count towards eligibility and funding levels even after the person with AIDS had
died. In an April 1995 report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO, later renamed the


                                                  13
Government Accountability Office) argued that using a more current measure of AIDS severity
would more effectively direct funds based on need (General Accounting Office 1995). When the
Senate first passed its Ryan White reauthorization in June 1995, it incorporated the GAO's recom-
mendation by changing the Title 1 funding rules so that a city had to have at least 2,000 AIDS cases
reported in the last five years to be designated as a Title 1 city. This change remained in the final
bill that President Bill Clinton signed into law in May 1996. At the time the eligibility rule was
changed, many cities that had qualified to be Title 1 cities under the original rules did not have
2,000 AIDS cases reported in the last five years. To prevent current Title 1 cities from experiencing
large funding drops because of the new rules, the 1996 Ryan White CARE Act reauthorization in-
stituted provisions to maintain funding levels and allowed cities that qualified under the original
Ryan White rules by March 31 of 1995 to maintain their eligibility for Title 1 funds even if they
had fewer than 2,000 AIDS cases reported in the past five years.
   As AIDS cases were rising sharply in 1995 when the GAO originally recommended the switch
to using a more contemporaneous measure of AIDS cases, many cities would have cleared the
new threshold within the next few years if the AIDS trends of the early 1990s had continued past
1995. However, treatment that could prevent AIDS but not cure HIV emerging immediately af-
ter the eligibility rules changed meant that cities that had not qualified for Title 1 status under the
original rules would obtain Title 1 status only if they were experiencing HIV/AIDS outbreaks that
were outliers in severity relative to other cities. Thus, immediately prior to effective but expen-
sive treatment for HIV/AIDS finally emerging, Congress implemented funding rules that would
provide some cities with billions more dollars for combating HIV/AIDS in the coming years than
other cities.
   Before the initial eligibility rules were changed, 44 cities became eligible for Title 1 funding. If
Congress had not changed the rules and if effective treatment had not emerged, approximately
50 cities would have achieved Title 1 status by 2006, assuming the growth in AIDS cases in 1995
continued through 2006. Even with the new rule Congress put in place in 1996, approximately
35 cities would have obtained Title 1 status by the end of 2006 if effective treatment had not
emerged. Similarly, approximately 35 cities would also have still achieved Title 1 status by 2006
with effective treatment emerging if Congress had not changed the eligibility rules. However,
with the combination of the rule change and effective treatment emerging, only two additional
cities gained Title 1 status from 1996 to 2006.

                                                  14
    Within a few years of the 1996 rule change, several cities that were not eligible for Title 1 fund-
ing had worse HIV/AIDS outcomes than Title 1 cities, and yet the cities without Title 1 status
did not directly receive any Ryan White funds. In response to the slow progress in addressing
HIV/AIDS in cities without Title 1 status, the 2000 Ryan White CARE Act reauthorization im-
plemented a new provision that would provide additional Title 2 funds to states with non-Title 1
cities that had reported 500 to 1,999 AIDS cases in the previous five years. Even with these addi-
tional city-directed Title 2 funds, though, the large disparities in HIV/AIDS funding across cities
persisted. In 2004, Title 1 cities received a mean funding per AIDS case through Title 1 of $2,380,
while states qualifying for the city-directed Title 2 funds from the 2000 reauthorization were al-
located an extra $414 per AIDS case in those cities on average. Throughout the early 2000s, the
allocation of funds became increasingly unaligned with HIV/AIDS burdens. By 2006, some non-
Title-1 cities had rates of new AIDS cases that were several times the rate of the Title 1 city with
the lowest rate.
    To provide the non-Title-1 cities that were on the worst HIV/AIDS trajectories with additional
funding, Congress changed the eligibility rules in the 2006 Ryan White CARE Act reauthorization
to allow cities with at least 1,000 AIDS cases reported in the previous five years to become eligible
for Title 1 status.13 Five cities obtained Title 1 status immediately after this rule change went into
effect in 2007, and one other city has obtained Title 1 status since 2007. Even with the 2006 reau-
thorization allowing some of the cities on the worst HIV/AIDS trajectories to gain Title 1 status,
large disparities in federal funding that stem from the 1996 reauthorization rules still exist today.
    In effect, the 1996 Ryan White CARE Act reauthorization resulted in cities with similar HIV/
AIDS burdens and on parallel HIV/AIDS tracks receiving drastically different amounts of federal
funding to combat HIV/AIDS, particularly from 1996 to 2006. This study estimates the effect of
Title 1 funds by comparing how the difference in HIV/AIDS outcomes between Title 1 cities and
other cities changed after Title 1 cities gained Title 1 status. Because the 1996 reauthorization led to
cities needing to have substantially worse HIV/AIDS trajectories relative to other cities to obtain
   13
     The 2006 reauthorization created two different categories of Title 1 cities. Eligible Metropolitan Areas, which
was a label previously applied to all Title 1 cities, are those that have reported at least 2,000 AIDS cases in the past
five years. Transitional Grant Areas are cities that have reported 1,000 to 1,999 AIDS cases in the past five years or
that qualified for Title 1 status under an earlier set of rules. The main difference between the two designations is that
Eligible Metropolitan Areas have hold harmless provisions that prevent sudden funding drops, while Transitional
Grant Areas do not have to set up planning councils. Transitional Grant Areas can also lose Title 1 status if they cease
to have a cumulative total of 1,500 or more people living with HIV infection ever classified as AIDS. In practice, no
city has come close to losing Title 1 status.

                                                           15
Title 1 status, I consider cities to be treated only if they achieved Title 1 status under the original
rules, meaning that they had at least 2,000 cases by March 31, 1995. I typically refer to these cities
as Title 1 cities, even though some other cities eventually obtained Title 1 status.14
   To keep the control and treatment groups comparable, the main analysis sample focuses on
cities that were closest to the original threshold of 2,000 AIDS cases ever reported by March 31,
1995. For the baseline analysis, I set the control cities to be the 25 cities with the most AIDS cases
reported by March 31, 1995, that did not qualify for Title 1 funding under the original rules and
the treatment cities to be the 25 cities with the fewest AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995, that
qualified for Title 1 status under the original rules. In Appendix Table A.4, I show that the results
are robust to using different sets of treatment and control cities. Appendix Table A.2 contains the
full list of control cities and Title 1 cities.
   Title 1 cities receive both formula-based funds and supplemental funds. The formula funds
made up half of Title 1 funding in the original legislation and make up two-thirds of Title 1 fund-
ing as of 2007. While the formula for the non-supplemental funding was initially based on a city's
share of AIDS cases ever reported by Title 1 cities, the 1996 reauthorization changed the formula
to instead use estimates of a city's share of people living with AIDS in Title 1 cities. The 2006
reauthorization changed the formula to include HIV cases. The supplemental funding is allo-
cated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services based on cities' reported need for addi-
tional HIV/AIDS funding. Throughout the Ryan White CARE Act's history, policymakers have
included hold-harmless provisions to prevent cities from experiencing large drops in their Title 1
funds.
   While Title 1 funding varies across Title 1 cities, the funding differences per eligible AIDS case
among Title 1 cities tend to be small. In 2004, for instance, the fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles of
Title 1 funding per AIDS case among Title 1 cities were $2,361 and $2,492. Rather than attempt
to identify the impact of these small, endogenous funding differences among Title 1 cities, the
approach of this study is to estimate the impact of a binary treatment variable for a city having
   14
     Appendix B analyzes trends in HIV/AIDS deaths in cities gaining Title 1 status in 2007 and shows that, in
contrast to cities gaining Title 1 status under the original Ryan White CARE Act rules, cities gaining Title 1 status
in 2007 experienced rising HIV/AIDS deaths relative to other cities in the years before they obtained Title 1 status,
which means that the parallel trends assumption required for difference-in-differences estimation is not satisfied for
these cities. Appendix B also shows, however, that the estimated impact of Title 1 status from a specification that
accounts for these pre-existing trends by supplementing the estimation with a city-specific linear time trend indicates
that Title 1 status reduced HIV/AIDS death rates in cities obtaining Title 1 status under the new eligibility rules put
in place by the 2006 reauthorization, which corroborates the findings from the main analysis.

                                                          16
Title 1 status. I then use information on Title 1 funding amounts to produce an estimate of the
amount of Title 1 funding spent for each HIV/AIDS death avoided.
   The basic model that I estimate is as follows:


                                 yjt = j + t + Xjt t + T itle1jt  +     jt ,                             (1)


where j indexes the city, t indexes the year, y represents the various measures of HIV/AIDS,  is a
vector of city fixed effects,  is a vector of fiscal year fixed effects, X is a vector of control variables,
and T itle1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the city is a Title 1 city in year t. The baseline set of
control variables is the share of the population that is male, younger than 18, older than 64, Black,
and Hispanic with the coefficients on these controls being allowed to vary before and after the
emergence of effective treatment in 1996.
   Interpreting the Title 1 coefficient in Equation (1) as the causal impact of Title 1 status requires
the assumption that, absent the differences in Title 1 funding, HIV/AIDS outcomes in the Title 1
cities in the sample would have trended in parallel to the cities in the sample that did not qual-
ify for Title 1 status under the original rules. As I have explained in this section, the institutional
environment supports the plausibility of this assumption. However, given how central this as-
sumption is for the analysis, I take additional steps to assess the validity of the assumption and
to relax it. These steps include estimating event-study specifications of the effect of Title 1 status,
varying the control and treatment groups, and incorporating additional time-varying controls.
   As has been noted elsewhere, the concurrent emergence of effective treatment for HIV/AIDS
is a central part of why the 1996 rule change for obtaining Title 1 status largely locked Title 1
statuses in place for the next decade. The independent effects of advances in HIV/AIDS treatment
are captured by the year fixed effects in Equation (1), but it is important to remember that the
expected impact of federal funding depends on the productivity of available treatment. I estimate
a specification of Equation (1) that allows for separate effects of Title 1 status before and after 1996,
but most of the wide differences in funding between Title 1 cities and other cities occurred during
a period for which effective treatment is available, meaning the estimates presented in this paper
are of the effect of federal funding to combat HIV/AIDS when effective treatment exists.
   I estimate Equation (1) for two time periods. Because the 2006 reauthorization made several
changes to the Ryan White program, one specification focuses only on years 1990 to 2006. How-


                                                    17
ever, as the 2006 reauthorization left large funding disparities in place and because large infusions
of funding to combat an infectious disease likely have persistent effects, I also estimate specifica-
tions that include years 1990 to 2018.

3.2     Data
   This study draws on several data sources. As described in the previous section, the sample
is selected based on the number of AIDS cases that cities had reported by March 31, 1995. For
information on reported AIDS cases, I use the AIDS Public Information Data Set (Department of
Health and Human Services 2005), which the CDC created from AIDS case reports submitted by
state and local health departments. The AIDS Public Information Data Set contains annual counts
of AIDS cases through 2002 for each city that had at least 500,000 people as of the 2000 Census.15
I impute AIDS cases reported as of March 31, 1995, by adding 25 percent of cities' AIDS cases
reported in 1995 to their AIDS cases reported by the beginning of 1995.
   Figure 1 plots the log of AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, for each city in the AIDS Public Infor-
mation Data Set in rank order. Cities to the right of the solid vertical line in Figure 1 had more
than 2,000 AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, and thus gained Title 1 status under the original Ryan
White rules. Cities to the left of the line had fewer than 2,000 AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, and
thus did not qualify for Title 1 status under the original eligibility rules. The blue diamonds in
Figure 1 represent the two cities that eventually became eligible for Title 1 funding under the 1996
reauthorization rules. The red squares in Figure 1 represent cities that have become Title 1 cities
under the rules that were put in place starting in fiscal year 2007. The cities between the right
dashed line and the solid line are the treatment cities, while cities between the left dashed line
and the solid line are the control cities.
   Numbers of HIV/AIDS deaths from fiscal years 1990 to 2018 come from restricted-use Vital
Statistics Multiple Cause of Death Files (Department of Health and Human Services 2020), which
have information on the universe of civilian deaths in the United States. In addition to containing
basic demographic information on decedents and the underlying Internal Classification Diagnosis
Code for each death, the restricted-use files contain information on the decedent's county. To have

   15
     The analysis excludes cities from Puerto Rico. Because the information used to create the control variables is not
available for all years of the sample for Honolulu, Honolulu is also excluded from the analysis. Appendix Table A.2
contains the full list of remaining cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set and indicates which cities are in the
main sample. Appendix Figure A.1 displays a map that indicates cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set.

                                                          18
a consistent mapping from counties to cities over time, I attribute HIV/AIDS deaths to cities
based on the city definitions in place in 1990, which are the city definitions used in the AIDS
Public Information Data Set. I use annual data on county-level populations from SEER (2019) to
calculate HIV/AIDS deaths per 100,000 people and to calculate the demographic controls.
   Appendix Table A.3 compares HIV/AIDS deaths to other deaths over the sample period. Rel-
ative to their share of non-HIV/AIDS deaths, Black people account for a disproportionately high
share of HIV/AIDS deaths (45 percent compared to 12 percent). Men also account for dispro-
portionately more HIV/AIDS deaths relative to their share of non-HIV/AIDS deaths (80 percent
compared to 50 percent). The mean age at death from HIV/AIDS was approximately 30 years
younger than the mean age for non-HIV/AIDS deaths from 1990 to 2018 (42 years compared to 72
years). Finally, 83 percent of HIV/AIDS deaths occurred in cities in the AIDS Public Information
Data Set compared to 61 percent of non-HIV/AIDS deaths.
   HIV/AIDS death rates are the main outcome studied because, in addition to being important,
deaths from HIV/AIDS are consistently measured across cities and can be computed for each
year from 1990 to 2018. In contrast, widespread collection of HIV data began relatively recently,
and HIV cases are underreported since the effects of HIV's immune system suppression do not
manifest immediately. In addition, the AIDS Public Information Data Set, which has information
on AIDS cases that correspond to the city definitions used in the main analysis, does not have
information past 2002. However, despite these issues with measuring AIDS rates, understanding
how Title 1 affects the spread and progression of the disease is important and can help in inter-
preting the analysis of HIV/AIDS death rates. Therefore, I also consider the effect of Title 1 status
on several different measures of AIDS diagnoses. Information on AIDS cases from 1990 to 2002
come from the AIDS Public Information Data Set and have information for all cities in the sample.
To have years that correspond to the years of HIV/AIDS deaths, I also use data on city-level AIDS
cases each year from 1990 through 2018 that were received from a special request to the CDC. The
city definitions in the data from the CDC do not perfectly correspond to the city definitions used
in the main analysis16 , but these data have a major advantage in that they span 1990 to 2018.
   I collected data on Ryan White Title 1 allocations come from multiple sources. Information on

   16
      Some cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set are not in the CDC data or are reported combined with other
cities. For this reason, the main sample for the CDC analysis includes 46 rather than 50 cities. Moreover, while HIV/
AIDS deaths are aggregated to fiscal years to match the Title 1 funding timing, AIDS cases are reported for calendar
years. Title 1 treatment definitions for the analysis of AIDS cases are therefore based on calendar years as well.

                                                         19
recent years of Title 1 allocations come from the Tracking Accountability in Government Grants
System and the HRSA website. Information on earlier years of Title 1 allocations come from GAO
reports, Office of Inspector General reports, HRSA budget justifications, and HRSA press releases.
Through these sources, I have been able to assemble a data set with information on 96 percent of
Ryan White Title 1 allocations from 1991 to 2018.17 Years 1994 to 1996 of this assembled data set
have incomplete funding information, and information is sporadically missing for a few city-year
combinations throughout the data. For the observations with missing or incomplete information,
I impute missing values for a city in year t using the city's funding in year t + 1 assuming that the
change in total Title 1 funding from year t to year t + 1 was distributed proportionally based on
the city's year t Title 1 funding. I inflation adjust annual funding amounts to 2018 dollars.
    Descriptive statistics for the baseline sample are shown separately for the treatment and con-
trol cities in Table 1. As would be expected based on the original rules for Title 1 eligibility, the
mean of HIV/AIDS death rates per 100,000 people is higher for the treatment cities. However, the
mean percent increase in the death rate from 1990 to 1991 was 17 percent for both the treatment
and control cities. In Section 4, I show that HIV/AIDS death rates continue to trend in parallel for
the two sets of cities until the treatment cities gain Title 1 status. Despite similar trends in HIV/
AIDS deaths in the early 1990s, the differences in Title 1 funding between the two sets of cities in
subsequent years have been large. From 1996 to 2006, cities that did not qualify for Title 1 status
under the original Ryan White CARE Act rules received $3.9 million on average, while cities that
qualified under the original rules received $68.9 million on average. Through 2018, the treatment
cities received approximately $3.2 billion more in Title 1 funding than the control cities did.


4        The Effect of Federal Funding to Combat HIV/AIDS
    The results presented in this section indicate that a city obtaining Title 1 status under the orig-
inal Ryan White CARE Act rules led to dramatically fewer HIV/AIDS deaths in the city in subse-
quent years. The section begins by estimating the impact of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS deaths. I
then test for heterogeneous effects of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS deaths for different sub-groups
and estimate the impact of Title 1 status on AIDS cases. Finally, I assess the implications of the


    17
     I contacted HRSA to inquire about obtaining its information on Ryan White allocations through an open records
request, but HRSA unfortunately does not maintain complete records on Ryan White allocations, which is why data
had to be collected from these different sources.

                                                       20
effect of Title 1 status by estimating the total lives saved by Title 1 and by using estimates of the
value of a statistical life to produce an estimate of the benefit-cost ratio of Title 1 funds.

The Impact of Title 1 Status on HIV/AIDS Death Rates

   Figure 2 plots coefficients and 95-percent confidence intervals from a single regression of Equa-
tion (1) where the effect of Title 1 status is allowed to vary flexibly with time using data from 1990
to 2006. The coefficients in Figure 2 indicate how the difference in AIDS death rates between Ti-
tle 1 cities and the control cities changed at different durations of Title 1 eligibility relative to the
difference in the year before Title 1 cities obtained their Title 1 status. The estimates indicate that
the log of HIV/AIDS death rates trended similarly for the two sets of cities prior to Title 1 cities
obtaining Title 1 status. Once cities obtained Title 1 status, HIV/AIDS death rates began falling
in Title 1 cities relative to cities that did not achieve Title 1 status under the original Ryan White
CARE Act rules. Appendix Figure A.2 plots coefficients from an equivalent specification using
data through 2018 and shows a similar pattern of estimates over time.
   Table 2 displays estimates of the effect of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS death rates. The first
column of Table 2 shows estimates of the average effect of Title 1 using data from 1990 to 2006.
The estimate suggests that Title 1 status lowered annual HIV/AIDS death rates by 17.0 percent on
average. Because the funding differences between the two sets of cities are sharpest through 2006,
specification 1 provides the cleanest estimate of the effect of Title 1 status. However, large funding
disparities still exist after 2006, and the effect of funding to halt an infectious disease is likely to
persist. To consider the effect of Title 1 funding through more recent years, the remaining columns
in Table 2 show results from specifications that include data through 2018. Column 2 shows the
baseline estimated effect of Title 1 status using data through 2018. The estimate is similar to the
estimate from column 1 at -16.8 percent.
   These estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 average the effects of Title 1 status across time.
However, the productivity of HIV/AIDS treatment rising dramatically in 1996 could lead to dif-
ferential effects of Title 1 status after 1996. To test for differential effects of Title 1 status before
and after 1996, column 3 presents estimates from a specification that replaces the single Title 1
status coefficient with one indicator for Title 1 status prior to 1996 and with a second indicator
for Title 1 status beginning in 1996. The estimated impact of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS deaths
is a statistically insignificant 1.4 percent reduction before 1996 and a statistically significant 22.4


                                                   21
percent reduction beginning in 1996. These results are consistent with Title 1 status having larger
impacts after effective treatment emerged, though it's important to note that these estimates are
also consistent with the effect of Title 1 status growing with Title 1 duration.
   Column 4 presents an estimate of the effect of Title 1 status from a regression weighted by
cities' populations. The estimated effect is similar to the estimate in column 2. Finally, column 5
expands the sample to include all cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set in the sample.
When all cities are included, the estimated effect of Title 1 status is an 18.3 percent reduction in
HIV/AIDS death rates.
   Table 3 assesses the robustness of the estimates from specifications 1 and 2 of Table 2 to various
alternative specifications. Specifications 1 and 2 of Panel A of Table 3 show the baseline estimates.
The remaining specifications in Panel A supplement Equation (1) with additional controls. Spec-
ifications 3 and 4 supplement Equation (1) with controls for city-level unemployment rates since
economic conditions have been shown to be related to health and also affect health insurance ac-
cess (Ruhm 2000). Specifications 5 and 6 control for same-sex marriage being legal in the state,
since same-sex marriage is associated with increased health insurance and health care access for
gay men (Carpenter et al. 2021). Specifications 7 and 8 supplement Equation (1) with year-by-
Census-region fixed effects to account for the possibility of region-specific trends in HIV/AIDS
deaths that are correlated with Title 1 status. The estimates across these additional specifications
are similar to the main estimates.
   Prior to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), one of the few options for people with HIV/AIDS to
obtain non-employer-based health insurance was through the disability insurance system after
HIV/AIDS had resulted in them being unable to work. In most states, people who qualify for
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) are automatically eligible for Medicaid. Approximately 15
states, however, require people to fill out separate applications for Medicaid and SSI, which has
the potential to lead to differential Medicaid access across states for people disabled because of
HIV/AIDS (Lakdawalla, Sood, and Goldman 2006). Though there is little variation in these rules
over time, these rules could still be a threat to this study's empirical approach if they are corre-
lated with Title 1 status and if they have an effect on HIV/AIDS death rates that varies over time.
Reassuringly for the validity of the baseline specification, an equal number of treatment and con-
trol cities have separate application processes at 7 for each set of cities, but to assess the relevance
of potential differential trends related to Medicaid application rules for the analysis, I supplement

                                                  22
Equation (1) with controls for the interaction of year indicator variables with an indicator vari-
able equal to one for cities in states with separate SSI and Medicaid applications. The estimated
effect of Title 1 status varying dramatically with the addition of these controls would suggest that
trends related to Medicaid application rules for low-income disabled people hinder the empirical
strategy. The results from including these additional controls are shown in specifications 9 and 10
of Table 3 and are similar to the baseline estimates.
   Specifications 11 and 12 supplement the baseline specifications with an indicator variable for
cities being in states that allow low-income, non-disabled childless adults to be on Medicaid.
Most of the variation in this measure starts in 2014 after the ACA expanded Medicaid, but the
measure also incorporates the few states that expanded Medicaid eligibility prior to the ACA.18
The results in specifications 11 and 12 do not change dramatically when this control is included,
which suggests that the estimated effect of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS deaths is not spuriously
driven by differential Medicaid access across cities in the sample.
   Panel B of Table 3 assesses the robustness of the results to alternative dependent variables.
Columns 1 and 2 of Panel B of Table 3 show estimated effects on the log of age-adjusted HIV/
AIDS mortality rates per 100,000 people calculated using the 2000 age distribution from the SEER
data. Columns 3 and 4 use the log of HIV/AIDS deaths as the dependent variable instead of the
log of HIV/AIDS death rates per 100,000 people. As long as major population changes correlated
with Title 1 status have not occurred, the estimates should be similar regardless of whether the
dependent variable is based on rates or counts. The estimates in columns 1 through 4 of Table 3
Panel B are similar to the baseline estimates.
   Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 Panel B show estimates of the impact of Title 1 status on non-HIV/
AIDS deaths per 100,000 people. Title 1 status has the potential to increase or decrease non-HIV/
AIDS deaths. By reducing HIV/AIDS deaths, Title 1 status could increase non-HIV/AIDS deaths
since people not dying from HIV/AIDS will eventually die from other causes, but large amounts
of funding to fight HIV/AIDS could also allow cities to spend money they would have spent on
HIV/AIDS on other types of health initiatives. Similarly, Title 1 funds have the potential to build
public health infrastructure that can be used more broadly. Despite these potential mechanisms for

   18
     Information on the timing of state adoption of the ACA's Medicaid expansion comes from the Kaiser Family
Foundation website. The list of states with pre-ACA Medicaid eligibility for childless, non-disabled adults comes
from McMorrow et al. (2017). The shares of observations from 1990 to 2018 with non-disabled childless adults being
eligible for Medicaid is similar for treatment and control cities at 15 percent and 13 percent, respectively.

                                                       23
how Title 1 status could affect non-HIV/AIDS deaths, finding similarly sized effects on non-HIV/
AIDS deaths would raise concerns about the validity of the empirical approach for identifying
the impact of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS outcomes. Figure 3 further considers the relationship
between Title 1 status and non-HIV/AIDS death rates by displaying estimated effects of Title 1
status on each of the five leading causes of death in the United States, which are cardiovascular
disease, cancer, accidents, chronic lower respiratory disease, and cerebrovascular disease, as well
as on suicide rates. The estimates displayed in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 Panel B and in Figure 3
do not indicate that Title 1 status is associated with large changes in non-HIV/AIDS death rates.
    Appendix Table A.4 further assesses the robustness of the analysis by showing estimates from
broadening and narrowing the set of cities included in the sample. Specifically, Appendix Table
A.4 considers the robustness of the results to including the 10, 20, and 30 cities on either side
of the original threshold of AIDS cases for Title 1 eligibility through 1995 that were closest to
the threshold. Appendix Table A.4 also assesses robustness to excluding the five cities that were
closest to the original threshold on either side of the threshold, which removes from the sample
the two cities that eventually qualified for Title 1 status under the new rules put in place in 1996.
Finally, Appendix Table A.4 shows estimates from a specification that limits the set of treated cities
to those that obtained Title 1 status from 1994 to 1996.19 While the standard errors rise as fewer
cities are included in the regressions, the point estimates of the effect of Title 1 status do not vary
dramatically.
    Appendix Figure A.3 tests for differential trends in HIV/AIDS death rates from 1990 to 2006
among cities with fewer than 2,000 AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995. Evidence of differen-
tial percent changes in HIV/AIDS death rates over time among cities not obtaining Title 1 eligi-
bility under the original rules would raise concerns about the validity of the empirical approach
used in this study. Appendix Figure A.3 shows one set of event-study coefficients from a regres-
sion that estimates changes over time in the difference in logged HIV/AIDS death rates between
the 12 cities in the control group with the most AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, and the other 13

   19
     As explained in de Chaisemartin and d'Haultfoeuille (2019) and Goodman-Bacon (2018b), models with two-
way fixed effects can produce estimates of treatment effects that are biased towards zero when treatment timing
varies across groups and when treatment effects evolve with treatment duration. As most of the treated cities in the
sample obtained Title 1 status within a few years of each other, differential treatment timing is arguably unlikely to
lead to major bias in this setting. The results in Appendix Table A.4 support this idea by showing that the estimated
effects are similar when the set of treated cities is limited to cities that obtained Title 1 status within three years of
each other.

                                                           24
control cities. Appendix Figure A.3 also shows event-study coefficients from a second regression
that estimates changes over time in the difference in logged HIV/AIDS death rates between the
control cities and the 25 cities with the most AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995, that were
not included in the main sample. The analysis in Appendix Figure A.3 provides evidence that
cities having reported more AIDS cases through 1995 is not associated with differential changes
in HIV/AIDS death rates in percent terms from 1990 to 2006 among cities that did not meet the
original threshold for Title 1 eligibility.
   The estimates presented so far suggest that the large amounts of federal funding allocated
to combat HIV/AIDS through Title 1 of the Ryan White CARE Act were transformative for the
cities receiving the funds. Figure 4 provides descriptive evidence that supports this finding by
showing how both Title 1 funding and reductions in HIV/AIDS death rates differ for cities that
reached 2,000 AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, and for cities that did not. Graph A plots means of
Title 1 funds received from 1996 to 2006 per AIDS case reported by March 31, 1995, for cities in
the AIDS Public Information Data Set grouped based on their rank order in AIDS cases reported
through 1995 relative to the original Title 1 threshold. While cities crossing the 2,000 case threshold
by March 31, 1995, received roughly $22,500 in Title 1 funding per AIDS case reported through
1995, cities with fewer than 2,000 AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, received less than $900 in Title 1
funding per AIDS cases reported through 1995.
   Graph B of Figure 4 plots the mean change in HIV/AIDS death rates from 1990 to 2006 for
the same grouping of cities. As the estimated effects from Table 2 suggest would be the case,
cities that qualified for Title 1 status under the original Ryan White CARE Act rules experienced
dramatically greater declines in HIV/AIDS death rates between 1990 and 2006 than the cities
that did not. The average decrease in HIV/AIDS death rates from 1990 to 2006 is 60 percent for
cities obtaining Title 1 status under the original rules and 36 percent for other cities. Graph C
shows differences in HIV/AIDS death rates from 1990 to 2012 and from 1990 to 2018. Even with
the broader changes in health care and health insurance occurring in recent years and even with
subsequent changes to the Ryan White CARE Act to partially offset funding disparities put in
place by the 1996 reauthorization, disparities in progress reducing HIV/AIDS death rates between
cities that qualified for Title 1 status under the original rules and those that did not still exist




                                                  25
through 2018.20

Impacts of Title 1 by Sex, Age, and Race

    The HIV/AIDS epidemic has had heterogeneous impacts across demographic groups. As Ap-
pendix Table A.3 indicates, males, prime-aged people, and Black people have accounted for dis-
proportionate shares of HIV/AIDS deaths in the United States relative to their shares of deaths
more broadly. Table 4 evaluates the implications of Title 1 by sex, age, and race.21
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 display estimated effects of Title 1 status separately for males and
females, for different age groupings, and for Black people, White people, and people of other
races. For these regressions, I compute HIV/AIDS death rates and controls separately for each
demographic group. Because some of the groups have no HIV/AIDS deaths in some city-year
combinations, I use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation rather than the log transforma-
tion. Column 1 displays estimated effects using data from 1990 to 2006, while column 2 displays
estimated effects using data from 1990 to 2018.
    Panel A of Table 4 estimates separate effects for males and females, and Panel B estimates
separate effects for people younger than 18, people 18 to 64, and people 65 or older. The estimates
in columns 1 and 2 of these panels are statistically significantly different from 0 for males and
for people ages 18 to 64. Likely in part because of the lower baseline HIV/AIDS death rates for
non-prime-aged adults and for females, the estimates of the effects for females, people younger
than 18, and people 65 and older are less precise than the estimates for males and people ages 18
to 64.
    Panel C of Table 4 estimates separate effects for Black people, White people, and people of other
    20
       As Figure 4 suggests, regression discontinuity and regression discontinuity difference-in-differences designs are
alternative approaches for studying the impact of Title 1 status. The difference-in-differences approach employed in
this study is preferred over these alternatives because of the staggered treatment timing and because cities just under
the original threshold were more likely to eventually receive some Title 1 funding than other non-original-Title-1
cities were. However, I have explored the sensitivity of the findings to using these alternative approaches. Estimates
from regression discontinuity and regression discontinuity difference-in-differences tend to vary across modeling
choices more than the estimates from difference-in-differences models do, but as would be expected based on Figure
4, estimates from the discontinuity-based research designs corroborate the findings from the difference-in-differences
analysis.
    21
       The analysis in this section does not focus on sexual orientation for data availability reasons. However, note that
HIV/AIDS disparities are much sharper still when sexual orientation is considered. For example, in 2016 the CDC
estimated the lifetime risk of HIV infection for different sexual orientation, race, and sex groupings and found that,
among the groups considered, White heterosexual men have the lowest lifetime risk of contracting HIV at less than
0.04% while Black gay men have the highest lifetime risk of contracting HIV at approximately 50%. Refer to "CDC:
1 in 2 Black Gay Men in US Will Be Diagnosed with HIV," which was written by Mike Stobbe and published by the
Associated Press on February 23, 2016.

                                                           26
races. Since Black people are less likely to have health insurance coverage and more likely to lack
financial resources than White people, Title 1 status has the potential to have disproportionately
large effects on Black HIV/AIDS death rates. However, given other hurdles that Black people
often face in accessing care, such as lower levels of trust for doctors (Alsan and Wanamaker 2018),
Title 1 also has the potential to have smaller impacts on Black people than on people of other
races. The point estimates shown in Table 4 are larger in magnitude for Black HIV/AIDS death
rates than for White HIV/AIDS death rates, but the estimates indicate that Title 1 has decreased
HIV/AIDS death rates for both groups.
   To assess statistical significance of the differences in estimates between groups, I draw 1,000
bootstrap samples with replacement and then replicate the analysis in Table 4 with the bootstrap
samples. A t-test based on these bootstrap estimates does not allow for rejecting the null hypothe-
sis that the effect of Title 1 status on HIV/AIDS death rates for people ages 18 to 64 is the same in
percent terms as the effect for people ages 0 to 17 (t-statistics of 0.5 for the column 1 estimates and
0.1 for the column 2 estimates) or the effect for people ages 65 and older (t-statistics of 1.8 and 1.0).
The evidence of a larger effect on male HIV/AIDS death rates than on female HIV/AIDS death
rates is stronger (t-statistics of 1.9 and 1.8). The t-statistics for the difference between the estimates
for White and Black people from the bootstrap analysis are 2.5 and 1.1, which is suggestive ev-
idence of a larger impact of Title 1 status on Black HIV/AIDS deaths rates than on White HIV/
AIDS deaths rates.
   To assess the demographics of the HIV/AIDS deaths avoided by Title 1, I calculate the implied
number of HIV/AIDS deaths avoided by Title 1 for each demographic group through 2018 assum-
ing that the estimate in column 2 of Table 4 represents the effect of Title 1 status on the group's
HIV/AIDS death rates in all Title 1 cities and then calculate each group's share of deaths avoided
out of the total implied number of deaths avoided for the panel.22 This calculation is an estimate
of each group's share of HIV/AIDS deaths avoided by Title 1 from 1990 to 2018. Column 3 of
Table 4 displays these estimates and indicates that the majority of the HIV/AIDS deaths averted
by Title 1 are male, ages 18 to 64, and Black, though the shares of avoided HIV/AIDS deaths for
Black and White people are not statistically significantly distinguishable from each other.


   22
    Note that my preferred approach for estimating the total number of HIV/AIDS deaths avoided by Title 1 of the
Ryan White program, which I discuss later, accounts for the Title 1 funds received by the control group. The approach
and calculations are summarized in Table 6.

                                                         27
   Figure 5 plots how each group's estimated share of the total HIV/AIDS deaths avoided by Title
1 compares to the group's 2010 population share and to the group's share of all deaths occurring
in the study period. The x-axis of graph A of Figure 5 indicates each group's share of the 2010
U.S. population. The x-axis of graph B of Figure 5 indicates each group's share of all 1990 to 2018
U.S. deaths. The y-axes in both graphs indicate each group's estimated share of the total HIV/
AIDS deaths avoided by Title 1 from column 3 of Table 4. Each marker represents a different
demographic group. If the HIV/AIDS deaths avoided from Title 1 were proportional to the U.S.
population or to all U.S. deaths, markers would lie along each graph's 45-degree line. Figure 5
highlights that, relative to both the 2010 U.S. population and to all U.S. deaths occurring during
the study period, the lives saved from Title 1 are disproportionately male, prime-aged, and Black.

The Impact of Title 1 Status on Rates of New AIDS Cases

   Figure 6 shows duration-specific estimates of the effect of Title 1 status on measures of rates of
AIDS cases reported and diagnosed. The black line shows estimates from a single regression with
the dependent variable set to be the log of annual rates of new AIDS cases calculated using the
AIDS cases reported each year from 1990 to 2002 AIDS Public Information Data Set. The blue line
shows estimates from a single regression with the dependent variable set to be the log of annual
rates of new AIDS diagnoses from 1990 to 2006 calculated from the data received directly from
the CDC. As with the HIV/AIDS death rates, rates of new AIDS cases trend similarly for both the
treated and untreated cities until the treated cities obtain Title 1 status. Once cities obtain Title 1
status, their rates of new AIDS cases reported and diagnosed fall relative to other cities. Appendix
Figure A.4 plots coefficients from a specification that uses data through 2018 and reveals a similar
pattern.
   Table 5 shows estimates of the average effect of Title 1 status on rates of new AIDS cases.
Column 1 shows the estimated effect of Title 1 status using data on new AIDS cases reported from
the AIDS Public Information Data Set. This specification includes data from years 1990 to 2002
for the 50 cities in the baseline sample. The next three columns show the estimated effect using
the data on annual AIDS diagnoses received directly from the CDC. As explained earlier, the city
definitions in the data received from the CDC do not completely align with the city definitions
used elsewhere, but the data received from the CDC have the advantage of allowing for analysis
of new AIDS diagnoses through 2018. Column 2 displays an estimate from a specification that


                                                  28
uses data from years 1990 to 2002 to show how the estimates from using the different measures
compare when the analysis period is the same. The estimate in column 3 is from a specification
that uses data from 1990 to 2006. The estimate in column 4 is from a specification that uses data
from 1990 to 2018. The estimates in columns 1 through 4 of Table 5 are similar across specifications
and indicate that Title 1 status reduced annual rates of new AIDS cases by an average of 19.2 to
21.3 percent.
   These results imply that Title 1 funding led to large reductions in rates of new AIDS cases
in the cities receiving the funds. Figure 7 shows how AIDS diagnosis and prevalence rates have
changed since 1990 for all cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set with AIDS data from
the CDC grouped by cities' rank order in AIDS cases reported through the end of 1995 relative
to the original threshold for Title 1 eligibility. Graphs A and B show diagnosis rates and mirror
the equivalent analysis for HIV/AIDS death rates in Figure 4. From 1990 to 2006, AIDS diagnosis
rates fell by 46 percent in cities that qualified for Title 1 status under the original Ryan White
CARE Act rules and by 16 percent in cities that had fewer than 2,000 AIDS cases reported by the
end of the eligibility window for the original rules.
   The reductions in HIV/AIDS death rates along with continued spread of HIV have led to the
number of people with HIV growing each year in the United States. Even with effective treatment
lowering the likelihood that HIV leads to AIDS over time, the number of people alive who have
ever been diagnosed as having AIDS (indicated as AIDS prevalence in Figure 7) has also risen
over time. In 2018, the United States had its highest number of people alive who have had ever
had AIDS up to that point. From 1990 to 2006, the share of the U.S. population that had ever
had AIDS increased more than four-fold. As shown in Graph C of Figure 7, however, growth
in AIDS prevalence was much lower for cities that qualified for Title 1 status under the original
Ryan White rules. In contrast to Title 1 cities, which experienced a 315 percent increase in AIDS
prevalence on average through 2006, non-Title 1 cities experienced a 470 percent increase in AIDS
prevalence through 2006. The differential changes in AIDS prevalence continue through 2012 and
2018 as well.

Spending per Live Saved, Total Lives Saved, and Cost-Benefit Analysis

   I now further assess the implications of the estimated impact of Ryan White's city-level fund-
ing by calculating the implied cost to avoid an HIV/AIDS death and the implied number of lives


                                                 29
saved by Title 1. Table 6 summarizes the analysis.
   Using the coefficient estimate from column 2 of Table 2, I first estimate the number of lives
saved for each treated city in the sample from 1991 to 2018. I then sum those annual city-level
estimates across years and cities to get an estimate of total lives saved across time for the treated
cities in the sample. The estimated number of lives saved by Title 1 status for the treated cities
in the sample is 10,024. An alternative approach to estimating the number of lives saved for the
treated cities in the sample is to allow the effect of Title 1 in Equation (1) to vary with the duration
that each city received Title 1 funds and then to use these duration-specific estimates to calculate
the number of lives saved.23 Calculating lives saved with duration-specific estimates implies that
Title 1 status saved 10,118 lives in the treated cities. Because the analysis with the duration-specific
estimates is similar to the baseline analysis, I focus the remaining discussion on the estimate cal-
culated using the average effect, but column 2 of Panel B of Table 6 displays calculations that use
the duration-specific estimates.
   Relative to cities that did not qualify for Title 1 status under the original eligibility rules, cities
in the sample that qualified for Title 1 status under the original eligibility rules received an addi-
tional $3.15 billion in Title 1 funding through 2018. This difference in funding along with the esti-
mated number of lives saved implies that Title 1 reduced one HIV/AIDS death for every $314,000
spent. This estimated spending per life saved applies to cities in the sample that received Title
1 funds and is not necessarily the same amount of Title 1 spending that would be required to
avoid an HIV/AIDS death in non-Title-1 cities. However, given the arbitrariness of Title 1 status
for cities in the baseline sample, the assumption that the impact of Title 1 funding on control cities
would have been similar to the impact on the treatment cities is plausible. The plausibility of this
assumption is further supported by the graphical analysis in Figure 4 and by analysis in Appendix
B that suggests that the effect of Title 1 status on cities gaining Title 1 status in 2007 is similar to the
effect estimated in the baseline analysis after accounting for the differential pre-Title-1 trends for
the 2007 Title 1 cities. The assumption that the marginal effect of Title 1 funding is the same as the
average effect on the treatment cities allows for making two equivalent statements about Title 1
funding decisions that are relevant given debates about levels of HIV/AIDS funding. First, if the


   23
    This specification is similar to the specification shown in Figure 2, though the specification for the calculation
presented in Table 6 uses data from 1990 to 2018 and allows separate effects for each Title 1 duration rather than
combining some years of duration.

                                                         30
federal government valued the lives that could be saved by Title 1 at at least $314,000, it should
have allocated more money through Title 1 than it did. Second, Title 1 funding levels from 1991 to
2018 implicitly value the lives that could be saved through Title 1 of the Ryan White CARE Act at
$314,000 per life.
    The estimated impact of Title 1 on HIV/AIDS death rates from the specification in Table 2
that includes data from all Title 1 cities is similar to the baseline estimate from the main analysis
sample, which suggests that the treatment effect of Title 1 status does not vary widely for Title 1
cities in the baseline sample and for Title 1 cities not included in the baseline sample. Under the
assumption that the effect of Title 1 is the same across Title 1 cities, the estimate of spending per
life saved implies that the $19 billion allocated through Title 1 saved 60,359 lives through the end
of 2018. As noted above, the estimates from this study can be used to calculate the government's
implied valuation of the lives that could be saved by Title 1 funding. However, to the extent
that Title 1 funding levels have been set for idiosyncratic reasons, the estimates also allow for
calculating the implied value of Title 1 spending under different assumptions about the value of a
statistical life. Under the assumption that the value of a statistical life is $10 million, the estimates
from this study imply that the $19 billion allocated through Title 1 of the Ryan White CARE Act
through 2018 resulted in a value of $604 billion and had a benefit-cost ratio of 32.24 Note that
the only benefit from Title 1 included in this calculation is its reduction in HIV/AIDS deaths. As
Title 1 reduces HIV/AIDS morbidity and likely improves the lives of people with HIV/AIDS in
other ways, such as by reducing out-of-pocket costs, meaningful benefits are not reflected in this
benefit-cost ratio.
    As was previously discussed, the Title 2 funding rules include provisions that partially off-
set the Title 1 funding disparities. Specifically, the formula used to allocate part of Title 2 funds
excludes HIV/AIDS cases from Title 1 cities, and the 2000 Ryan White reauthorization provides
additional Title 2 funds to states with non-Title-1 cities that have high numbers of AIDS cases. If
states direct less Title 2 funding to Title 1 cities in response to the effect of Title 1 funds on Title
2 funds, then the amount of federal spending required to avoid an HIV/AIDS death would be
less than $314,000. To produce a rough estimate of the impact of a city receiving one dollar of
Title 1 funding on state Title 2 funding, I first create a state-year level data set from 2000 to 2018

   24
     Estimates of the value of a statistical life vary widely. The value of a statistical life of $10 million is in line with
recent evidence and with values of a statistical life used by federal agencies (Lee and Taylor 2019).

                                                             31
that contains information on each state's AIDS cases, Title 1 funding, and Title 2 funding. I then
regress Title 2 funding on year fixed effects, each state's share of AIDS cases out of all AIDS cases
each year, and the total Title 1 funding that cities in each state received each year to produce an
estimate of the relationship between Title 1 and Title 2 funding after accounting for states' relative
AIDS burdens.25 The coefficient on Title 1 funding from this regression indicates that cities in a
state receiving an extra dollar of Title 1 funding is associated with a reduction in Title 2 funding
of $0.23 after accounting for states' AIDS cases. Assuming that Title 1 cities receive $0.23 less in
Title 2 funds for each dollar they receive in Title 1 funds implies that Title 1 avoided an HIV/AIDS
death for every $242,000 spent in federal funding and that the benefit-cost ratio of Title 1 is 41.


5     Conclusion
    HIV/AIDS has claimed over 700,000 lives in the United States and tens of millions of lives
worldwide, and the U.S. federal government spends billions of dollars each year to treat HIV/
AIDS. This paper examined the impact of federal funding to combat HIV/AIDS provided to cities
through the largest federal program aimed at addressing HIV/AIDS in the United States. The
results indicate that the federal funding allocated to cities has had large impacts on the cities
receiving the funds. The estimates imply that Title 1 of the Ryan White CARE Act alone has saved
approximately 60,000 lives as of 2018 and reduced an AIDS death for each $314,000 spent. This
amount of spending to save a life is far less than typical estimates of the value of a statistical
life. Assuming a value of a statistical life of $10 million, these estimates imply a benefit-cost ratio
of 32. Given that the benefits in this calculation do not take into account the reduced morbidity
from Title 1 or the fact that Title 1 funds have likely displaced other governmental payments and
private payments for treatment, this estimate of the benefit-cost ratio is likely conservative.
    In opting to address HIV/AIDS by allocating federal funds to support local responses rather

    25
       In principle, if one had complete information on all parameters used to determine Title 2 allocations, it would be
possible to calculate the impact of Title 1 funds on Title 2 funds using the Title 2 allocation rules. However, because
Title 2 has different categories of funds, numerous inputs, a mixture of formula and discretionary funding, changes to
both formula structures and input definitions over time, and hold harmless provisions, the allocation of Title 2 funds
is complex, and assessing the impact of an additional dollar of Title 1 funding on Title 2 funds through the allocation
rules is challenging. For this reason, I opt to produce an empirical estimate of the offset rather than to attempt to
collect data on Title 2 inputs and then calculate an estimate of the offset using the allocation rules. For a discussion
of how Title 2's complex allocation rules complicate efforts to determine the exact impact of Title 1 funding on Title 2
funds using the allocation rules, refer to HRSA administrator Elizabeth Duke's 2006 Congressional testimony about
double counting in the Ryan White CARE Act (U.S. Congress Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions 2006).

                                                           32
than by establishing a federal entitlement program, Congress set up the Ryan White CARE Act
as a place-based funding mechanism. Place-based funding has advantages over other ways of
structuring funding, including that the federal government can allocate funding to places most in
need and that flexible funding can allow local officials to tailor the use of funds to their specific
communities and to engage in proactive strategies. In part for these reasons, people often advocate
for increasing the use of place-based funding and policies in a number of domains, including
in health, education, economic development, and infrastructure (Shambaugh and Nunn 2018).
This study provides evidence that allocating federal funding to local areas can have large health
impacts. However, the results from this study also highlight the importance of funding rules and
indicate that place-based funding can lead to disparities across places, especially if funding is
allocated using sharp, arbitrary cutoffs. In the case of HIV/AIDS, many years of large funding
disparities have resulted in divergent progress in combating HIV/AIDS across U.S. cities.




                                                 33
References
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. "Inside the
  War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 93(2): 387­403.

Alsan, Marcella and Marianne Wanamaker. 2018. "Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 407­455.

Anderson, D Mark, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Daniel I Rees. 2020. "Re-Examining the Contri-
 bution of Public Health Efforts to the Decline in Urban Mortality." American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics.

Anderson, D Mark, Kerwin Kofi Charles, Claudio Las Heras Olivares, and Daniel I Rees. 2019.
 "Was the First Public Health Campaign Successful?" American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 11(2): 143­75.

Benjamin, Georges C. 2020. "Celebrating Public Health in a Time of Crisis." Association of State
  and Territorial Health Officials.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. "Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
  American South." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73­117.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. "Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Child-
  hood Exposure." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 1­45.

Bozzette, Samuel A, Geoffrey Joyce, Daniel F McCaffrey, Arleen A Leibowitz, Sally C Morton,
  Sandra H Berry, Afshin Rastegar, David Timberlake, Martin F Shapiro, and Dana P Gold-
  man. 2001. "Expenditures for the Care of HIV-Infected Patients in the Era of Highly Active
  Antiretroviral Therapy." New England Journal of Medicine, 344(11): 817­823.

Carpenter, Christopher S, Samuel T Eppink, Gilbert Gonzales, and Tara McKay. 2021. "Effects
  of Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage on Marriage and Health." Journal of Policy Analysis and
  Management, 40(2): 376­411.

Center for Poverty and Inequality Research. 2020. "What Are the Major Federal Safety Net Pro-
  grams in the U.S.?" https://poverty.ucdavis.edu/article/war-poverty-and-todays-safety-net-0.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1998. "AIDS Falls from Top Ten Causes of Death;
  Teen Births, Infant Mortality, Homicide All Decline."

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017. "More People with HIV Have the Virus under
  Control."

Chan, Tat Y, Barton H Hamilton, and Nicholas W Papageorge. 2016. "Health, Risky Behaviour
 and the Value of Medical Innovation for Infectious Disease." The Review of Economic Studies,
 83(4): 1465­1510.

                   ement and Xavier d'Haultfoeuille. 2019. "Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators
de Chaisemartin, Cl´
  with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                              34
Department of Health and Human Services. 2005. "Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
 National Center for HIV, STD and TB Prevention, AIDS Public Information Data Set US Surveil-
 lance Data for 1981-2002." CDC WONDER On-line Database.

Department of Health and Human Services. 2020. Multiple Cause of Death, 1990-2019. National
 Center for Health Statistics.

Doyle, Joseph J. 2011. "Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Evidence from Health
 Shocks to Patients Far from Home." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 221­43.

Doyle, Joseph J, John A Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel A Kleiner. 2015. "Measuring
 Returns to Hospital Care: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns." Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 123(1): 170­214.

Duggan, Mark G and William N Evans. 2008. "Estimating the Impact of Medical Innovation: A
 Case Study of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments." In Forum for Health Economics & Policy. Vol. 11.
 De Gruyter.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney. 2018. "Provider Incentives and Healthcare
  Costs: Evidence from Long-Term Care Hospitals." Econometrica, 86(6): 2161­2219.

El-Sadr, Wafaa M, Kenneth H Mayer, and Sally L Hodder. 2010. "AIDS in America--Forgotten
  But Not Gone." New England Journal of Medicine, 362(11): 967.

El-Sadr, Wafaa M, Kenneth H Mayer, Miriam Rabkin, and Sally L Hodder. 2019. "AIDS in Amer-
  ica--Back in the Headlines at Long Last." New England Journal of Medicine, 380(21): 1985­1987.

England, Roger. 2007. "Are We Spending Too Much on HIV?" BMJ, 334(7589): 344­344.

Fauci, Anthony S, Robert R Redfield, George Sigounas, Michael D Weahkee, and Brett P Giroir.
  2019. "Ending the HIV Epidemic: A Plan for the United States." JAMA, 321(9): 844­845.

    andez, Raquel, Sahar Parsa, and Martina Viarengo. 2019. "Coming Out in America: AIDS,
Fern´
  Politics, and Cultural Change." National Bureau of Economic Research.

France, David. 2016. How to Survive a Plague: The Story of How Activists and Scientists Tamed AIDS.
  Pan Macmillan.

Gebo, Kelly A, John A Fleishman, Richard Conviser, James Hellinger, Fred J Hellinger,
 Joshua S Josephs, Philip Keiser, Paul Gaist, and Richard D Moore. 2010. "Contemporary
 Costs of HIV Health Care in the HAART Era." AIDS (London, England), 24(17): 2705.

General Accounting Office. 1995. "Ryan White CARE Act of 1990: Opportunities to Enhance
 Funding Equity."

Goldman, Dana P, Timothy Juday, Mark T Linthicum, Lisa Rosenblatt, and Daniel Seekins.
 2014. "The Prospect of a Generation Free of HIV May Be within Reach If the Right Policy Deci-
 sions Are Made." Health Affairs, 33(3): 428­433.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018a. "Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Im-
 plementation." Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 216­262.

                                                35
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018b. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Tim-
 ing." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hamilton, John D, Pamela M Hartigan, Michael S Simberkoff, Philip L Day, Gigi R Diamond,
 Gordon M Dickinson, George L Drusano, Merrill J Egorin, W Lance George, Fred M Gordin,
 et al. 1992. "A Controlled Trial of Early versus Late Treatment with Zidovudine in Symptomatic
 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection." New England Journal of Medicine, 326(7): 437­443.

Hatcher, William. 2020. "The Ryan White Program Is Vital to End the HIV Epidemic." American
 Journal of Public Health, 110(1): 51­52.

Health Resources and Services Administration. 2013. "Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program: Part A
 Manual."

Health Resources and Services Administration. 2019. "HRSA's Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program:
 Program Overview."

Health Resources and Services Administration. 2020a. "RWHAP Allocation Reports."

Health Resources and Services Administration. 2020b. "HRSA's Ryan White HIV/AIDS Pro-
 gram Overview of Clients: Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, 2018."

Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. "Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
 and Infant Health." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 172­211.

Institute of Medicine. 2004. Measuring What Matters: Allocation, Planning, and Quality Assessment
  for the Ryan White CARE Act. National Academies Press.

Joint Economic Committee. 2017. "The Rise in Opioid Overdose Deaths."

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2019a. "U.S. Federal Funding for HIV/AIDS: Trends over Time."

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2019b. "The Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program: The Basics."

Lakdawalla, Darius, Neeraj Sood, and Dana Goldman. 2006. "HIV Breakthroughs and Risky
  Sexual Behavior." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3): 1063­1102.

Lee, Jonathan M. and Laura O. Taylor. 2019. "Randomized Safety Inspections and Risk Exposure
  on the Job: Quasi-Experimental Estimates of the Value of a Statistical Life." American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4): 350­74.

Lopez,
 ´     Julia D, Enbal Shacham, and Tawnya Brown. 2018. "The Impact of the Ryan White
  HIV/AIDS Medical Case Management Program on HIV Clinical Outcomes: A Longitudinal
  Study." AIDS and Behavior, 22(9): 3091­3099.

Mansour, Hani, Daniel I Rees, and James M Reeves. 2020. "Voting and Political Participation in
 the Aftermath of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 27504.




                                               36
Marcus, Julia L, Wendy A Leyden, Stacey E Alexeeff, Alexandra N Anderson, Rulin C Hechter,
 Haihong Hu, Jennifer O Lam, William J Towner, Qing Yuan, Michael A Horberg, et al. 2020.
 "Comparison of Overall and Comorbidity-Free Life Expectancy Between Insured Adults with
 and without HIV Infection, 2000-2016." JAMA Network Open, 3(6): e207954­e207954.

McMorrow, Stacey, Genevieve M Kenney, Sharon K Long, Jason A Gates, et al. 2017. "The ACA
 Medicaid Expansion Led to Widespread Reductions in Uninsurance among Poor, Childless
 Adults." Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Miller, Sarah, Sean Altekruse, Norman Johnson, and Laura R Wherry. 2019. "Medicaid and
 Mortality: New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data." National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Roser, Max and Hannah Ritchie.            2018.    "HIV   /   AIDS."   Our   World   in   Data.
 https://ourworldindata.org/hiv-aids.

Rubin, Marcie S, Cynthia G Colen, and Bruce G Link. 2010. "Examination of Inequalities in
 HIV/AIDS Mortality in the United States from a Fundamental Cause Perspective." American
 Journal of Public Health, 100(6): 1053­1059.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. "Are Recessions Good for Your Health?" The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 115(2): 617­650.

SEER. 2019. "Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program Populations (1969-
  2018)." National Cancer Institute, DCCPS, Surveillance Research Program.

Shambaugh, Jay C and Ryan Nunn. 2018. Place-Based Policies for Shared Economic Growth. Hamil-
  ton Project, Brookings.

Sood, Neeraj, Timothy Juday, Jacqueline Vanderpuye-Orgle, Lisa Rosenblatt, John A Romley,
  Desi Peneva, and Dana P Goldman. 2014. "HIV Care Providers Emphasize the Importance of
  the Ryan White Program for Access to and Quality of Care." Health Affairs, 33(3): 394­400.

U.S. Congress Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. 2006. "Examin-
  ing Reauthorization of the Ryan White CARE Act Relating to Fighting the AIDS Epidemic of
  Today." 109th Congress, 2nd Session.




                                              37
                                                 Figure 1: Cities' AIDS Cases by March 31, 1995


                                        13
          Log of Number of AIDS Cases
             Reported through 1995




                                        10




                                         7




                                         4




                                                                                                             0
                                                    20




                                                                 40




                                                                               60




                                                                                            80
                                             1




                                                                                                           10
                                                       Cities' Rank Order in Number of AIDS Cases
                                                                  Reported through 1995


Notes: Each marker represents a separate city. The x-axis indicates cities' rank order in AIDS cases reported by March
31, 1995. The y-axis indicates the log of cities' AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995. Cities to the right of the solid
vertical line qualified for Title 1 status under the original rules for Title 1 eligibility. Cities to the left of the line did
not. The blue diamonds represent cities that became eligible for Title 1 status under the rules put in place in 1996. The
red squares represent cities that became eligible for Title 1 status under the rules put in place in 2007. Cities between
the dashed lines are included in the main sample. Data on AIDS cases come from the AIDS Public Information Data
Set.




                                                                      38
              Figure 2: Relationship between Title 1 Status and HIV/AIDS Death Rates


                      .2

                      .1

                      0

                    -.1

                    -.2

                    -.3

                    -.4

                    -.5
                                    re




                                                                r




                                                                             r




                                                                                           r
                       re




                                                  re




                                                                                                        r
                                                                te




                                                                             te




                                                                                           te




                                                                                                       te
                                    fo
                      fo




                                                 fo



                                                               af




                                                                            af




                                                                                         af




                                                                                                     af
                                  be
                   be




                                              be




                                                            1




                                                                         3




                                                                                       5



                                                                                                  6+
                                3




                                                         to




                                                                       to




                                                                                    to
                 4+




                                             1
                             to




                                                        0




                                                                     2




                                                                                   4
                            2




                                                 Years Relative to Title 1 Status


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on Title 1 status interacted with number of years from initial Title 1 status eli-
gibility from a single regression with the log of HIV/AIDS death rates as the dependent variable. The year before
cities obtained Title 1 status is the omitted category. The x-axis indicates the number of years from Title 1 status.
The y-axis indicates the coefficient estimate. The sample contains 850 observations from 50 cities from 1990 to 2006.
The regression includes city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents who are
Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The dashed lines indicate 95-percent confidence intervals
calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                          39
            Figure 3: Relationship between Title 1 Status and Non-HIV/AIDS Death Rates


                         All Non-HIV/AIDS Deaths:
                                      1990 to 2006
                                      1990 to 2018
                Cardiovascular Disease Deaths:
                                   1990 to 2006
                                   1990 to 2018
                                      Cancer Deaths:
                                        1990 to 2006
                                        1990 to 2018
                                 Accidental Deaths:
                                       1990 to 2006
                                       1990 to 2018
                     Respiratory Disease Deaths:
                                     1990 to 2006
                                     1990 to 2018
              Cerebrovascular Disease Deaths:
                                  1990 to 2006
                                  1990 to 2018
                   Intentional Self-Harm Deaths:
                                     1990 to 2006
                                     1990 to 2018
                                                            -.1         -.05        0          .05               .1
                                                                       Coefficient on Title 1 Status


Notes: Each marker represents an estimate of the coefficient on Title 1 status from separate regressions of Equation
(1) with the dependent variable being the log of deaths per 100,000 people for the indicated cause of death. The unit
of observation in the regressions is a city and year combination. Numbers of deaths come from the Vital Statistics
Mortality data. All regressions include city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents
who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The sample includes 50 cities and contains 850
observations from 1990 to 2006 and 1,450 observations from 1990 to 2018. The graph displays 95-percent confidence
intervals for each estimate calculated using standard errors clustered at the city level.




                                                              40
Figure 4: Title 1 Funding and Changes in HIV/AIDS Death Rates since 1990 by Cities' Rank Order
in AIDS Cases Reported by March 31, 1995
                                                               A. Funding per AIDS Case Reported through 1995                                                                                                                            B. HIV/AIDS Death Rate Changes from 1990 to 2006
       Mean of Ryan White CARE Act Title 1 Funding




                                                     25000




                                                                                                                                                                                        Mean Percent Change from 1990 to 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -20
          from 1996 to 2006 per 1995 AIDS Case




                                                     20000                                                                                                                                                                      -30


                                                     15000                                                                                                                                                                      -40


                                                     10000                                                                                                                                                                      -50


                                                     5000                                                                                                                                                                       -60


                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                    -70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov
                                                                                                          w




                                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ov



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ov
                                                               w


                                                                              w


                                                                                            w




                                                                                                                      w


                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                            e


                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lo
                                                                                                                                             ov
                                                                                                                                ov




                                                                                                                                                          ov


                                                                                                                                                                      ov
                                                                                                       lo
                                                              lo


                                                                          lo


                                                                                        lo




                                                                                                                   lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ab




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ab



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ab
                                                                                                     be
                                                          be


                                                                         be


                                                                                       be




                                                                                                                 be




                                                                                                                                           ab
                                                                                                                               ab




                                                                                                                                                       ab


                                                                                                                                                                     ab




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                                                      9


                                                                     0


                                                                                   0




                                                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4
                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1-
                                                     -5


                                                                    -4


                                                                                  -3




                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1-
                                                                                                                                                  -3


                                                                                                                                                                -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                                                    41



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         31



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     31
                                                                                                            1-


                                                                                                                        1-
                                                                                            11
                                            41


                                                               31


                                                                              21




                                                                                                                                    11


                                                                                                                                                21


                                                                                                                                                            31
                                                          Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold                                                                                                   Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold


                                                                     C. HIV/AIDS Death Rate Changes from 1990
                                              -50
            Mean Percent Change from 1990




                                              -60


                                              -70


                                              -80


                                              -90
                                                                                                       w




                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                          w



                                                                         w



                                                                                        w




                                                                                                                      w



                                                                                                                                    e




                                                                                                                                                                e



                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                              ov
                                                                                                                                ov




                                                                                                                                                            ov



                                                                                                                                                                           ov
                                                                                                     lo
                                                      lo



                                                                     lo



                                                                                    lo




                                                                                                                   lo
                                                                                                  be
                                                     be



                                                                    be



                                                                                   be




                                                                                                                 be




                                                                                                                                             ab
                                                                                                                               ab




                                                                                                                                                           ab



                                                                                                                                                                          ab
                                                                                                0
                                            9



                                                                0



                                                                               0




                                                                                                              10




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                        0



                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                             -2
                              -5



                                                               -4



                                                                              -3




                                                                                                                                        -2



                                                                                                                                                      -3



                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                                                                                                           1-



                                                                                                                          1-
                                                                                         11
        41



                                                           31



                                                                          21




                                                                                                                                     11



                                                                                                                                                   21



                                                                                                                                                                31




                                                          Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold
                                                                                                              2012             2018



Notes: Each marker represents a set of cities grouped based on rank order in AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995.
The x-axes for all graphs indicate cities' rank order in AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995, relative to the original
threshold for Title 1 eligibility. The y-axis in graph A indicates mean Title 1 funding from 1996 to 2006 per AIDS case
reported by March 31, 1995. The y-axes in graphs B and C indicate the mean percent change in HIV/AIDS death rates
in the indicated year since 1990.




                                                                                                                                                                                   41
Figure 5: Demographics of AIDS Deaths Avoided from Ryan White Title 1 Funding Relative to
Demographics of the 2010 U.S. Population and of All 1990 to 2018 U.S. Deaths

                                                          A. Relative to 2010 Population                                                                                              B. Relative to 1990 to 2018 Deaths
                                    100                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                             Ages 18 to 64                                                                                      Ages 18 to 64
                                    90                                                                                                                             90
                                                                                  Male                                                                                                                          Male
 from Ryan White CARE Act Title 1




                                                                                                                                from Ryan White CARE Act Title 1
  Percent of AIDS Deaths Avoided




                                                                                                                                 Percent of AIDS Deaths Avoided
                                    80                                                                                                                             80

                                    70                                                                                                                             70

                                    60                                                                                                                             60
                                                        Black                                                                                                                         Black
                                    50                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                             White                                                                                                                           White
                                    40                                                                                                                             40

                                    30                                                                                                                             30

                                    20                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                    Female                                                                                                                      Female
                                    10                                                                                                                             10
                                                      65 or Older
                                                                                                                                                                             Younger than 18                                   65 or Older
                                     0                         Younger than 18
                                              Other Race                                                                                                            0         Other Race
                                          0       10     20        30      40    50     60     70     80       90    100                                                 0       10        20    30      40     50     60    70    80        90      100
                                                                Percent of U.S. Population as of 2010                                                                                        Percent of All Deaths from 1990 to 2018


Notes: Each marker represents a demographic group. The x-axis in graph A indicates each group's share of the 2010
population calculated using SEER data. The x-axis in graph B indicates each group's share of all 1990 to 2018 deaths
calculated using Vital Statistics Mortality data. The y-axes indicate the estimated share of AIDS deaths avoided from
Ryan White Title 1 for each group from 1990 to 2018. The 45-degree lines represent where each marker would be if
the demographics of the AIDS deaths avoided from Ryan White Title 1 mirrored the demographics of the 2010 U.S.
population or of all U.S. deaths from 1990 to 2018.




                                                                                                                           42
              Figure 6: Relationship between Title 1 Status and Rates of New AIDS Cases


                      .3

                    .15

                      0

                   -.15

                    -.3

                   -.45

                    -.6
                                      re




                                                                   r




                                                                                  r




                                                                                                r
                       re




                                                    re




                                                                                                              r
                                                                   te




                                                                                 te




                                                                                               te




                                                                                                             te
                                    fo
                      fo




                                                   fo



                                                                  af




                                                                                af




                                                                                              af




                                                                                                           af
                                   be
                    be




                                                be




                                                               1




                                                                             3




                                                                                           5



                                                                                                        6+
                                3




                                                            to




                                                                           to




                                                                                         to
                 4+




                                               1
                              to




                                                           0




                                                                         2




                                                                                       4
                            2




                                                   Years Relative to Title 1 Status

                                                 Source: AIDS Public Information Data Set
                                                 Source: CDC Data


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on Title 1 status interacted with number of years from initial Title 1 status eligibility.
The year before cities obtained Title 1 status is the omitted category. The x-axis indicates the number of years from
Title 1 status. The y-axis indicates the coefficient estimate. The black circles are from a single regression with the log of
rates of new AIDS cases reported from the AIDS Public Information Data Set as the dependent variable. The sample
contains 650 observations from 50 cities from 1990 to 2002. The blue diamonds are from a single regression with the
log of annual AIDS diagnosis rates from the CDC as the dependent variable. The sample contains 782 observations
from 46 cities from 1990 to 2006. Each regression includes city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the
share of cities' residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The dashed lines indicate
95-percent confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                             43
Figure 7: Changes in AIDS Diagnosis and Prevalence Rates since 1990 by Cities' Rank Order in
AIDS Cases Reported by March 31, 1995
                                                          A. AIDS Diagnosis Rate Changes from 1990 to 2006                                                                                                                 B. AIDS Diagnosis Rate Changes from 1990
      Mean Percent Change from 1990 to 2006




                                                  0                                                                                                                                                     -20




                                                                                                                                                                        Mean Percent Change from 1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -35
                                              -15


                                                                                                                                                                                                        -50
                                              -30

                                                                                                                                                                                                        -65
                                              -45
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ow




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                              w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ow




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ow



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ov



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ov
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lo
                                              -60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    be
                                                                                                                                                                                                        be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ab




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ab



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                                          -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                           ow




                                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -4
                                                      w



                                                                w



                                                                               w




                                                                                                             w



                                                                                                                         e




                                                                                                                                                    ve



                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                      ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-
                                                                                                                       ov




                                                                                                                                                                ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                                        41



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 31



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
                                                  lo



                                                              lo



                                                                             lo




                                                                                                         lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      31
                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                            l
                                                                                         be
                                              be



                                                            be



                                                                           be




                                                                                                        be




                                                                                                                                    ab
                                                                                                                      ab




                                                                                                                                                ab



                                                                                                                                                              ab
                                                                                       0
                                              9



                                                            0



                                                                         0




                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                              0


                                                                                                                                                         43
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold
                                                                                    -2
                    -5



                                                          -4



                                                                      -3




                                                                                                                               -2



                                                                                                                                           -3
                                                                                                   1-



                                                                                                                 1-




                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                  11
      41



                                                       31



                                                                    21




                                                                                                                           11



                                                                                                                                         21



                                                                                                                                                       31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012                 2018
                                                      Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold


                                                       C. AIDS Prevalence Rate Changes from 1990 to 2006                                                                                                                D. AIDS Prevalence Rate Changes from 1990
      Mean Percent Change from 1990 to 2006




                                              600                                                                                                                                                       700



                                                                                                                                                                        Mean Percent Change from 1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                        600
                                              500
                                                                                                                                                                                                        500

                                              400                                                                                                                                                       400

                                                                                                                                                                                                        300
                                              300
                                                                                                                                                                                                        200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                              w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ov



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lo
                                              200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be
                                                                                                                                                                                                         be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        be



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ab




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ab



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                               w




                                                                                                                                         e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -4
                                                      w



                                                                   w



                                                                                 w




                                                                                                             w



                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-
                                                                                                                                     ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-
                                                                                                                       ov




                                                                                                                                                    ov



                                                                                                                                                                ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                           lo




                                                                                                                                                                         41



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  31



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21
                                                  lo



                                                                lo



                                                                             lo




                                                                                                         lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      31
                                                                                          be
                                              be



                                                               be



                                                                            be




                                                                                                        be




                                                                                                                                    ab
                                                                                                                      ab




                                                                                                                                                ab



                                                                                                                                                              ab
                                                                                       0
                                              9



                                                            0



                                                                         0




                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                0



                                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold
                                                                                     -2
                        -5



                                                          -4



                                                                       -3




                                                                                                                               -2



                                                                                                                                             -3



                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                   1-



                                                                                                                 1-
                                                                                  11
      41



                                                       31



                                                                    21




                                                                                                                            11



                                                                                                                                         21



                                                                                                                                                       31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012                 2018
                                                      Rank Order in AIDS Cases Reported through 1995 Relative to 1995 Threshold



Notes: Each marker represents a set of cities grouped based on rank order in AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995.
The x-axes for all graphs indicate cities' rank order in AIDS cases reported by March 31, 1995, relative to the original
threshold for Title 1 eligibility. The y-axes indicate mean percent changes in the indicated measure and year since
1990.




                                                                                                                                                                       44
                                         Table 1: Characteristics of Control and Treatment Cities

                                                                        Fewer than 2,000 AIDS Cases             More than 2,000 AIDS Cases
                                                                      Reported through March 31, 1995         Reported through March 31, 1995
                                                                              (Control Cities)                       (Treatment Cities)
                                                                        Mean             St. Dev.               Mean            St. Dev.
     Panel A. City-by-Year Level Data (n=1,450)
     Population Size                                                   1,033,971          410,823              1,584,696           633,287
     Fraction of Population Male                                          0.48             0.01                   0.49              0.01
     Fraction of Population Younger than 18                               0.25             0.03                   0.25              0.02
     Fraction of Population 65 or Older                                   0.12             0.02                   0.12              0.03




45
     Fraction of Population White                                         0.82             0.10                   0.85              0.06
     Fraction of Population Black                                         0.16             0.11                   0.10              0.07
     Fraction of Population Hispanic                                      0.03             0.05                   0.12              0.11
     Panel B. City Level Observations (n=50)
     HIV/AIDS Deaths per 100,000 People in 1990                           7.3                2.6                  12.0               7.8
     Percent Increase in HIV/AIDS Death Rate from 1990 to 1991            17                 29                    17                11
     Total Title 1 Dollars from 1991 to 1996                               0                  0                7,284,073         6,876,145
     Total Title 1 Dollars from 1997 to 2006                          3,852,918          13,346,971           68,864,959         22,426,453
     Total Title 1 Dollars from 2006 to 2018                          17,804,023         30,787,974            71,477,627        23,817,116
     Total Title 1 Dollars through 2018                               21,656,941         39,689,725           147,626,659        48,692,930
     Notes: The control and treatment groups include 25 cities each. The descriptive statistics in panel A are for years 1990 to 2018.
                    Table 2: The Effect of Title 1 Status on HIV/AIDS Death Rates

                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
      Title 1                                      -0.170       -0.168                    -0.164       -0.183
                                                  (0.055)      (0.063)                   (0.052)      (0.052)
                                                  [0.003]      [0.010]                   [0.003]      [0.001]
      Title 1 * 1(Before 1996)                                               -0.014
                                                                            (0.047)
                                                                            [0.768]
      Title 1 * 1(1996 to 2018)                                              -0.224
                                                                            (0.076)
                                                                            [0.005]




46
      Years                                     1990-2006    1990-2018    1990-2018    1990-2018    1990-2018
      Number of Cities                             50           50           50           50           102
      n                                            850         1,450        1,450        1,450        2,958
      Mean of Dependent Variable in Levels         8.9          6.3          6.3          5.2          6.6
      Population Weights                                                                   x
      Notes: Each column displays the effect of Title 1 status from separate regressions of Equation (1). The
     unit of observation is a city and year combination. The dependent variable is the log of HIV/AIDS deaths
     per 100,000 people. Numbers of HIV/AIDS deaths each year come from the Vital Statistics Mortality
     data. All regressions include city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities'
     residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. Standard errors are clustered
     by city and are shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets.
              Table 3: Alternative Specifications for Estimates of the Effect of Title 1 Status

      Panel A. Dependent Variable: Log(HIV/AIDS Deaths per 100,000 People)
                                  (1)              (2)          (3)      (4)              (5)            (6)
                                -0.170           -0.168       -0.164   -0.163           -0.170         -0.168
                                (0.055)          (0.063)     (0.054)   (0.063)          (0.055)       (0.063)
                                [0.003]          [0.010]     [0.004]   [0.013]          [0.003]       [0.011]
      Additional Controls                 Baseline           Unemployment Rate              Same-Sex Marriage

                                  (7)          (8)              (9)       (10)           (11)            (12)
                                -0.160       -0.163           -0.168     -0.169        -0.176           -0.171
                                (0.055)      (0.067)         (0.056)    (0.065)        (0.055)         (0.063)
                                [0.006]      [0.019]         [0.004]    [0.012]        [0.002]         [0.009]
      Additional Controls       Region-by-Year Effects      SSI/Medicaid-by-Year      Medicaid for Childless Adults

      Panel B. Alternative Dependent Variables (in Logs)




47
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)               (6)
                              Age-Adjusted HIV/AIDS                                       Non-HIV/AIDS Deaths
      Dependent Variable
                              Deaths per 100,000 People       HIV/AIDS Deaths                per 100,000 People
                               -0.167         -0.166          -0.180    -0.185           0.000            -0.006
                               (0.054)        (0.062)         (0.061)  (0.074)          (0.008)          (0.011)
                               [0.003]        [0.010]         [0.005]  [0.016]          [0.972]          [0.602]

      Years                   1990-2006        1990-2018    1990-2006    1990-2018    1990-2006         1990-2018
      Notes: Each cell displays the effect of Title 1 status from separate regressions of Equation (1). The unit of
     observation is a city and year combination. The dependent variable in Panel A is the log of HIV/AIDS deaths
     per 100,000 people. The dependent variables for the regressions in Panel B are indicated in the table. Numbers
     of deaths each year come from the Vital Statistics Mortality data. All regressions include city fixed effects, year
     fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and
     older, and male. Additional controls are indicated in the table for the regressions in Panel A. Standard errors
     are clustered by city and are shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets.
Table 4: The Effect of Title 1 Status on HIV/AIDS Death Rates for Different Demographic Groups

                                                                                Estimated Share of
                                                                                 Deaths Avoided
                                 Mean HIV/AIDS                                      out of All
                                    Deaths per                                   Deaths Avoided
                                  100,000 People          (1)          (2)             (3)
             Panel A. Sex
             Male                       10.4             -0.155       -0.155            87%
                                                        (0.054)      (0.061)
                                                        [0.006]      [0.014]
             Female                      2.4             -0.082       -0.081            13%
                                                        (0.068)      (0.086)
                                                        [0.230]      [0.353]
             Panel B. Age
             Younger than 18             0.2             -0.067       -0.090             2%
                                                        (0.083)      (0.102)
                                                        [0.421]      [0.378]
             Ages 18 to 64               9.6             -0.153       -0.140            94%
                                                        (0.055)      (0.066)
                                                        [0.007]      [0.039]
             65 or Older                 1.8             -0.184       -0.136             4%
                                                        (0.110)      (0.108)
                                                        [0.101]      [0.215]
             Panel C. Race
             Black                      18.6             -0.218       -0.188            54%
                                                        (0.066)      (0.070)
                                                        [0.002]      [0.010]
             White                       4.2             -0.120       -0.146            45%
                                                        (0.056)      (0.065)
                                                        [0.038]      [0.030]
             Other                       1.0             -0.164       -0.182             2%
                                                        (0.184)      (0.180)
                                                        [0.377]      [0.317]
             Years                   1990-2018        1990-2006    1990-2018         1990-2018
             Notes: Each cell in columns 1 and 2 displays the effect of Title 1 status from separate
            regressions of Equation (1). The unit of observation is a city and year combination. The
            dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of HIV/AIDS deaths per 100,000
            people for each group. Numbers of HIV/AIDS deaths each year come from the Vital
            Statistics Mortality data. All regressions include city fixed effects, year fixed effects,
            and controls for the share of cities' residents of each group who are Black, Hispanic,
            younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. Standard errors are clustered by city and are
            shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets. The sample for each regression
            contains 850 observations from 1990 to 2006 and 1,450 observations from 1990 to 2018.




                                                       48
          Table 5: The Effect of Title 1 Status on Rates of New AIDS Cases

                                                (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
                                               -0.192        -0.206        -0.200       -0.213
                                              (0.056)        (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.044)
                                              [0.001]        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]

                                           AIDS Public
 Source                                    Information       CDC          CDC          CDC
                                             Data Set

 Years                                       1990-2002     1990-2002    1990-2006    1990-2018
 Number of Cities                                50            46           46           46
 Mean of Dependent Variable in Levels           21.0          19.0         17.3         13.4
 n                                              650           598          782         1,334
 Notes: Each column displays the effect of Title 1 status from separate regressions of Equation
(1). The unit of observation is a city and year combination. The dependent variable is the log
of new AIDS cases reported or diagnosed per 100,000 people. Numbers of new AIDS cases
reported each year come from the AIDS Public Information Data Set. Numbers of new AIDS
cases diagnosed each year were obtained directly from the CDC. All regressions include city
fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents who are Black,
Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. Standard errors are clustered by city and
are shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets.




                                               49
                  Table 6: Comparing the Costs of Title 1 to Benefits from Lives Saved

      Panel A. Title 1 Funding Information
      Total Title 1 Funding Received by Treated Cities through 2018: $3.69 billion
      Total Title 1 Funding Received by Comparison Cities through 2018: $0.54 billion
      Additional Title 1 Funding Received by Treated Cities through 2018: $3.15 billion
      Total Title 1 Funding through 2018: $18.96 billion

      Panel B. Cost Benefit Calculation
                                                                                    (1)                   (2)




50
                                                                                  Single          Duration-Specific
                                                                             Title 1 Estimate     Title 1 Estimates
      Estimated Lives Saved for Treated Cities in Sample                          10,024                10,118
      Title 1 Funding per Life Saved                                             $314,180              $311,252
      Implied Total Lives Saved by All Title 1 Funding through 2018               60,359                60,927
      Benefits from Title 1 for a Value of Statistical Life of $10 million     $604 billion          $609 billion
      Benefit-Cost Ratio                                                             32                   32
     Notes: Panel A summarizes basic Title 1 funding information. Column 1 of Panel B assesses the implications
     of the estimated impact of Title 1 from the baseline specification for years 1990 to 2018, while column 2 of
     Panel B assess the implications of estimates from a specification that allows the effect of Title 1 status to vary
     with the number of years that a city has had Title 1 status for years 1990 to 2018.
Appendices

A   Appendix Tables and Figures

                   Figure A.1: Cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set




                                   Title 1 Cities         Non-Title-1 Cities


     Notes: The graph shows Title 1 status as of 2018 for cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set.




                                                      1
Figure A.2: Relationship between Title 1 Status and HIV/AIDS Death Rates, Using Data from 1990
to 2018


                      .3


                   .15


                      0


                   -.15


                    -.3


                   -.45


                    -.6
                                 re




                                                                                              r

                                                                                                      r

                                                                                                             r
                                                   r

                                                            r

                                                                         r

                                                                               r

                                                                                       r
                       re




                                          re




                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                              te

                                                                                                      te

                                                                                                             te
                                                   te

                                                            te

                                                                     te

                                                                              te

                                                                                       te




                                                                                                                      te
                                 fo
                      fo




                                          fo




                                                                                            af

                                                                                                   af

                                                                                                           af
                                                af

                                                         af

                                                                  af

                                                                              af

                                                                                    af




                                                                                                                  af
                                be
                   be




                                      be




                                                                                         11

                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                        14
                                               1

                                                        3

                                                                 5

                                                                          7

                                                                                   9




                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                              15
                            3




                                           to

                                                    to

                                                             to

                                                                         to

                                                                               to
                 4+




                                      1




                                                                                       to

                                                                                              to

                                                                                                      to
                           to




                                          0

                                                   2

                                                            4

                                                                     6

                                                                               8

                                                                                    10

                                                                                            12

                                                                                                   13
                      2




                                                        Years Relative to Title 1 Status


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on Title 1 status interacted with number of years from initial Title 1 status eligibility
from a single regression with the log of HIV/AIDS death rates as the dependent variable. The year before cities
obtained Title 1 status is the omitted category. The x-axis indicates the number of years from Title 1 status. The
y-axis indicates the coefficient estimate. The sample contains 1,450 observations from 50 cities from 1990 to 2018.
The regression includes city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents who are
Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The dashed lines indicate 95-percent confidence intervals
calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                                     2
Figure A.3: Placebo Analysis of Differential Trends among Cities with Fewer than 2,000 AIDS
Cases Reported through March 31, 1995


               .5


            .25


               0


            -.25


             -.5
                              re




                                                               r




                                                                           r




                                                                                          r
                re




                                             re




                                                                                                        r
                                                            te




                                                                           te




                                                                                         te




                                                                                                       te
                              fo
               fo




                                            fo




                                                           af




                                                                         af




                                                                                        af




                                                                                                     af
                            be
            be




                                         be




                                                        1




                                                                       3




                                                                                     5




                                                                                                  6+
                          3




                                                      to




                                                                    to




                                                                                   to
          4+




                                        1
                       to




                                                    0




                                                                   2




                                                                                 4
                      2




                                                  Years Relative to 1996

                                         Within Control Group Comparison
                                         Comparison of Control Cities to 25 Cities with
                                         Most 1995 AIDS Cases Not in Main Sample


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on a placebo treatment indicator variable interacted with number of years from
1995 from a regression with the log of HIV/AIDS death rates as the dependent variable. The interaction with the year
1995 is the omitted category. The x-axis indicates the number of years from 1995. The y-axis indicates the coefficient
estimate. The black circles are from a single regression that includes the 425 observations from 1990 to 2006 from
the main analysis sample's 25 control cities. The coefficients plotted are time indicator variables interacted with an
indicator variable equal to one for the 12 cities in the sample with the most AIDS cases by March 31, 1995. The blue
diamonds are from a single regression that includes the 850 observations from 1990 to 2006 from the 50 cities with
the most AIDS cases by March 31, 1995, that did not qualify for Title 1 under the original Ryan White rules. The
coefficients shown are time indicator variables interacted with an indicator variable equal to one for the 25 cities in
the sample with the most March 31, 1995, AIDS cases. The regressions include city fixed effects and year fixed effects.
The dashed lines indicate 95-percent confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                           3
Figure A.4: Relationship between Title 1 Status and Rates of New AIDS Cases, Using Data from
1990 to 2018


                      .3


                   .15


                      0


                   -.15


                    -.3


                   -.45


                    -.6
                                 re




                                                                                              r

                                                                                                      r

                                                                                                             r
                                                   r

                                                            r

                                                                         r

                                                                               r

                                                                                       r
                       re




                                          re




                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                              te

                                                                                                      te

                                                                                                             te
                                                   te

                                                            te

                                                                     te

                                                                              te

                                                                                       te




                                                                                                                      te
                                 fo
                      fo




                                          fo




                                                                                            af

                                                                                                   af

                                                                                                           af
                                                af

                                                         af

                                                                  af

                                                                              af

                                                                                    af




                                                                                                                  af
                                be
                   be




                                      be




                                                                                         11

                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                        14
                                               1

                                                        3

                                                                 5

                                                                          7

                                                                                   9




                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                              15
                            3




                                           to

                                                    to

                                                             to

                                                                         to

                                                                               to
                 4+




                                      1




                                                                                       to

                                                                                              to

                                                                                                      to
                           to




                                          0

                                                   2

                                                            4

                                                                     6

                                                                               8

                                                                                    10

                                                                                            12

                                                                                                   13
                      2




                                                        Years Relative to Title 1 Status


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on Title 1 status interacted with number of years from initial Title 1 status eligibility
from a single regression with the log of annual AIDS diagnosis rates from the CDC as the dependent variable. The
year before cities obtained Title 1 status is the omitted category. The x-axis indicates the number of years from Title 1
status. The y-axis indicates the coefficient estimate. The sample contains 1,334 observations from 46 cities from 1990
to 2018. Each regression includes city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents
who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The dashed lines indicate 95-percent confidence
intervals calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                                     4
Table A.1: Percent of Title 1 Spending by Category in Fiscal Year 2010

     Type of Care                                    Percentage
     Outpatient Care and Pharmacy                       35.2%
     Case Management and Treatment Adherence            18.3%
     Mental Health                                       5.8%
     Substance Abuse Services                            4.9%
     Nutrition and Food Services                         4.4%
     Early Intervention and Outreach Services            4.2%
     Other Medical Services                              9.3%
     Support Services                                    5.7%
     Clinical Quality Management                         3.2%
     Administration Costs                                9.1%
    Notes: The data come from the Health Resources and Ser-
    vices Administration's 2010 Ryan White expenditure report.




                                  5
Table A.2: Cities in the AIDS Public Information Data Set
                               AIDS Cases                       Year Title 1
                               by Original              Main      Status
City                           Cutoff        Ranking   Sample    Achieved
Akron, OH                      312               7       no
Albany-Schenectady, NY         1,001            39       yes
Albuquerque, NM                651              24       no
Allentown, PA                  461              13       no
Ann Arbor, MI                  252               4       no
Atlanta, GA                    9,729            93       no        1991
Austin, TX                     2,466            68       yes       1995
Bakersfield, CA                527              20       no
Baltimore, MD                  7,811            90       no        1992
Baton Rouge, LA                794              30       no        2007
Bergen-Passaic, NJ             3,602            75       yes       1994
Birmingham, AL                 1,038            43       yes
Boston, MA                     8,938            92       no        1991
Buffalo, NY                    883              34       no
Charleston, SC                 885              35       yes
Charlotte, NC                  1,216            48       yes       2007
Chicago, IL                    13,385           97       no        1991
Cincinnati, OH                 1,211            46       yes
Cleveland, OH                  2,044            60       yes       1996
Colorado Springs, CO           288               6       no
Columbia, SC                   1,012            40       yes
Columbus, OH                   1,512            54       yes       2013
Dallas, TX                     8,020            91       no        1991
Dayton, OH                     616              21       no
Daytona Beach, FL              649              23       no
Denver, CO                     3,945            78       yes       1994
Detroit, MI                    4,742            85       no        1993
El Paso, TX                    488              16       no
Fort Lauderdale, FL            7,380            89       no        1991
Fort Wayne, IN                 159               1       no
Fort Worth, TX                 2,063            61       yes       1996
Fresno, CA                     715              28       no
Gary, IN                       402              10       no
Grand Rapids, MI               485              15       no
Greensboro, NC                 1,016            41       yes
Greenville, SC                 796              31       no
Harrisburg, PA                 517              19       no
Hartford, CT                   2,244            66       yes       1996
Houston, TX                    11,965           96       no        1991
Indianapolis, IN               1,725            56       yes       2007
Jacksonville, FL               2,697            70       yes       1995
Jersey City, NJ                4,406            83       yes       1991
Kansas City, MO                2,705            71       yes       1994
Knoxville, TN                  402               9       no
Las Vegas, NV                  1,810            57       yes       1999
Little Rock, AR                630              22       no
Los Angeles, CA                28,912          101       no        1991
Louisville, KY                 748              29       no
McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX 176                 2       no
Memphis, TN                    1,490            53       yes       2007
Miami, FL                      14,545           99       no        1991
New Brunswick, NJ              2,098            62       yes       1996
Milwaukee, WI                  1,214            47       yes
Minneapolis-St Paul, MN        2,180            65       yes       1996
Mobile, Al                     674              25       no
Ocean City, NJ                 1,862            59       yes
Nashville, TN                  1,291            51       yes       2007
Nassau-Suffolk, NY             4,230            81       yes       1993
New Haven, CT                  3,913            77       yes       1994
New Orleans, LA                4,132            79       yes       1993
New York, NY                   75,781          102       no        1991
Newark, NJ                     10,861           95       no        1991
Norfolk, VA                    1,852            58       yes       1999
                           Continued on next page



                                    6
Table A.2 ­ continued
                               AIDS Cases                        Year Title 1
                               by March               Baseline     Status
City                           31, 1995     Ranking   Sample      Achieved
Oakland, CA                    5,588           87       no          1992
Oklahoma City, OK              1,067           44       yes
Omaha, NE                      441             12       no
Orange County, CA              3,773           76       yes         1993
Orlando, FL                    3,324           74       yes         1994
Philadelphia, PA               10,750          94       no          1991
Phoenix, AZ                    3,057           73       yes         1994
Pittsburgh, PA                 1,600           55       yes
Portland, OR                   2,644           69       yes         1995
Providence, RI                 1,220           49       yes
Raleigh-Durham, NC             1,209           45       yes
Richmond, VA                   1,456           52       yes
Riverside-San Bernardino, CA   4,322           82       yes         1994
Rochester, NY                  1,247           50       yes
Sacramento, CA                 2,177           64       yes         1996
Saint Louis, MO                2,968           72       yes         1994
Salt Lake City, UT             954             37       yes
San Antonio, TX                2,427           67       yes         1995
San Diego, CA                  6,868           88       no          1991
San Francisco, CA              21,560         100       no          1991
San Jose, CA                   2,145           63       yes         1996
Sarasota, FL                   867             33       no
Scranton, PA                   266             5        no
Seattle, WA                    4,672           84       yes         1993
Springfield, MA                958             38       yes
Stockton, CA                   470             14       no
Syracuse, NY                   714             27       no
Tacoma, WA                     506             18       no
Tampa-Saint Petersburg, FL     5,060           86       no          1993
Toledo, OH                     359             8        no
Tucson, AZ                     900             36       yes
Tulsa, OK                      686             26       no
Vallejo-Fairfield-Napa, CA     859             32       no
Ventura, CA                    495             17       no
Washington, DC                 13,635          98       no          1991
West Palm Beach, FL            4,151           80       yes         1994
Wichita, KS                    421             11       no
Wilmington, DE                 1,030           42       yes
Youngstown, OH                 218             3        no




                                    7
Table A.3: Characteristics of HIV/AIDS and Non-HIV/AIDS Deaths from 1990 to 2018

                                                              HIV/AIDS      Non-HIV/AIDS
                                                               Deaths          Deaths
       Fraction Male                                              0.80            0.50
       Fraction Female                                            0.20            0.50
       Fraction Younger than 18                                  0.01             0.02
       Fraction Ages 18 to 64                                     0.95            0.24
       Fraction 65 or Older                                       0.04            0.73
       Mean Age                                                   42.4            72.3
       Fraction Black                                             0.45            0.12
       Fraction White                                             0.54            0.86
       Fraction Other Race                                        0.01            0.02
       Fraction in City in AIDS Public Information Data Set      0.83             0.61
       Total                                                    478,194        70,373,631
      Notes: The data come from the Vital Statistics Mortality data from 1990 to 2018.




                                                 8
         Table A.4: The Effect of Title 1 Status on HIV/AIDS Death Rates from Alternative Samples

                                                                                       Number of
                                                                                         Cities          (1)           (2)
     Baseline                                                                               50         -0.170       -0.168
                                                                                                       (0.055)      (0.063)
                                                                                                       [0.003]      [0.010]
     n                                                                                                   850         1,450

     30 Cities Closest to Original Threshold on Both Sides of Threshold                     60          -0.151       -0.146
                                                                                                       (0.054)      (0.061)
                                                                                                       [0.007]      [0.020]
                                                                                                        1,020        1,740
     n
     20 Cities Closest to Original Threshold on Both Sides of Threshold                     40          -0.164       -0.182
                                                                                                       (0.067)      (0.075)
                                                                                                       [0.019]      [0.020]
     n                                                                                                   680         1,160

     10 Cities Closest to Original Threshold on Both Sides of Threshold                     20          -0.147       -0.151




9
                                                                                                       (0.095)      (0.097)
                                                                                                       [0.136]      [0.135]
     n                                                                                                   340          580

     Excluding 5 Cities Closest to Original Threshold on Both Sides of Threshold            40          -0.193       -0.173
                                                                                                       (0.072)      (0.080)
                                                                                                       [0.011]      [0.036]
     n                                                                                                   680         1,160

     Excluding Cities Obtaining Title 1 Status before 1994                                  47          -0.162       -0.156
                                                                                                       (0.058)      (0.066)
                                                                                                       [0.007]      [0.024]
     n                                                                                                   799         1,363

     Years                                                                                            1990-2006    1990-2018
     Notes: Each cell displays the effect of Title 1 status from separate regressions of Equation (1). The unit of observation
    is a city and year combination. The dependent variable is the log of HIV/AIDS deaths per 100,000 people. Numbers
    of HIV/AIDS deaths each year come from the Vital Statistics Mortality data. All regressions include city fixed effects,
    year fixed effects, and controls for the share of cities' residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older,
    and male. Standard errors are clustered by city and are shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets.
B        Estimating the Effect of Title 1 Status Using Variation in Title

         1 Status from the 2006 Ryan White CARE Act Reauthorization
    As described in the main text, the primary analysis defines the Title 1 status treatment variable
as an indicator variable equal to one for cities obtaining Title 1 status under the original rules for
Title 1 eligibility. The 2006 Ryan White CARE Act reauthorization changed the eligibility rules to
allow some cities on the worst HIV/AIDS trajectories to obtain Title 1 status. In this appendix,
I first show that estimating a naive difference-in-differences model that uses variation in Title 1
status from the 2006 reauthorization to identify the impact of Title 1 status without accounting
for pre-existing trends would wrongly attribute the worsening HIV/AIDS outcomes associated
with these cities qualifying for Title 1 status in 2007 as being part of the effect of Title 1 status. I
then show that estimating a specification that includes a control for linear city-specific time trends
accounts for the pre-existing trends and provides further evidence that Title 1 status reduces HIV/
AIDS deaths.
    For this analysis, I focus on the five cities obtaining Title 1 status in 2007 after the eligibil-
ity rules were changed. These cities are Baton Rouge, Charlotte, Indianapolis, Memphis, and
Nashville. I include as the control cities the 25 cities with the most AIDS cases reported by 1995
that did not achieve Title 1 status before the 2006 Ryan White reauthorization and focus on years
1998 to 2018.26
    The black series in Figure B.1 shows estimates of duration-specific effects of Title 1 status from
Equation (1). The estimates indicate HIV/AIDS death rates for the cities that obtained Title 1
status in 2007 were increasing in the early 2000s relative to other cities. Within a few years of
these cities obtaining Title 1 status in 2007, HIV/AIDS death rates begin to fall relative to non-
Title-1 cities. This profile of estimates is consistent with the evidence in the main text that Title
1 status reduces HIV/AIDS deaths. However, the pre-existing trend towards more HIV/AIDS
deaths for the 2007 Title 1 cities means that the parallel trends assumption required for difference-

    26
     I exclude Columbus, which obtained Title 1 status in 2013, though a similar analysis could also be done to
estimate the impact of Title 1 status on Columbus.

                                                      10
in-differences models is violated and that the baseline estimating equation will not yield valid
estimates of the impact of Title 1 status. Table B.1 displays the estimated effect of Title 1 status
from Equation (1). The point estimate is positive and statistically insignificant.
    One approach to accounting for the differential pre-trends is to supplement Equation (1) with
city-specific linear time trends. Under the assumption that the differential trends would have con-
tinued linearly absent Title 1 status, the estimated impact of Title 1 status from Equation (1) is valid
once city-specific trends are included. To implement this approach, I first estimate 30 city-specific
linear time trends using years 1998 to 2006 by estimating models with city fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and the interaction of city indicator variables and year. I then include the product of each
city's coefficient on its year-city interaction and the year as a control in Equation (1) with data
from 1998 to 2018.27
    The blue series in Figure B.1 displays the coefficients on years relative to Title 1 status from
including the control for city-specific time trends. Column 2 of Table B.1 displays the estimate of
the average impact once the control for city-specific time trends is included. Once the differential
trends that led to certain cities obtaining Title 1 status are accounted for, the estimates follow a
similar pattern as the estimates of Title 1 status presented in the main text. The estimate in Table
B.1 indicates that Title 1 status leads to a reduction in HIV/AIDS death rates of 21.7 percent.28




    27
       As Goodman-Bacon (2018b) explains, this two-step procedure is preferred over including city-specific time
trends directly in Equation (1) because, unlike using only pre-treatment data to estimate the city-specific trend co-
efficients, directly including city-specific time trends risks attributing duration-specific treatment effects to being part
of the city-specific time trend.
    28
       Note that while the main analysis could also have included a control for city-specific time trends, I chose not
to take this approach in the main analysis for the following three reasons. First, the main empirical approach is
based on the initial eligibility rules, which were changed precisely because they did not prioritize places with worse-
than-average HIV/AIDS trends for eligibility. Second, the analysis in Figures 2 and 6 suggests that the treatment
and control cities were trending similarly prior to the treatment cities gaining Title 1 status. Third, the emergence of
effective HIV/AIDS treatment means that the assumption that cities' HIV/AIDS death rates in the early 1990s would
have trended linearly through 2006 or through 2018 is not realistic and does not hold. For these reasons, the preferred
approach for the main analysis is to estimate a common time trend non-parametrically. Nevertheless, I have explored
the sensitivity of the baseline analysis to including a control for city-specific linear time trends as in the analysis
presented in this appendix. For this analysis, I estimate initial time trends using data prior to cities gaining Title 1
status through 1995. I then estimate models that supplement Equation (1) with a control for each city's predicted
log HIV/AIDS death rate assuming HIV/AIDS death rates would have trended linearly. The results corroborate the
main estimates with the point estimate on Title 1 status being -0.135 (p-value of 0.008) from 1990 to 2006 data and
-0.159 (p-value of 0.010) from 1990 to 2018 data.

                                                            11
Figure B.1: Relationship between Title 1 Status and HIV/AIDS Death Rates for Cities Obtaining
Title 1 Status in 2007

              .4



              .1



             -.2



             -.5



             -.8
               re


                           re


                                      re


                                                  re




                                                                         r


                                                                                    r


                                                                                                r


                                                                                                           r
                                                           re




                                                                                                                    r
                                                                         te


                                                                                   te


                                                                                                te


                                                                                                          te


                                                                                                                    te
              fo


                           fo


                                      fo


                                                  fo


                                                           fo


                                                                     af


                                                                                   af


                                                                                             af


                                                                                                          af


                                                                                                                af
             be


                        be


                                     be


                                                be


                                                        be


                                                                     1


                                                                               3


                                                                                            5


                                                                                                      7


                                                                                                               8+
          9


                       7


                                 5


                                              3




                                                                to


                                                                              to


                                                                                        to


                                                                                                     to
                                                       1
        to


                   to


                                to


                                           to




                                                                0


                                                                          2


                                                                                        4


                                                                                                  6
      8


                   6


                             4


                                          2




                                                   Years Relative to Title 1 Status

                                 Main Specification                      Including City-Specific Time Trends


Notes: Each marker is a coefficient on Title 1 status interacted with number of years from initial Title 1 status eligibility
with the log of HIV/AIDS death rates as the dependent variable. The x-axis indicates the number of years from Title
1 status. The y-axis indicates the coefficient estimate. The black circles are from a single regression with city fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and the demographic controls described in the text. The blue diamonds are from a single
regression that includes a city-specific linear time trend in addition to the baseline controls. The sample contains
630 observations from 30 cities from 1998 to 2018. Each regression includes city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and
controls for the share of cities' residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than 18, 65 and older, and male. The dashed
lines indicate 95-percent confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered by city.




                                                                12
Table B.1: Estimated Effect of Title 1 Status Using Variation in Title 1 Status from 2006 Ryan White
CARE Act Reauthorization

                                                                     (1)          (2)
                                                                    0.019        -0.217
                                                                   (0.093)      (0.093)
                                                                   [0.841]      [0.027]

                      Years                                      1998-2018     1998-2018
                      City-Specific Linear Trend                                   x
                      Number of Cities                                30           30
                      n                                              630          630
                      Mean of Dependent Variable in Levels           4.0          4.0
                      Notes: Each column displays the effect of Title 1 status from sep-
                     arate regressions of Equation (1). The unit of observation is a city
                     and year combination. The dependent variable is the log of HIV/
                     AIDS deaths per 100,000 people. Numbers of HIV/AIDS deaths
                     each year come from the Vital Statistics Mortality data. All regres-
                     sions include city fixed effects, year fixed effects, and controls for
                     the share of cities' residents who are Black, Hispanic, younger than
                     18, 65 and older, and male. Standard errors are clustered by city
                     and are shown in parentheses. P-values are shown in brackets.




                                                      13
