                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LEARNING ABOUT HOMELESSNESS USING LINKED SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE
                              DATA

                                       Bruce D. Meyer
                                        Angela Wyse
                                       Alexa Grunwaldt
                                        Carla Medalia
                                          Derek Wu

                                      Working Paper 28861
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28861


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results were
approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004,
CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007, CBDRB-FY21-045, and CBDRB-FY21-ERD002-19. We would
like to thank Kevin Corinth, Dennis Culhane, Kevin Deardorff, Margot Kushel, Brendan
O'Flaherty, and Annette Riordan for comments, Mark Asiala, George Carter, James Christy,
Conor Dougherty, Anne Fletcher, Katie Genadek, Kristin Kerns, William Koerber, Larry
Locklear, Tim Marshall, Brian McKenzie, James Pugh, Trudi Renwick, Nan Roman, William
Snow, Eddie Thomas, and John Voorheis for providing feedback and answering our questions,
Gillian Meyer and Connor Murphy for research assistance and the Russell Sage Foundation, the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Charles Koch Foundation and the Menard Family Foundation for
financial support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Bruce D. Meyer, Angela Wyse, Alexa Grunwaldt, Carla Medalia, and Derek Wu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning about Homelessness Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data
Bruce D. Meyer, Angela Wyse, Alexa Grunwaldt, Carla Medalia, and Derek Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 28861
May 2021
JEL No. J0,R0

                                          ABSTRACT

Official poverty statistics and even the extreme poverty literature largely ignore people
experiencing homelessness. In this paper, we examine the characteristics, labor market
attachment, geographic mobility, earnings, and safety net utilization of this population in order to
understand their economic well-being. This paper is the first to examine these outcomes at the
national level using administrative data on income and government program receipt. It is part of
the Comprehensive Income Dataset project, which combines household survey data with
administrative records to improve estimates of income and related statistics. Specifically, we use
restricted microdata from the 2010 Decennial Census, which enumerates both sheltered and
unsheltered homeless people, the 2006-2016 American Community Survey (ACS), which surveys
sheltered homeless people, and longitudinal shelter-use data from several major U.S. cities. We
link these data to longitudinal administrative tax records as well as administrative data on the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), veterans' benefits, Medicare, Medicaid,
housing assistance, and mortality. Our approach benefits from large samples that offer a guide to
national homelessness patterns and allow us to compare estimates between data sources,
including the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)'s point-in-time (PIT)
counts. By shedding light on issues of data linkage and survey coverage among homeless people,
this paper contributes to efforts to better incorporate this hard-to-survey population into income
and poverty estimates.

Bruce D. Meyer                                   Carla Medalia
Harris School of Public Policy                   U.S. Census Bureau
University of Chicago                            4600 Silver Hill Road
1307 E 60th Street                               Washington, DC 20233
Chicago, IL 60637                                carla.medalia@census.gov
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu                             Derek Wu
                                                 Harris School of Public Policy
Angela Wyse                                      University of Chicago
University of Chicago                            1307 E 60th Street
1307 E 60th Street                               Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637                                derekwu@uchicago.edu
awyse@uchicago.edu

Alexa Grunwaldt
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th St
Chicago, IL 60637
alexa.grunwaldt@gmail.com
1. Introduction
People experiencing homelessness are among the most deprived individuals in the United States,
yet they are neglected in official poverty statistics and the extreme poverty literature and largely
omitted from household surveys. The Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP) are not designed to represent homeless individuals,
while the American Community Survey (ACS) surveys only those in shelters. Those wishing to
learn about the economic circumstances of this population must turn to a handful of studies that
are either localized, outdated, self-reported, or some combination of the three.

In this project, we draw on underused data sources and employ novel methods to address these
shortcomings. We focus on three areas. First, we seek to understand coverage of homeless
people in household surveys and to reconcile population estimates across data sources. Second,
we present substantial new information on their characteristics, including demographic attributes,
physical and cognitive limitations, and geographic mobility. Finally, we use administrative data
to examine the employment, income, and safety net program participation of this population.
These results allow us to assess the permanence or transience of low material well-being among
those who experience homelessness, the coverage of the safety net, and the implications of the
current omission of this population from official statistics.

Our work advances the literature in several ways. We take advantage of large samples that offer
a guide to national homeless patterns, including the unsheltered. Specifically, we draw on the
restricted-use versions of the 2010 Decennial Census and the 2006-2016 American Community
Survey (ACS) one-year data files, two sources of data that have gone largely unused in previous
work on homelessness. The 2010 Decennial Census allows us to identify both sheltered and
unsheltered individuals, while the ACS surveys only people in homeless shelters but reports a
broad set of characteristics. Moreover, we link these sources to administrative data on income
and program receipt, thereby adding additional information and allowing us to correct for well-
established patterns in misreporting of government program participation and income (Meyer,
Mok and Sullivan 2015; Meyer and Mittag 2019). And lastly, our linked tax and program data
allow us to paint a detailed and longitudinal picture of the economic circumstances of people
experiencing homelessness, thereby gaining insight into homeless individuals' well-being over
the course of more than a decade.

                                                  1
More generally, this paper is part of an unprecedented project that assembles and links survey
and administrative data on income, program receipt, and closely related information (Medalia,
Meyer, O'Hara, and Wu 2019; Meyer, Wu, Mooers, and Medalia 2021). Known as the
Comprehensive Income Dataset (CID) project, it aims to improve household surveys and
statistical research on tax administration and to better understand poverty, inequality, and the
effects of government transfers. This paper stems from earlier work using the CID that examined
extreme poverty as well as the realization that homeless people are generally excluded from the
CPS and SIPP and therefore official income statistics (Meyer, Wu, Mooers, and Medalia 2021).

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on the
challenges of studying homelessness and the most widely used sources of counts or estimates.
Section 3 reviews the literature on the characteristics and economic circumstances of people
experiencing homelessness. Section 4 describes our survey and administrative data sources.
Section 5 compares population estimates and demographic attributes across sources and explains
key differences. Section 6 describes our methodology and results on the survey characteristics of
the homeless population, while Section 7 presents our methodology and results on the income
and program receipt of people experiencing homelessness. Section 8 discusses the preceding
results and concludes.

2. Background

2.1 Sources of Counts or Estimates of Homelessness

The most widely cited source of statistics on homelessness in the United States is the Annual
Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR), which HUD has presented to Congress each year since
2007. The AHAR provides nationwide estimates of homelessness, including estimates derived
from a point-in-time (PIT) count in January of each year and estimates of the number of unique
shelter users in a fiscal year based on extrapolation from shelters' administrative records. The
AHAR also provides some information about the demographics, family structure, veteran status,
and shelter use patterns of people experiencing homelessness, as well as information on different
areas' capacities to house homeless persons.

In addition to the AHAR, the Census Bureau published a Special Report on the Emergency and
Transitional Shelter Population, which described the geographic distribution and demographic

                                                 2
characteristics of the sheltered homeless population enumerated in the 2010 Census (Smith,
Holmberg, and Jones-Puthoff 2010). This report did not, however, address differences between
the 2010 Census and the PIT count.

The most detailed national study of people experiencing homelessness is more than two decades
old. The 1996 National Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients (NSHAPC)
provided demographic and economic characteristics for a sample of homeless assistance service
users that was intended to be nationally representative (Burt et al. 1999). The study offered
findings on homeless individuals' self-reported income, employment, participation in
government programs, medical issues and special needs, and history of experiences with
homelessness.

Aside from the above sources, most work on the characteristics of people experiencing
homelessness focuses on a few major U.S. cities. Some local homeless service administrative
units, known as Continuums of Care (CoCs), publish reports on the characteristics of people
experiencing homelessness in their area, often using databases maintained for the purpose of
inclusion in the AHAR or based on the results of their own surveys (Orange County CoC 2017,
LAHSA 2018). A small number of researchers have also linked shelter use databases to
administrative data to provide more extensive or accurate health or labor market outcomes. For
example, Metraux et al. (2018) matched shelter use records from the New York City Department
of Homeless Services (DHS) with earnings records from the Social Security Administration
(SSA).

Although these localized studies offer a wealth of information, they are unlikely to reflect
national homelessness patterns. PIT counts broken down by CoC demonstrate significant
geographic heterogeneity in trends in recent years, with New York City and some cities in
California seeing dramatic rises in the size of the homeless population and other areas
experiencing declines. The share of homeless people residing in shelters versus unsheltered
locations also varies widely across the country. Studies that focus on New York City, where
right-to-shelter laws require the city to provide beds and most of the homeless reside in shelters,
will likely lead to different conclusions than an examination of Los Angeles, where more than
twice as many people experienced unsheltered homelessness (versus sheltered homelessness) in
recent years according to the PIT data reported in the AHARs. Factors like housing markets,

                                                 3
state and local public services, and shelter capacity also vary widely between jurisdictions and
limit the generalizability of localized studies.

3. Literature
This section reviews previous literature. It starts by describing the challenges of studying
homelessness. It also reviews prior work on the characteristics of people experiencing
homelessness, before turning to literature on employment, income, and government program
participation.

3.1 Challenges of Studying Homelessness

People experiencing homelessness are exceptionally difficult to survey. Reasons for this include
the lack of a permanent residence, poor mental health, substance abuse, and not wanting to be
found (Glasser, Hirsch, and Chan 2013, 2014). Faced with these challenges, many efforts to
study this population have centered on users of homelessness services, although there is some
evidence that such surveys and enumerations miss the "hidden homeless" who do not interact
with service providers (Metraux et al. 2016). These difficulties raise questions about the
representativeness and comprehensiveness of any data source, particularly those that cover the
unsheltered.

3.2 Defining Homelessness

Another challenge lies in the wide range of commonly used definitions of homelessness. Most
definitions, including the one that HUD calls "literally homeless," include individuals and
families who are residing in emergency or transitional shelters and those whose primary
nighttime residence is a public or private place not meant for human habitation. Commonly used
definitions differ in the extent to which they incorporate individuals who are precariously housed
or at imminent risk of losing their residence (Evans, Phillips, and Ruffini 2019). For example,
HUD includes in its literally homeless classification those who are exiting an institution and who
experienced sheltered or unsheltered homelessness before entering that institution. Definitions
also vary in whether or not they include those fleeing domestic violence. Some widely cited
statistics (e.g. HUD's annual point-in-time estimate) include this group, while others (e.g. the
2010 Census Special Report on homelessness) exclude them. The U.S. Department of


                                                   4
Education's definition of homelessness includes school-aged children who are "doubled up," i.e.
sharing the housing of others due to economic hardship.

For the purpose of this project, we focus on people residing in emergency or transitional shelters
(the sheltered homeless) and those whose primary nighttime residence is not meant for human
habitation (the unsheltered homeless). These are the groups identified in our data sources. Unless
otherwise noted, we exclude individuals or families residing in domestic violence shelters, as
they are not identified as homeless in the decennial census data. Moreover, we do not address
questions relating to the precariously housed or those who are doubled-up, as these individuals
are counted among the domiciled populations in the decennial census and household surveys.

3.2 Previous Literature on Characteristics

3.2.1 Race

Whites constitute a large share of people experiencing homelessness in the United States, but
Blacks are consistently found to be over-represented relative to their share among the overall
population and the poor (Burt et al. 2001, AHAR 2007-2018, O'Flaherty 2019). This pattern is
especially stark among the sheltered homeless. According to the 2017 PIT, Blacks were present
in the sheltered homeless population at about three times the rate as in the total U.S. population.
American Indians/Alaskan Natives and Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders are also frequently
found to be over-represented among homeless people, while Asians and Whites are under-
represented (AHAR 2007-2018).

The disproportionate share of Blacks among the sheltered homeless is a widely studied question
in homelessness research. The puzzle is compounded by the observation that major cities in the
South, which are home to large concentrations of Blacks living in poverty, tend to have lower
rates of homelessness than relatively more white cities in the North and West (O'Flaherty 2019).
This pattern makes for a stark distinction between the racial composition of homeless and
domiciled populations in places like Los Angeles, where Blacks make up nine percent of the
general population but 40 percent of people experiencing homelessness (LAHSA 2018). There is
anecdotal evidence that discrimination in housing and labor markets makes poor Blacks more
vulnerable to homelessness than poor Whites (LHASA 2018). Discrimination in the criminal
justice system could also play a role, given the link between past and subsequent incarceration

                                                 5
and homelessness (Metraux and Culhane 2004, Harding, Morenoff, and Herbert 2013). Some
researchers have also pointed towards segregation in shelters as a reason for Blacks' larger
shares among the sheltered relative to the unsheltered. Metraux et al. (2016) observe that
Philadelphia's shelters tend to be located in areas that are predominantly Black, which they say
leads some White homeless individuals to prefer to remain unsheltered in predominately White
areas.

It may also be the case that Whites are typically able to draw on more substantial resource
networks to avoid homelessness, meaning that they would on average need to experience larger
income shocks to fall into homelessness. Corinth and Rossi-de Vries (2018) find that individuals
with closer ties to family members and religious community are less likely to experience
homelessness, presumably because these networks can provide money, shared housing, or other
support to protect against homelessness. Many of the factors that put Blacks at higher risk for
homelessness, such as high rates of poverty and incarceration and less accumulated wealth, also
mean that Blacks' social networks may have fewer resources to share. As one concrete example,
some public housing assistance programs restrict the number of residents in a unit, thereby
precluding doubling-up in these units as a strategy to avoid homelessness.

Resource networks could also explain White homeless individuals' higher mortality rates relative
to Black homeless individuals, as demonstrated in some medical literature (Roncarati et al. 2018,
Baggett et al. 2013). O'Flaherty (2019) hypothesizes that Whites' relatively stronger resource
networks may make them less vulnerable to homelessness than Blacks with similar levels of
physical and mental health.

3.2.2 Hispanic Origin

Most sources find that share of homeless people identifying as Hispanic or Latino is similar to
their share in the broader population, despite Hispanics' relatively high likelihood of being poor
(Conroy and Heer, 2003). Baker (1996) coined the term "Latino paradox" to describe this
phenomenon and suggested that Hispanics rely disproportionately on personal network-based
strategies such as doubling-up to avoid the streets and shelters.

Conroy and Heer (2003) offer an alternative explanation, arguing that homeless Hispanics'
tendency to reside in non-traditional homeless spaces leads to a systematic undercount. While the


                                                 6
undercount of Hispanics in surveys is well-documented, this explanation relies on undercount
rates being higher for Hispanics experiencing homelessness than for Hispanics in general. This
could be true if, for example, homeless Hispanics are more likely to be unauthorized immigrants
and therefore mistrustful of surveys and authorities.

3.2.3 Sex and Family Structure

National data sources consistently find that most people experiencing homelessness are male,
with an especially stark sex disparity among the unsheltered. For example, the 2018 PIT finds
that about 55 percent of sheltered homeless individuals and 70 percent of unsheltered homeless
individuals were male. This pattern persists across point-in-time and interval prevalence analyses
of sheltered homelessness. A small share of homeless people (about one percent in the 2018 PIT)
are transgender or do not identify as male, female, or transgender.

Family structure is closely related to the sex composition of the homeless population. Research
shows that the majority of families experiencing homelessness are female-headed, single-parent
households (Burt and Cohen 1989, Burt et al. 1999, Metraux et. al 2018, AHAR 2007-2018).
Metraux et al. (2018) find that among New York City shelter users between 1990 and 2002,
more than three-quarters of female adults had accompanying children while about ninety-five
percent of males did not. This suggests that sex may serve as a rough proxy when data on family
structure is not available for shelter users, as in the 2010 Census or ACS.

3.2.4 Age

HMIS and PIT data on shelter users show that 20-30 percent of the sheltered homeless are under
age 18, while a small but growing share of shelter users is over age 62 (5.4 percent in the 2017
AHAR's interval prevalence estimates, compared to 18.8 percent in the overall 2017 ACS
population). Single homeless adults are older, on average, than adults in homeless families,
where the modal household head is a young parent with preschool-aged children (Culhane et al.
2013).

Several researchers have called attention to an apparent aging of the homeless population in the
last several decades. Hahn et al. (2006) found evidence that the median age of people
experiencing homelessness in San Francisco was increasing by about two-thirds of a year
annually, while Culhane et al. (2013) observed an aging pattern using New York City shelter

                                                 7
data. Culhane et al. (2013) also analyzed the 1990, 2000, and 2010 Censuses and observed that
the modal age of the sheltered population in each year corresponded to people born during the
latter part of the baby boom, a phenomenon they attributed to heightened birth cohort-specific
risk factors for homelessness. The aging of the homeless population is a matter of concern for
public policy, as it appears to be accompanied by a rise in the prevalence of chronic and costly
medical conditions among people experiencing homelessness (Kushel 2014).

3.2.5 Veteran Status

Homelessness among veterans is a topic of particular public interest. Veterans, who are primarily
male and unaccompanied by children, appear to be disproportionately represented among the
homeless relative to their share in the broader population (Brignone et al. 2018, Burt et al. 1999).
In the homelessness literature, a large body of work centers on the health care utilization and
physical and mental illness among this group, due in part to widespread interest and in part to the
extensive administrative data collected and shared with researchers through the Veterans Affairs
(VA) health care system (Brignone et al. 2018). This work has identified high rates of substance
abuse and psychiatric disorders as potential reasons for the higher rates of homelessness among
veterans (Early 2005).

The share of the homeless who are veterans appears to have declined substantially over time. In
the 1996 NSHAPC, Burt et al. (1999) found that twenty-three percent of homeless service users
nationally were veterans. Fourteen years later, the 2010 PIT found the veteran share to be just
11.6 percent, and by 2018 the veteran share in the PIT had fallen to 8.6 percent (AHAR 2018).
This substantial decrease is often attributed to expanded government efforts to end veteran
homelessness, including increased investment in prevention and rapid rehousing for this
population (AHAR 2018). Demographic shifts might have also played a role. O'Flaherty (2019)
notes that the number of veterans between the ages of 18 and 65, the range most susceptible to
homelessness, fell substantially over this same period, a fact that could possibly explain much or
all of the decline. In particular, the cohort of Vietnam veterans reached their early- to mid-sixties
in the 2010s, meaning that social security and SSI receipt, alongside mortality, may have made
these individuals less likely to appear among the homeless population.




                                                  8
3.3 Previous Literature on Employment, Earnings, and Program Receipt

3.3.1 Employment and Income Characteristics

A substantial share of people experiencing homelessness are either currently working or were
recently employed. The most widely cited national estimate of employment among this
population comes from the NSHAPC, where 44 percent of homelessness service users reported
working in the previous thirty days (Burt et al. 1999). Metraux et al. (2018) updated this figure
using administrative records of earnings from the SSA for shelter users in New York City
between 1990 and 2002, finding employment rates of around 45 percent during the year of
shelter use. Von Watcher, Schnorr, and Riesch (2020), found that 29 percent of shelter users
tracked by HUD in Los Angeles had earnings in the previous year according to California
Unemployment Insurance (UI) records, although their approach excluded out-of-state earnings,
as well as earnings from self-employment and independent or informal work.

Metraux et al. (2018), Burt et al. (1989), and Burt et al. (1999) found lower rates of employment
for homeless adults in families, the majority of whom are female, than for singles. Possible
reasons for this difference include the cost of childcare and greater access to public and private
assistance by homeless families. Burt et al. (1989) found that homeless women with children
relied substantially more on General Assistance (GA) and Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC, the precursor to Temporary Assistance to Needy Families). Similarly, Burt et
al. (1999) found that fewer homeless service users in families performed paid labor, and those in
families were more likely to receive money from family or friends.

Unsurprisingly, estimates of income and earnings reveal a highly impoverished population. In
1995, the NSHAPC estimated the mean monthly income for single users of homelessness
services nationwide to be $348. For families, the majority of whom consisted of a single parent
with an average of two children, mean monthly income was estimated to be $475. These income
measures included income from earnings, gifts from friends and family, and governmental cash
transfers. For comparison, the overall monthly median household income that year was $2,840
(Burt et al. 1999).

Among the working homeless, frequent job turnover, low-wage labor, and informal employment
appear to contribute to low income levels. Ethnographers have reported substantial reliance on

                                                 9
informal income-generating activities like recycling, panhandling, childcare, and illicit activities
among this population (Gowan 2010, Snow and Anderson 1993). About one-half of NSHAPC
respondents who reported working in the last month had earnings from temporary positions, day
labor, or informal jobs (Burt 2001, Burt et al. 1999).

3.3.2 Relationship between Employment and Homelessness

There are many reasons to expect low employment rates among people experiencing
homelessness. Some of the factors associated with high risk for homelessness, such as substance
abuse, physical disabilities, and mental health challenges, are also likely to impair employability
(Fazel, Geddes, and Kushel 2014). Zuvekas and Hill (2000) note that physical disabilities and
substance abuse are associated with fewer hours of employment among a random sample of
homeless shelter and meal program users in Alameda County in 1991-1993. People experiencing
homelessness also have high rates of recent incarceration, a well-established barrier to
employment (Metraux and Culhane 2016, Harding, Morenoff, and Herbert 2013, Mueller-Smith
2015). Poor health and incarceration may be both a cause and a consequence of homelessness
(Kushel, Hahn, and Evans 2005).

There are also more direct reasons why homelessness could cause unemployment. These include
the stigma associated with being homeless, poor hygiene, health conditions associated with
homelessness, and incompatibility of shelter hours with nighttime employment. Glomm and John
(2002), for example, find evidence that homelessness decreases future employability through
adverse effects on health.

An active area of inquiry in this literature concerns the extent to which employment shocks
precipitate homelessness. In surveys, job loss is often cited as a cause of homelessness (Burt
1999, Levin, McKean, and Raphael 2004, Metraux et al. 2017). A handful of studies attempt to
address this question in the aggregate, examining correlations between the size of the homeless
population and unemployment rates, using either geographic or inter-temporal variation (see
O'Flaherty 2011 for a review of the literature on determinants of aggregate homelessness,
including unemployment rates). These studies have produced mixed results.

A more convincing approach to answering this question lies in longitudinal analyses of
individual-level data on employment and earnings over a period including the onset of


                                                 10
homelessness. Metraux et al. (2018) observed a slight dip in employment for singles and an even
slighter dip in employment for families around onset of homelessness, although there was a
somewhat more pronounced fall in earnings. These findings suggest a potential link between
employment shocks and the onset of homelessness, but the effect of job loss appears to be more
moderate than one might expect from reviewing surveys on the causes of homelessness.

3.3.3 Participation in Government Programs

Given the low material well-being of people experiencing homelessness, one policy-relevant
question concerns the extent to which government safety net programs reach this population
(Burt et al. 1999). The literature on participation in government programs is scant and almost
entirely self-reported. The NSHAPC gives the most detailed account on this topic, finding that
39 percent of single homeless adults and 79 percent of adults in homeless families received
means-tested benefits. Among families, the NSHAPC found high rates of receipt of AFDC (52
percent), food stamps (71 percent), and Medicaid (61 percent). Participation rates in these
programs were much lower for single homeless adults. SSI receipt was 11 percent for both single
homeless adults and those in families, which falls short of estimated rates of disability among
this population.

Some research has examined participation in health services programs, especially among
veterans. This literature shows that people experiencing homelessness often fail to take
advantage of programs for which they qualify. In their secondary analysis of NSHAPC data,
Kushel, Vittinghoff, and Haas (2001) found that only one-fourth of homeless veterans had VA
insurance, despite theoretical eligibility for these benefits.

4. Data

4.1 Census Bureau Data

4.1.1 2010 Census

The Census Bureau conducted a three-day operation called the Service-Based Enumeration
(SBE) to count people experiencing homelessness during the 2010 Census (Smith, Holmberg,




                                                  11
and Jones-Puthoff 2010). 1 The operation built on previous efforts to enumerate the homeless,
                                0F




including the Census's 2000 SBE and the 1990 street and shelter enumeration effort known as
"S-night." Census staff constructed the list of SBE locations using internet research and by
soliciting input from local officials and advocacy groups. Sites were subject to validation and
advance visits prior to the operation. During the 2010 SBE, enumerators visited emergency and
transitional shelters, soup kitchens, regularly scheduled mobile food vans, and targeted non-
sheltered outdoor locations (TNSOLs). When unable to conduct an interview, subjects were
enumerated by observation.

Table 1 describes each type of site and offers examples. Of the 422,972 homeless counted in the
2010 Census, approximately 50 percent were at shelters, 42 percent were at soup kitchens and
regularly scheduled mobile food vans, and eight percent were at TNSOLs (Barrett and Russell
2012). 21F




As a source of data on people experiencing homelessness, the decennial census has some distinct
advantages. The decennial census is meant to include every person residing in the United States,
a fact that facilitates analyses that involve linking to other data sources like the American
Community Survey (ACS). Moreover, all SBE enumerators received the same training and
carried out the enumeration according to uniform methodological standards nationwide. Finally,
the decennial census provides a rare source of data on people experiencing unsheltered
homelessness and is the only source of national data on this population that contains name and
date of birth, thereby allowing records to be linked to administrative and survey data.

4.1.2 American Community Survey (ACS)

The ACS has collected micro-level data on individuals in emergency and transitional shelters
since 2006. Specifically, the ACS surveys people residing in "facilities where people
experiencing homelessness stay overnight," including shelters that operate on a first-come, first-
served basis, shelters where people have a bed for a specified period of time, and shelters that
provide temporary shelter during extremely cold weather. The ACS excludes domestic violence
shelters. The ACS group quarters definition document notes that its universe of emergency and

1 The Census Special Report on the Emergency and Transitional Shelter Population can be accessed here:

https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/reports/c2010sr-02.pdf.
2 The 2010 Census Service-Based Enumeration (SBE) Assessment Report can be accessed here:

https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2013/dec/2010_cpex_250.pdf

                                                             12
transitional shelters includes "missions; hotels and motels used to shelter people experiencing
homelessness; shelters for children who are runaways, neglected, or experiencing homelessness;
and similar places known to have people experiencing homelessness." 3                        2F




Because they are included in the Group Quarters (GQ) sample, individuals surveyed at shelters
are treated as single-person households and not asked whether they have any dependents or
partners, unlike the ACS's Housing Unit (HU) sample. Sampling weights are designed to smooth
out seasonality, yielding estimates that can be understood as being drawn from an approximate
cross-sectional sample of the population in question. The introduction of an updated sample
frame and new population controls for the GQ population in 2011 resulted in a discontinuous
increase in the estimated count of sheltered homeless individuals. 4                   3F




The GQ indicator used to identify sheltered homeless individuals is not available in public files,
and as a result no researchers to date have published work using the ACS as a source of data on
people experiencing homelessness. Nevertheless, the ACS surveys a large number of homeless
individuals each year with an extensive series of questions. The ACS sample includes
approximately one percent of the U.S. population each year and in 2010 collected data from
approximately 2,300 individuals residing in emergency and transitional shelters. Moreover, the
ACS asks about a range of topics of particular interest to homelessness researchers, including
employment, income, government program participation, education, migration, physical and
cognitive limitations, and veteran status.

4.2 HUD Administrative Data

4.2.1 Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) Micro-Data

As a condition of federal funding, local homeless services coordinating bodies called
Continuums of Care (CoCs) are required to maintain a Homeless Management Information
System (HMIS) database. Micro-level client data include the name, social security number, race,
birthday, veteran status, and start and end of service-use dates for all individuals utilizing CoC


3 The2010 ACS Group Quarters Definitions can be accessed here: https://www2.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs/tech_docs/group_definitions/2010GQ_Definitions.pdf
4 ACS data are subject to error arising from a variety of sources. Additional information about sources of error and weighting and

estimation methodology can be found in the American Community Survey Design and Methodology report (2014), which can be
accessed here: https://www2.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs/methodology/design_and_methodology/acs_design_methodology_report_2014.pdf.

                                                               13
resources. 5 These datasets allow CoCs to track service use and measure homelessness at local,
             4F




regional, and national levels. The CID project currently has access to HMIS micro-data from Los
Angeles (2004-2014) and Houston (2004-2015).

4.2.2 Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) Aggregated Data

Building from HMIS records, HUD produces an annual estimate of the number of unique
homeless shelter users nationwide in the preceding fiscal year. This estimate is published in the
Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress. 6 Because only federally funded
                                                                               5F




shelters are required to report into HMIS (although some others report voluntarily), HUD
extrapolates to non-HMIS shelters using the HMIS participation rate, which is calculated as the
ratio of HMIS shelter beds to total shelter beds in each CoC. This participation rate is published
by HUD in the Housing Inventory Count (HIC), an inventory of available shelter beds in a given
area maintained by CoCs.

4.2.3 HUD Point-in-Time (PIT) Count

The AHAR also includes an annual estimate of the number of sheltered and unsheltered
homeless individuals on one evening in January of a given year, known as the Point-in-Time
(PIT) count. Although commonly referenced as a count, the PIT is actually an estimate, with
some CoCs adopting sampling or combined sample and census methods, in accordance with
HUD-approved methodologies. 7 The 2018 PIT includes in its sheltered homeless estimates
                                         6F




people residing in domestic violence shelters, a population that is excluded from the decennial
census and ACS sheltered homeless estimates.

4.2.4 Differences between Census and HUD Data Sources




5 CoCs use the HMIS database to report on all programs administered using HUD funding. Services covered by these programs

typically include permanent housing, transitional housing, and supportive services. Permanent housing includes both permanent
supporting housing (PSH), which is designed to help homeless persons with a disability live independently, and rapid re-housing
(RRH), which provides housing relocation and stabilization services, including short- and medium-term rental assistance.
Transitional housing programs provide housing and accompanying supportive services to homeless individuals and families for
up to twenty-four months. Supportive services include outreach and efforts to link sheltered or unsheltered homeless individuals
with housing or other necessary services and provide ongoing support. The precise services provided vary widely by CoC. More
information about the guidelines for HMIS data management can be found in HUD's CoC Program HMIS Manual, which is
accessible at: https://files.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/CoC-Program-HMIS-Manual.pdf.
6 AHAR reports can be accessed here: https://www.hudexchange.info/homelessness-assistance/ahar/
7 The PIT Count Methodology Guide can be accessed here: https://files.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/PIT-Count-

Methodology-Guide.pdf

                                                               14
Table 2 summarizes differences across Census and HUD data sources. Several key distinctions
are worth noting.

First, all sources are national in scope, although currently we only have access to linked HMIS
micro-data from Los Angeles and Houston. Only the 2010 Census and the PIT cover the
unsheltered, and only the 2010 Census allows us to link the unsheltered to administrative data
sources.

The time frame of analysis also differs across data sources. While the 2010 Census, PIT, and
ACS are all cross-sectional analyses, HMIS data are used to estimate of the total number of
unique shelter users over the course of a fiscal year, a type of estimate known as period or
interval prevalence. This choice results in HMIS shelter use estimates that are much higher than
point prevalence estimates. On average, point-in-time estimates give greater weight to
individuals with longer spells of homelessness, and there is some work suggesting that the
characteristics of individuals who experience chronic homelessness differ from those who
experience shorter spells (Lee, Tyler, and Wright 2010).

The timing of cross-sectional analyses also differs across source. As a result, seasonal patterns
may explain some differences in the sheltered/unsheltered composition of people experiencing
homelessness in the PIT versus 2010 Census. Shelters in cold climates typically experience
higher occupancy in the winter months. By design, the PIT is conducted in January of each year
because it is easier to count homeless individuals at sheltered rather than unsheltered locations
and because fewer non-homeless individuals are likely to be found on the streets late at night. In
contrast, the 2010 Census' SBE was carried out during the comparatively warmer period of late
March, while the ACS is conducted year-round and is weighted to smooth out any unevenness of
interviewing over the course of the year.

4.2.5 Caveats on Census Bureau Data

The Census Bureau made efforts to ensure that housed individuals were not misclassified as
homeless. At soup kitchens and food vans, respondents were asked whether they had a usual
home elsewhere, and if so, were prompted to provide that address. If that address was found to
be valid during post-processing, the person was removed from the SBE universe and enumerated
at his or her usual home instead. It is nevertheless possible that some individuals were


                                                15
misclassified as homeless. This is a key caveat on our analysis, as misclassification would affect
our population estimates and could bias other results depending on the ways in which
misclassified non-homeless individuals differ from the actual homeless.

Another potential concern is the completeness and representativeness of the 2010 Census SBE
data. The 2010 Census Special Report on the Emergency and Transitional Shelter Population
acknowledged that the SBE likely missed some people experiencing homelessness, particularly
unsheltered homelessness:

        "Although we made a determined effort to enumerate people at service locations
        (emergency and transitional shelters, soup kitchens, and regularly scheduled mobile food
        vans) and targeted non-sheltered outdoor locations, because this is a dynamic and
        complex group, all people normally at these locations may not have been included in the
        count." (Smith, Holmberg, and Jones-Puthoff 2010)

The report also observed that some individuals who would be considered homeless under a
broader set of criteria, such as doubled-up individuals or those residing in pay-for-use motels or
campgrounds without a permanent residence, could have been included in the Census outside of
the SBE, a view reiterated in the Glasser, Hirsch, and Chan (2013) ethnographic assessment of
the operation. Given these caveats, the report cautions that the decennial census does not
"produce or publish a total count of `the homeless' population." To the extent that enumerated
individuals are not representative of the entire population, incompleteness of the enumeration
could result in bias.

4.2.6 Caveats on HUD Data

The HUD data sources are also imperfect. Cronley (2011) reviewed HMIS usage patterns among
24 homeless service providers and found that staff members in some organizations rarely used
the database, suggesting that their records may not be well or uniformly maintained. In our
HMIS micro-data from Los Angeles and Houston, records entered prior to 2010 suggest limited
or sporadic database management, due to improbably low counts of shelter users and high rates
of missing information. Moreover, a non-negligible share of all records from these cities across




                                                16
all years of data availability have no recorded shelter exit date. This fact likely reflects poor
record maintenance rather than indefinite shelter spells. 8           7F




Because they incorporate sampling methods, both the HMIS aggregate and PIT estimates are
potentially subject to sampling error. Moreover, the PIT methodology varies by CoC, and the
quality of the estimate could depend on the resources or expertise available in a given CoC to
conduct its annual count. HMIS aggregated estimates of shelter use rely on extrapolation from
shelters that participate in the program to those that do not, which could result in bias if HMIS-
covered shelters are not a representative subset or all shelters. Nation-wide, the HMIS
participation rate (defined as the share of beds in a given CoC that track shelter use through
HMIS) ranged from 69-80 percent over the 2007-2018 period, according to the HUD's Housing
Inventory Chart (HIC). The quality of PIT estimates in CoCs with low HMIS participation rates
may suffer as a result of extrapolation, particularly where HMIS shelters differ substantially from
non-HMIS shelters.

4.2.7 Administrative Income/Resource Data

We draw data on income and employment from Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms 1040s, W-
2s (which are available for those who did not file a form 1040 as well as those who did), and
1099-Rs. In addition to wage and salary earnings from employment, 1040 data contain various
forms of asset income, including taxable dividends, taxable and tax-exempt interest, gross rents
and royalties, and social security income. W-2 records give us wages and tips as well as deferred
compensation amounts for individuals who did not file a 1040 but did receive formal labor
market earnings. Data on retirement distributions come from IRS 1099-R Forms, which cover
gross distributions from employer-sponsored plans (defined benefit and defined contribution
plans) and IRA withdrawals. The tax data contain universe records covering the entire United
States. IRS 1040 records are available for 2003-2015, W2s for 2005-2016, and 1099-Rs for
2003-2015.

In addition to income from tax records, we examine participation in various safety net programs.
We include Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) records provided by the state


8 This view was expressed by HUD senior program specialist William Snow, whose responsibilities include analyzing and

improving HUD data sources like the HMIS. Snow stated that incompleteness of exit date reporting was an important concern
regarding HMIS data quality.

                                                            17
agencies of Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey
(2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016). For housing assistance, our administrative data come
from the Public and Indian Housing Information Center (PIC) and Tenant Rental Assistance
Certification System (TRACS) files. These data cover almost all public and subsidized housing
assistance programs under the jurisdiction of HUD. We also use Medicare and Medicaid data
from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to investigate health insurance
coverage, and we have Veterans Benefit Administration data on VA disability compensation and
pension receipt for fiscal years 2007-2015.

Finally, we draw on the SSA's Numident files for birth and death dates.

5. Comparison of Counts and Coverage Across Data Sources

5.1 Overall Estimates of Sheltered and Unsheltered Homelessness

The size of the homeless population is widely debated in the academic literature and media, with
estimates varying considerably depending on the data source, time frame, and definition of
homelessness used. Table 3 reports estimated counts of the overall population of the sheltered
and unsheltered homeless across our data sources.

In Figure 1, we see that the aggregate HMIS estimate of sheltered homelessness is about 3.5-4
times the PIT estimate across all years. The HMIS estimate is higher in large part because it
measures the number of individuals who experienced at least one shelter spell in a given fiscal
year, whereas the PIT estimates the sheltered population at a point in time. The ACS estimate
was about 50 percent of the PIT estimate for 2007-2010, before jumping to approximately 70
percent after changes to the sample frame and weighting methodology in 2011. The 2010 Census
estimate of sheltered homelessness is close to the 2010 ACS estimate. The HMIS estimate has
declined steadily since 2010 and the PIT estimate has declined slightly since 2015. The ACS
weighted estimate has remained fairly stable, aside from the discontinuous increase in 2010.

Figure 2 displays estimates of the size of the unsheltered homeless population according to the
2010 Census and the PIT. The PIT estimate fell between 2012 and 2015, before rising slightly.
The 2010 Census estimate of the unsheltered population size is close to the PIT estimate for
2010.


                                                18
5.2 Recent Rises in California and New York

These overall estimates mask significant geographic heterogeneity in the HUD PIT estimates. As
Figure 3 shows, New York and California have seen substantial rises in their homeless
populations in recent years, with most of New York's increase attributable to New York City and
California's to Los Angeles and to a lesser extent San Francisco (Figure 4).

Figures 5 and 6 decompose the growth in these states and cities into that attributable to sheltered
and unsheltered populations. In Los Angeles, we see a stark rise in the unsheltered homeless
population alongside a fairly flat trend in the sheltered homeless population. The San Francisco
Bay area has also seen an increase in unsheltered homelessness and a flat trend in sheltered
homelessness, although at a lower level. In New York City, in contrast, we see that all of the
growth in homelessness has taken place among the sheltered, who constitute the vast majority of
that city's homeless population (Figure 6).

5.3 Comparison of Demographic Attributes across Data Sources

Table 4 reports race and Hispanic ethnicity for the sheltered homeless by data source, and Table
5 reports age and sex. Overall, we see that the racial makeup of the sheltered homeless is fairly
consistent across data sources, with a larger share of Blacks in the ACS and 2010 Census data
than in the HMIS data and a larger share of Whites in the HMIS than the other sources for most
years. 9 The ACS reports a smaller share of sheltered homeless under the age of 18 than the other
       8F




sources (15.3 percent in the 2010 ACS, as opposed to 20.2 and 21.8 percent in the 2010 Census
and the 2010 HMIS, respectively). Conversely, the 2010 ACS and 2010 Census report a higher
share of individuals over the age of 62 than the HMIS data (5.5 and 4.5 percent in 2010,
compared to 2.8 percent, respectively). The share of the homeless population that is male, by
contrast, is similar across data sources at approximately 62 percent in 2010.

Table 6 reports demographic characteristics and counts for the unsheltered homeless in the 2010
Census, broken down by the type of enumeration site. (We do not report demographic
characteristics of the unsheltered from the PIT, because CoCs did not begin collecting detailed

9
 The share of Blacks in the ACS is statistically significantly larger than the share of Blacks in HMIS for 2007, 2012,
and 2014-2016 at the p<0.05 level. The share of Whites in HMIS is statistically significantly larger than the share of
Whites in the ACS for 2007, 2009, and 2012-2016. The 2010 Census reports a higher share of Blacks and a lower
share of Whites than 2010 HMIS (significant at the p<0.001 level).

                                                          19
demographic characteristics for the unsheltered until 2015.) A larger share of the unsheltered
homeless is over the age of 62 (9.5 percent), male (71.0 percent), and White (52.9 percent)
relative to the sheltered estimates. A smaller share of the unsheltered (8.8 percent) is under the
age of 18 relative to the sheltered estimates.

5.4 Characteristics of Houston and Los Angeles HMIS Shelter Users

Table 7 reports demographic characteristics for HMIS shelter users, pooled over 2004-2014 for
Los Angeles and 2004-2015 for Houston, alongside characteristics according to the ACS and
2010 Census for these areas.

HMIS characteristics are presented using two different weighting methods. The first, which we
call person-weighted, gives equal weight to each individual who had any shelter spell in the
period covered by our data, regardless of the number or length of his or her shelter spells. This
approximates characteristics obtained from interval-prevalence estimates, as in the HMIS
aggregate data. The second weighting method, which we call day-weighted, weights each
individual by the number of days they spent in an HMIS shelter during the observation period.
This approximates characteristics obtained from a point-in-time estimate carried out at a random
point in the year, where individuals with longer spells have a higher likelihood of being
surveyed.

We observe that the two weighting methods produce similar patterns of characteristics in both
cities. In Los Angeles, the shares White, Black, under age 18, female, and Hispanic are
comparable under day- versus person-weighting. The appears to be true for Houston, with the
exception of the share under age 18 and the share female which differ somewhat across
weighting method. Under person-weighting, 21 percent of shelter users are under the age of 18,
while 26 percent of users are under 18 with day weights. Forty percent of shelter users are female
under person-weighting and 49 percent are female under day-weighting. Differences in
characteristics between weighting schemes across groups imply differences in the length and
frequency of shelter spells.

These results provide some preliminary evidence that the characteristics of people experiencing
sheltered homelessness vary somewhat between point-in-time and interval-prevalence estimates.



                                                 20
The extent to which they differ will depend on the degree to which long-term stayers differ from
short-term stayers, as well as the distribution of the cumulative time in shelter.

5.5 Seasonality of Shelter Use in Los Angeles and Houston

Figure 7 displays the average number of daily shelter users in a given month, pooled over 2009-
2015 for Houston and 2009-2014 for Los Angeles. We exclude earlier years based on concerns
expressed by HUD officials about the quality of HMIS database prior to 2009. Houston's
average daily shelter use falls in the 2,000 to 2,200 range throughout the year with little seasonal
variation. In Los Angeles, average daily shelter use in January (10,780), the month of the PIT, is
close to that in March (11,040), the month of the Census. Publicly available data from the New
York City Department of Homeless Services also does not display seasonal shelter use
patterns. 10 Taken together, these data do not provide evidence that seasonality is a major driver
           9F




of differences in sheltered homeless counts between the PIT and 2010 Census, although more
study is required.

6. Survey Characteristics of People Experiencing Homelessness

6.1 Methodology for Survey Characteristics

This section lays out our methods for describing the characteristics of the sheltered homeless and
comparison groups using ACS. We present results from the pooled 2006-2010 ACS and the
pooled 2011-2018 ACS. We divide the ACS between 2010 and 2011 due to the introduction of a
new sample frame in 2011 following the 2010 Census. In future work, we will present
characteristics for sub-groups of the sheltered homeless based on sex, race, Hispanic ethnicity,
and geography.

We identify people experiencing sheltered homelessness in the ACS using the group quarters
(GQ) code for emergency and transitional shelters. This GQ code is available only in restricted-
use data. We also examine two comparison groups: the broader housed (non-GQ population),
and people residing in households with an single adult household head who are identified by the




10 This data can be found in daily reports published by the New York City Department of Homeless Services, including, for

example, this report from July 8, 2020: https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/dhs/downloads/pdf/dailyreport.pdf

                                                              21
ACS as being poor, whether or not children are present. 11 This second comparison group allows
                                                                           10F




us to compare the characteristics and economic circumstances of homeless individuals to the
broader population of people in poverty. We restrict this analysis to single individual-headed
households because most people in homeless shelters are not accompanied by a spouse.

Our results draw on the entire universe of people surveyed at emergency and transitional shelters
in the 2006-2010 and 2011-2018 ACS. We also draw a sample from the ACS non-GQ population
to form the comparison groups described above. We apply ACS survey weights to all estimates
and calculate standard errors using replicate weights. All shares and amounts are calculated
across both imputed and non-imputed item responses for a given ACS variable. Starting in 2011,
the ACS began imputing whole persons from surveyed GQ facilities to GQ facilities that were
not surveyed, in order to improve the quality of sub-state population estimates. From 2011
onwards, we exclude whole person imputed observations and re-scale the survey weights by a
constant such that the sum of the re-scaled weights applied only to non-imputed observations
equals the sum of the original weights applied to both imputed and non-imputed observations at
the national level.

6.2 Results on Survey Characteristics

Tables 10-12 display characteristics of the sheltered homeless in the 2006-2010 and 2011-2018
ACS. For comparison, these tables also report the characteristics of the two domiciled groups
described in the previous section. Tables 10a and 10b describe the demographic characteristics.
Tables 11a and 11b report school attendance for children ages 5-17 and education, mobility,
marital status, veteran status, and functional limitations for adults ages 18-64. Tables 12a and
12b give self-reported employment, income, and benefit receipt for adults ages 18-64.

6.2.1 Age and Sex

In Tables 10a and 10b, we see that relative to both comparison groups, a smaller share of the
sheltered homeless are under the age of 5 or between the ages of 5 and 17. In both time periods,
we see that the largest share of the sheltered homeless fall into the 45-64 age bracket, which
corresponds to the late baby boom cohort identified by Culhane et al. (2013) as having the


11 The household types selected for this comparison group may still include additional adults, such as an adult biological child,

partner, roommate, or parent. They do not however include any households where a spouse is present.

                                                                22
highest risk of homelessness. In 2011-2018, just 4.1 percent of the sheltered homeless are over
the age of 64, compared with 10.0 percent of the poor and 14.6 percent of the non-GQ
population. We also see that 60.5 percent of the sheltered homeless are male, which is nearly
twenty percentage points higher than the poor comparison group.

6.2.2 Race and Hispanic Ethnicity

The racial composition of the sheltered homeless in the ACS is consistent with previous
literature. In 2011-2018, we find that Whites make up 39.6 percent of the sheltered homeless,
while Blacks appear at much higher rates than in comparison groups. 46.8 percent of the
sheltered homeless are Black in this time period, compared to just 29.7 percent of the poor and
12.9 percent of the non-GQ population. American Indian/Alaskan Natives are over-represented
relative to the poor group in 2006-2010. Hispanics are over-represented relative to the overall
housed population in 2011-2018, but are under-represented relative to the single poor
comparison group in both time periods.

6.2.3 Mobility and Citizenship

Table 11b shows that in the 2011-2018 ACS, sheltered homeless adults ages 18-64 were more
likely to reside in their state of birth relative to the housed comparison group, with 54.6 percent
of sheltered homeless adults ages 18-64 residing in their state of birth at the time of survey.
About 9.1 percent of the sheltered homeless had changed states in the last year, compared to just
3.0 percent of the poor and 2.5 percent of the housed population overall.

6.2.4 Education

Table 11b shows that 89.8 percent of sheltered homeless children ages 5-17 attended school in
the last three months, a share that is lower than in comparison groups. This could be driven by
lower attendance among sheltered homeless youths ages 16-17. Mean years of completed
education is about one-tenth of a year lower for sheltered homeless adults than for poor single
adults, but approximately 1.5 years lower than that of housed adults overall. Among sheltered
homeless adults ages 18-64, 30.4 percent have less than a high school education, 36.4 percent
have a high school diploma or GED, and 27.3 percent have some college but not college degree.
Only 5.8 percent are college graduates.



                                                 23
6.2.5 Functional Limitations

The ACS asks respondents whether or not they have difficulty performing a range of physical or
cognitive activities. In Table 11b, we see that 36.1 percent of the sheltered homeless ages 18-64
reported experiencing at least one of several physical limitations (difficulty walking or climbing
stairs, hearing, or seeing) and cognitive limitations (difficulty remembering or making
decisions). By comparison, just 23.1 percent of the poor and 10.1 percent of the non-GQ
population in the 2011-2018 period had reported these limitations. Perhaps most starkly, nearly
one-quarter of the sheltered homeless have difficulty remembering or making decisions, a share
that is about twice that of the single poor adults and about 5.5 times the share among the broader
population of adults. While rates of functional limitations are high relative to comparison groups,
about two-thirds of sheltered homeless people indicate that they do not have any of these
physical or cognitive limitations. In ongoing work, we examine whether these patterns persist
even when controlling for age, sex, and race.

6.2.6 Self-Reported Employment and Program Participation

ACS respondents are also asked to report employment and receipt of government benefits.
Previous work by Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2015) and Meyer and Mittag (2019) has shown
that such self-reports are frequently unreliable, and we will show in subsequent sections that
administrative data often conflict with self-reports in this case as well. With this caveat in mind,
we nevertheless present self-reported measures of employment and program participation from
the ACS in Tables 12a and 12b.

About 39.4 percent of sheltered homeless adults ages 18-64 reported having worked in the past
year in the 2011-2018 ACS, which is slightly lower than single poor adults (45.5 percent) and
much lower than the broader population (78.4 percent). The sheltered homeless also reported
fewer weeks worked conditional on having worked in the last year, suggesting a more sporadic
work history.




                                                 24
Mean earnings of the sheltered homeless in 2018 dollars are reported to be $14,200 conditional
on having worked, which is higher than the poor single adult comparison group's mean reported
earnings of $8,325. 12    11F




Approximately 71.2 percent of the sheltered homeless reported receiving any transfer income in
the previous year, compared to 57.4 percent of single poor adults and 16.1 percent of the overall
population. The sheltered homeless reported higher receipt rates for food stamps (64.8 percent),
Medicaid (61.9 percent), and public assistance (20.1 percent) than the domiciled poor. They
reported lower rates of SSI receipt (12.0 percent, compared to 11.0 percent for the poor), which
contrasts with the finding in the above section that the sheltered homeless are more likely to
suffer from physical and cognitive limitations.

7. Income and Program Receipt Using Administrative Data

7.1 Methodology for Income and Program Receipt

This section describes our methods for estimating income and program receipt. We first describe
our three groups of interest (sheltered homeless, unsheltered homeless, and a poor adult
comparison group). Next, we explain our methods for linking the 2010 Census to administrative
datasets and adjusting for non-linkage. Finally, we describe our treatment of each administrative
data source and our methods for constructing various outcomes.

7.1.1 Description of the Sheltered, Unsheltered, and ACS Adult Poor Groups

We create three groups of adults to link across datasets: sheltered homeless adults, unsheltered
homeless adults (excluding those enumerated at TNSOLs, for reasons explained below), and the
subset of 2010 ACS non-group quarters (housed) adults in poor households with an unmarried
household head. We define an adult as an individual who was born between 1945 and 1992,
inclusive. These individuals were ages 18-64 at some point during 2010. 13                         12F




12 The administrative data, when linked to the 2010 Census, paints a different picture, as we will see in the next section. In that

data, the sheltered homeless had lower mean pretax income than the ACS poor in 2010. In ongoing work, we examine income
and benefit misreporting for specific individuals in the ACS.
13 We drop individuals who were enumerated in the 2010 Decennial Census or 2010 ACS but died prior to 2010 according to

their date of death in the 2019 Numident.

                                                                 25
Our sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are drawn from the 2010 Census. The sheltered
group consists of individuals enumerated at emergency and transitional homeless shelters during
the Service-Based Enumeration (SBE) on March 29-31, 2010. The unsheltered group consists of
individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly-scheduled mobile food vans (RSMFVs)
during this same window. We keep only individuals for whom a protected identification key
(PIK) could be assigned by the Census Bureau, and we adjust for non-PIKing using inverse
probability weights, a method described in detail in a subsequent subsection. Our resulting
sample size, rounded to comply with Census Bureau disclosure requirements, is 111,000
sheltered homeless individuals and 60,000 unsheltered homeless individuals.

To construct our ACS poor comparison group, we draw a ten percent sample from the 2010 ACS
and keep individuals who are identified as poor based on survey income and household structure
in the ACS. We also restrict the sample to households with an unmarried household head,
whether or not children are present. We use households with an unmarried household head
because people experiencing homelessness are less likely to be married than the general
population. 14 We do not exclude households with children because a substantial share of people
              13F




experiencing homelessness have accompanying children. 15 The resulting sample size, rounded to
                                                                           14F




comply with Census Bureau disclosure requirements, is 153,000 individuals.

7.1.2 Using Protected Identification Keys (PIKs) to Link across Datasets

We link our administrative tax and program receipt data to the 2010 Census using Protected
Identification Keys (PIKs). The U.S. Census Bureau's Person Identification Validation System
(PVS) assigns PIKs to individuals who appear in survey and administrative data by searching for
a matching record by Social Security Number (if available), name, date of birth, sex, and address
in a reference file derived from SSA records and augmented with Individual Taxpayer
Identification Numbers (ITINs) and other information by the Census Bureau (Wagner and Layne
2014).




14 Our results from the 2011-2018 ACS indicate that about 10.0 percent of the sheltered homeless ages 18-64 are married,

compared to 50.5 percent of the domiciled population in the same age range.
15 In the 2010 PIT count, for example, nearly 40 percent of people experiencing homelessness had accompanying family

members. About 15 percent of the sheltered homeless in the 2010 ACS are below the age of 18.

                                                              26
Table 8 presents the share of records in our HMIS, 2010 Census, and ACS datasets that are
assigned a PIK by PVS. 16 Linkage rates are fairly high for HMIS data, where shelters are
                               15F




instructed to collect SSNs but do so imperfectly in practice. ACS and 2010 Census data, in
contrast, do not contain SSNs, so linkage rates depend on the completeness and accuracy of
personally identifiable information (PII) provided to enumerators and surveyors, the uniqueness
of this information, and the coverage of the reference file. Linkage rates for these survey sources
vary substantially by SBE site type. For the ACS sheltered homeless, linkage rates range from 70
percent in 2008 to 83 percent in 2010. The linkage rate for the sheltered homeless in the 2010
Census is 68.6 percent. Soup kitchens and food vans in the 2010 Census have linkage rates of
41.8 and 42.4 percent, respectively, while the PVS was able to assign a PIK to only 17.2 percent
of people enumerated at TNSOLs.

7.1.3 Adjusting for Non-Linkage Using Inverse Probability Weights

We use inverse probability weights (IPWs) to adjust for non-linkage at the individual level.
These weights are the inverse of the predicted probability of an individual receiving a PIK in a
probit model of PIK status with a range of covariates. 17 Inverse probability weights will lead to
                                                                      16F




consistent estimates if the ability to assign a link and the outcomes of interest ­ in this case,
income and program participation ­ are independent conditional on the observables included in
the probit estimation. For the 2010 Census, we find that most of the homeless who did not
receive a PIK had failed to provide enumerators with sufficient PII. Potential reasons for
subjects' failure to provide PII include mistrust of enumerators, cognitive challenges, and being
asleep. 18 Our assessment of the conditional independence assumption's validity therefore rests
         17F




on our beliefs about whether income and program receipt are correlated with subjects'
probability of providing sufficient PII to enumerators in a way that is not captured by our probit
estimation.

In the case of TNSOLs, we are not confident that the assumption of conditional independence
holds. Finding, counting, and capturing demographic data for people experiencing homelessness



16 Because the vast majority of our administrative data contain a valid social security number, more than 99 percent of these

records are successfully assigned a PIK by PVS and we do not include these in the table.
17 The Appendix more fully describes our IPW methodology.
18 Tables 9a, 9b, and 9c shows differences in characteristics between linked and unlinked individuals in the 2010 ACS, among

2010 Census sheltered homeless individuals, and among unsheltered homeless individuals, respectively.

                                                              27
at TNSOLs presented a substantial challenge to the SBE effort, according to the 2010 Service-
Based Enumeration (SBE) Assessment report. 19 TNSOLs were visited in the middle of the night,
                                                           18F




and enumerators were instructed not to wake sleeping people and to prioritize safety over
gathering information from uncooperative individuals. In some cases, Census officials hired
local facilitators, typically themselves homeless, to act as guides and introduce enumerators to
people residing at TNSOLs. Given these procedures, it is plausible that a conditionally non-
random relationship exists between the Census Bureau's ability to assign a PIK and outcomes of
interest.

In contrast to TNSOLs, other service-based locations achieved higher PIK rates. In the three
New England cities where they conducted their ethnography, Glasser, Hirsch, and Chan (2013)
concluded that "enumeration at soup kitchens is a potentially effective method of including the
out-of-doors homeless" in the decennial census, and that "there was a high level of cooperation
between the homeless service providers such as shelter and day center administrators and the
U.S. Census." They observed that administrators at shelters often provided information about
sleeping individuals, which helps explain the higher PIK rates for shelters relative to the other
SBE locations.

In light of these assessments, we assume that the probability of being assigned a PIK is not
correlated with outcomes of interest after conditioning on observables for those at shelters, soup
kitchens, and food vans but not TNSOLs, although we admit that this assumption cannot be
verified. We therefore exclude TNSOLs from analyses of the unsheltered that rely on data
linkage.

7.1.4 Treatment of Administrative Datasets

This section describes our treatment of the various administrative datasets used to generate
income and program receipt estimates. Using PIKs, we linked our two groups of homeless
people and our poor, housed comparison group to the following administrative datasets:

IRS 1040 extracts (2003-2016)


19The report states: "The greatest challenge that the Census Bureau experienced while implementing the 2010 Census Service-
Based Enumeration Operation was finding people at the targeted non-sheltered outdoor locations where people experiencing
homelessness lived or stayed and capturing their demographic data, such as age, Hispanic Origin, and race." (p.viii)


                                                                 28
We use Census Bureau extracts of IRS Form 1040 to obtain calendar year income information
for tax filers, including total money income, 20 interest income, social security income, rental
                                                         19F




income, wage and salary income, and indicators for whether a schedule C, F, or SE (each
pertaining to some source of self-employment) was filed. We attribute a given 1040 to an
individual if his or her PIK appears as either a primary or secondary filer on a tax return. In a
revision of our approach (not yet disclosed) we subtract from the income appearing on the 1040
any W-2 earnings and 1099-R income of a spouse and any dependents, if present.

IRS W-2s (2006-2016)

These employer-filed information returns provide wage and salary income for all individuals
covered by Social Security, allowing us to add income information for individuals who did not
file 1040s. 21 Additionally, we count the number of unique employer taxpayer identification
             20F




numbers (TINs) associated with a particular PIK, giving us an estimate of the number of
employers worked for during a given calendar year.

IRS 1099-Rs (2006-2016)

These information returns filed by employers and pension funds provide records of gross
retirement distributions paid out to individuals. They exclude rollovers of retirement accounts.

VA Benefits (Fiscal Year 2007-Fiscal Year 2014)

This file contains fiscal year data on Veterans' Administration service-based compensation and
pension receipt. To obtain calendar year estimates, we assume individuals received
compensation or pensions for all months of the fiscal year in which they were indicated to be a
recipient and translate this into calendar years accordingly. 22            21F




Medicare (2006-2014)

This dataset gives us start and end dates for enrollment in Part A (hospital care) and Part B (out-
patient care) of the Medicare health insurance program for the elderly and disabled. We indicate

20 Total money income includes wages/salaries, total interest income (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony

received, business income, total pensions/annuities, net rents/royalties, farm income, unemployment compensation, and total
social security benefits.
21 Although employers are only supposed to issue W-2s to individuals with valid social security numbers (SSNs), in practice W-

2s may also bear invalid SSNs or individual taxpayer identification numbers (ITINs).
22 For example, if an individual received VA benefits in fiscal year 2010 (October 2009-September 2010), we would indicate that

they had received VA benefits in both 2009 and 2010 calendar years.

                                                               29
that an individual received these benefits if they were enrolled for at least one day of a given
year. We also obtain from these records whether an individual was receiving Medicare due to
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI, for the elderly or surviving family members) or
Disability Insurance (DI, for the disabled) in a given year.

HUD Public and Subsidized Housing (2004-2016)

We use data from the HUD Public and Indian Housing Information Center (PIC) and Tenant
Rental Assistance Certification System (TRACS) datasets to obtain information on public and
subsidized housing receipt. Note, however, that these data miss payments associated with
housing programs administered by the Department of Agriculture, states, and localities. Because
some individuals appear in both datasets, we de-duplicate records by keeping the month/year
record with the greatest benefit amount. We estimate the value of these in-kind transfers by
subtracting total tenant payment from the gross rent amount. 23                    22F




Medicaid (Fiscal Year 2007-Fiscal Year 2015)

These files provide fiscal year-level information about enrollment in Medicaid, a health
insurance program for low-income individuals and families. The range of fiscal years for which
Medicaid data are available vary by state. As with VA benefits, we obtain calendar year
estimates by assuming individuals were enrolled in Medicaid for all months of a given fiscal year
and translating this into calendar year receipt indicators.

SNAP (years vary by state)

These files contain monthly dollar amounts of food stamp vouchers from the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) data for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2006-2016),
Tennessee (2006-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016), and New York (2007-2016).

Numident (2019)

This dataset provides us with birth dates for all individuals with a Social Security Number
(SSN), allowing us to calculate age. It also includes death dates. Because mortality is high for

23 For public housing units, which have missing gross rent amounts and make up less than a quarter of all units in the

administrative data, we impute the market rent based on the average rent by 5-digit zip code, household size, and year (and, if
rent is still missing, by 3-digit zip code/household size/year, 5-digit zip code/year, and 3-digit zip code/year in that order). We
consider a household as receiving payments in a given month if that month is within twelve months of the most recent
certification date and is prior to any termination date.

                                                                 30
homeless people, we also use the Numident to mortality-adjust our estimates, calculating income
and program receipt rates only for those who are still living at the end of a given calendar year.

Table A1 in the data appendix describes in detail how we constructed each measure of income
and benefit receipt. All shares and amounts reported in income and program receipt tables are
mortality-adjusted and use the annual average Chained Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (C-CPI-U) to express dollar amounts in 2018 dollars. Results are also rounded to
comply with Census Bureau disclosure rules.

7.1.5 Coverage of Administrative Datasets

All of the administrative datasets, except for SNAP and Medicaid for 2014-2015, cover the entire
United States for all years available. 24 When reporting the share of the population receiving
                                                23F




SNAP or Medicaid, or any outcomes using SNAP or Medicaid receipt as an input, we limit the
sample to individuals who in 2010 resided in states for which those datasets are available. 25, 26                     24F   25F




For example, the share of individuals receiving SNAP in 2007 is the share of individuals who
resided in New York, New Jersey, Tennessee, or Indiana in 2010 who link to those states' SNAP
datasets in 2007. Approximately 25.3 percent of all sheltered and 17.2 percent of all unsheltered
homeless individuals resided in one of these states in 2010. Implications of incomplete
geographic coverage are discussed in more detail in the results section.

7.2 Results on Income and Program Receipt

Tables 13, 14, and 15 respectively present our findings on income and program receipt using
administrative data sources for the sheltered and unsheltered homeless enumerated in the 2010
Decennial Census, as well as a comparison group of poor single-adult households from the 2010
ACS. Figures 8-20 illustrate key patterns that emerge from the data. Because we link a cross-
section of individuals from 2010 to administrative datasets, we are able present those
individuals' longitudinal income and program receipt over the course of more than a decade.




24 We exclude Puerto Rico and other U.S. territories.
25 Our only information about state of residences comes from the 2010 Census, which means we do not know in which state an
individual resided in years other than 2010.
26 Outcomes that use SNAP receipt as a component include the share receiving any benefits, the share receiving any benefits or

earnings, and pre-tax income plus in-kind transfers. Outcomes that use Medicaid receipt as an input include the share receiving
any benefits and the share receiving any benefits or earnings.

                                                               31
7.2.1 Share with Any Earnings

Figure 8 displays the share of individuals in each group who had any earnings in the tax data for
a given year. 27 In 2010, the year these individuals are observed to be homeless, we see that 52.8
                 26F




percent of the sheltered homeless and 40.4 percent of the unsheltered appear in the 1040 and/or
W2 data as having earned income. For the sheltered homeless, that share is substantially higher
than the 39.4 percent of sheltered homeless ACS respondents in the 2011-2018 ACS who self-
report having worked in the past year.

Overall, we notice a downward trend in the share of individuals in all three groups that have
formal labor market earnings during the Great Recession. 28 After 2010, however, we see the
                                                                              27F




share of single poor adults with earnings rising slightly and then remaining level, while the share
of the sheltered and unsheltered homeless with earnings continues to decline. These two groups
diverge from the poor comparison group most substantially after the year they are observed to be
homeless.

7.2.2 Share with Any Benefit Receipt

Figure 9 displays the share of individuals in each group who are recorded in administrative
sources as receiving any government benefit in a given year. Benefits include SNAP, VA, HUD,
Medicare, and Medicaid, with SNAP and Medicaid contributing the largest shares. In 2010, the
year individuals are observed to be homeless, 88.8 percent of the sheltered and 78.1 percent of
the unsheltered homeless received at least one of these benefits.

The rate of benefit receipt increases during the Great Recession, peaking in 2010 followed by a
decline for all three groups. The sheltered homeless generally have higher rates of benefit receipt
than the unsheltered or the poor, with the notable exception of Medicare, for which the
unsheltered have higher rates than the sheltered from 2006-2016.




27 We define earnings as the sum of wage and salary income and positive estimated self-employment income on a 1040, plus
deferred compensation from any linked W2s minus any PIKed cofiler's W2 wages and tips. When an individual does not file a
1040, we define earnings as W2 wages and tips plus deferred compensation. For individuals who do not file a 1040 or receive a
W2, earnings are zero.
28 The spike in earnings for all three groups in 2007 reflects an increase in 1040 filing by taxpayers seeking to receive "recovery

rebates" included in the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008.

                                                                32
7.2.3 Earnings, Pre-Tax Income and In-Kind Transfers

Figure 10 shows the median of earnings for the three groups. 29 We see that earnings falls for all
                                                                                28F




groups from 2007 to 2010, which is consistent with the declining share of individuals reporting
earnings during the recession. Income for the poor comparison group, however, rises consistently
after 2010, while the sheltered and unsheltered homeless' median earnings falls to zero,
reflecting the fact that fewer than half had any earned income in those years.

Figure 11 gives the 75th percentile of earnings. We see a similar pattern as with the median, and
observe that even among sheltered and unsheltered individuals who are higher up in the income
distribution, earnings remain fairly flat, whereas that of the poor comparison group begins to rise
after the year observed as homeless or poor. This pattern is also consistent in Figures 12 and 13,
which give the median and 75th percentile of pre-tax income plus in-kind transfers from HUD
and SNAP. 30  29F




7.2.4 SNAP Receipt

Figure 14 reports SNAP receipt rates. SNAP receipt is increasing for all three groups in the first
four years of observation, but the growth is particularly stark for the sheltered homeless, rising
from 36.1 percent in 2006 to 80.9 percent in 2010. SNAP receipt for the unsheltered homeless
also begins at a lower level than the ACS poor, but after 2006 surpasses them and peaks at 64.7
percent in 2010. As with most other benefits, SNAP receipt is higher for people experiencing
sheltered as opposed to unsheltered homelessness.

There is an important caveat to our findings on SNAP receipt. We have access to SNAP records
for just five states, with different periods of coverage for each state. To address this limitation,
we restrict our analysis of SNAP receipt to individuals who resided in one of these states in
2010. This restriction means that if an individual receiving SNAP benefits moved from a state
that is covered by our records in 2010 to one that is not in a subsequent year, Tables 13 and 14


29 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA Service-Connected Disability

(SCD) compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the calendar year and ¼ of
the annual SCD amount of the fiscal year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a
1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages and tips and deferred compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA
and employer sponsored retirement distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations making over $8 million a year in
pre-tax income.
30 SNAP benefits are calculated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average monthly SNAP benefit

received in that year. We drop a few observations who make over $8 million per year in pre-tax and in kind transfer income.

                                                              33
would incorrectly consider them to have dis-enrolled from SNAP. Similarly, if an individual was
enrolled in SNAP in a state that is not covered prior to 2010 and moved to a state that is covered
before 2010, our tables would incorrectly consider them to be a new SNAP enrollee.

Taken together, incomplete coverage means that the observed peak in enrollment in 2010 is
likely to be overstated, and different trends between the groups could reflect differences in inter-
state mobility. From the previous section, we know that 12.6 percent of the sheltered homeless in
the 2006-2010 ACS reported living in a different state one year prior, compared to just 2.2
percent of the poor comparison group. We do not have an estimate of interstate mobility for the
unsheltered.

7.2.5 Medicaid and Medicare Receipt

Figure 15 displays the share enrolled in Medicaid. Medicaid enrollment is lower for the
unsheltered than for the sheltered homeless and the poor prior to 2012, which could reflect the
relatively larger share of women and families in these groups. 48.9 and 48.4 percent of the
sheltered homeless and poor, respectively, were enrolled in Medicaid in 2010, as compared to
43.5 percent of the unsheltered.

Figure 16 displays the share enrolled in Medicare Part A or B. Medicare Part A (hospital
insurance) and Part B (medical insurance) are available individuals who are age 65 and older,
disabled, or experiencing end-stage renal disease (ESRD). 31 Because our sample is limited to
                                                                          30F




ages 18-64 in 2010, it is likely that the majority of those enrolled in Medicare before 2010 are
disabled, while the upward trend in 2010 and after reflects ageing of this population. In 2010, 8.8
percent of the sheltered homeless and 9.5 percent of the poor were enrolled in Medicare,
compared to 14.8 percent of the unsheltered homeless. The unsheltered homeless have higher
enrollment rates all years of observation, perhaps reflecting higher rates of disability among this
group.

7.2.6 VA Benefit Receipt

As Figure 17 shows, 2010, about 0.7 percent of the poor, 2.2 percent of the unsheltered, and 2.8
percent of the sheltered homeless received VA benefits. This difference in levels is consistent


31   Source: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Eligibility-and-Enrollment/OrigMedicarePartABEligEnrol/index

                                                             34
with the fact the sheltered homeless were more likely to self-report as veterans in the 2006-2010
ACS compared to the poor comparison group (14.8 percent of the sheltered homeless, versus 3.6
percent of the poor). There is a slight increasing trend for all groups over time, likely reflecting
the aging of this population, and no discernable deviation from trend in the year they are
observed as homeless.

7.2.7 HUD Housing Assistance Receipt

Figure 18 displays the share of individuals receiving housing benefits. 11.1 percent of the
sheltered and 10.4 percent of the unsheltered homeless received housing benefits at some point
in 2010, compared to 19.0 percent of the poor comparison group. Prior to 2010, housing benefit
receipt for both homeless groups was consistently about 5-9 percentage points lower than the
poor. There is a steady decrease in the rate of receipt among the sheltered in the years before
they are observed as homeless, falling to its lowest level in 2009. Both the unsheltered and
especially the sheltered exhibit an increasing pattern after 2010, with housing benefit receipt for
the sheltered surpassing the poor in 2015.

7.2.8 Cross-Sectional Analysis of Income by Sub-Group

Tables 14 and 15 provide a cross section of income and program receipt for different sub-groups
of the sheltered and unsheltered homeless, respectively, in 2010. Figures 19a and 19b display our
results on the 75th percentile of earnings for the following groups, divided into male and female:
overall; White, Black, other race; and Hispanic and non-Hispanic. Figures 20 incorporate the full
amount of pre-tax income and the value of in-kind transfers from HUD and SNAP.

Among the sheltered, we see that and both male and female Blacks have higher earnings than
Whites of the same sex. Figure 21a shows that women experiencing sheltered homelessness are
about seven percentage points more likely than males to have any earnings. Blacks experiencing
sheltered homelessness are more likely to have earnings than Whites experiencing sheltered
homelessness, disaggregated by sex.

These findings are consistent with a model of homelessness where women and Blacks find it
more difficult to maintain housing than men and Whites, respectively, given a certain level of
income. For women, the need to provide for accompanying children could explain this
difference. For Blacks, the various factors discussed in the literature review above, including

                                                  35
discrimination and a comparative lack of resources in friend and family networks, could explain
the observed differences in earnings and income.

7.2.9 Cross-Sectional Analysis of Program Receipt by Sub-Group

Figure 22 gives the share of individuals who appear in our administrative records as receiving
any benefits. Again, we see that benefit receipt rates are higher for women than for men and for
Blacks than for Whites, regardless of sex. Figures 23-27 show differences in receipt rates for
SNAP, Medicaid, Medicare, VA benefits, and housing benefits. This pattern persists when we
look at SNAP, Medicaid, and housing benefit receipt.

The pattern is reversed for the share enrolled in Medicare. Not only are the unsheltered more
likely to be enrolled than the sheltered for all groups, but it is also the case that men have higher
receipt rates than women and Whites have higher enrollment than Blacks, regardless of sex.
Disability benefit receipt accounts for most of the Medicare enrollment in 2010 because we
restrict our data to individuals who were between the ages of 18 and 64 in 2010.

Unsurprisingly, sheltered homeless males are about eight times as likely to receive VA benefits
as sheltered homeless females. Sheltered homeless Black men are more likely to receive VA
benefits than sheltered homeless White men.

8. Discussion

8.1 Observations on Survey Characteristics

Our ACS data provide the first national estimates of mobility among the sheltered homeless.
Mobility is a topic of particular concern for cities with large homeless populations, where
officials are apt to make claims about the extent to which homeless people are outsiders drawn
by generous public services rather than local residents unable to obtain or afford housing.
Nationally, we observe moderate rates of mobility, with only a small share of sheltered homeless
adults in 2011-2018 ­ about 9.1 percent ­ having changed states in the year before their
interview. While this is higher than one-year interstate mobility for the housed (non-GQ)
population, it is still lower than one might expect in light of the rhetoric. Furthermore, the longer
term measures of mobility since birth indicate only small differences between the homeless and



                                                  36
comparison groups. Our analysis suggests that the link between mobility and homelessness is not
as strong as is suggested in public discourse.

We are also able to provide the first national estimates of rates of various functional limitations
among adults experiencing sheltered homelessness. We find much higher rates of physical
limitations relative to the housed population and moderately higher or similar rates of physical
limitations relative to the poor comparison group. There is a stark disparity in the share reporting
a cognitive limitation. Nearly one-quarter of the sheltered homeless ages 18-64 reports difficulty
remembering or making decisions, a rate that is approximately twice that of the poor comparison
group and 5.5 times that of the housed population in this age range. Cognitive limitations appear
to be a significant factor distinguishing the sheltered homeless from the rest of the poor.

8.2 Observations on Income and Program Receipt

Unsurprisingly, the administrative data reveal substantial material deprivation among people
experiencing homelessness. Earnings for both the sheltered and unsheltered homeless fall far
short of the poor comparison group. This pattern is persistent across the ten years of observation,
even though many of these individuals were likely housed for large segments of this period.
There is no distinguishable drop in earnings relative to the poor comparison group around the
year that they were observed as homeless. Homelessness appears to be a symptom of long-term
low material well-being. In other words, people experiencing homelessness appear to be having
not just a year of deprivation and challenge, but a decade (at least).

We also find high rates of formal employment among this population. 52.8 percent of the
sheltered homeless had formal labor market earnings in the year they were observed as homeless.
We are the first to use administrative data to estimate the employment and income of the
unsheltered, and we find that 40.4 percent of this population had at least some formal
employment in the year they were observed as homeless. It is striking that so many individuals
experience homelessness despite being employed. This finding contrasts with stereotypes of
people experiencing homelessness as too lazy to work or incapable of doing so.

We find that the majority of people experiencing homelessness are reached by some form of
social safety net program, primarily SNAP and Medicaid. 88.8 percent of the sheltered and about
78.1 percent of the unsheltered received at least one benefit according to administrative records

                                                 37
in the year they were observed to be homeless. These individuals had consistently high rates of
benefit receipt across the decade of observation, indicating long-term reliance on the social
safety net. We see a slight rise in SNAP receipt and a rise and subsequent increase in housing
benefit receipt around the year observed as homeless, but other benefits have steady receipt rates
that do not differ substantially around the year observed as homeless. Persistent reliance on
safety net programs reinforces our observation that these individuals are subject to low material
well-being over an extended period of time, whether domiciled or not.

An additional noteworthy finding is the higher rate of receipt for nearly all benefits among the
sheltered relative to the unsheltered homeless. Anecdotally, we have been told that this might be
partially attributable to the fact that homeless shelters work to connect clients to social services.
However, this does not explain receipt rates in the years before individuals were observed as
homeless. Family structure provides an alternative explanation, as many safety net programs are
more readily available to families than single adults. Indeed, we see higher rates of SNAP, HUD,
and Medicaid benefit receipt among females than males, even among the sheltered. Selection
into shelter use more broadly could also explain higher rates of benefit receipt. Individuals who
elect to use shelter services may also be more likely to use other social service programs.

Our analysis of earnings and program receipt by sub-group also sheds light on the racial and sex
composition of the homeless population. Conditional on gender, a larger share of homeless
Blacks had earnings relative to Whites, and conditional on race, a larger share of homeless
females had earnings than males.. Conditional on having earnings, mean earnings for these
groups also demonstrated the same pattern. This pattern is consistent with a model where
homelessness occurs when an individual's income falls short of a minimum housing cost. If the
minimum housing cost is higher for Blacks and females due to factors like limited housing
possibilities and larger family size, then Whites and males should be able to maintain housing
with fewer resources. Such a model would predict higher average incomes for homeless Blacks
and females than Whites and males, which is exactly what we observe.

8.3 Implications for Poverty Statistics

Because the population experiencing homelessness is small relative to the broader population in
poverty, incorporating this group into national poverty estimates would have a small effect on


                                                  38
the poverty rate. Including the ACS sheltered homeless in official statistics would increase the
poverty rate by between 0.05 and 0.10 percentage points on a base of about 15 percent (15.1 in
the 2010 CPS). If we assume all those counted in the PIT were poor (sheltered and unsheltered),
we would increase the poverty rate between 0.15 and 0.20 percentage points. The effect on
poverty statistics in certain geographic areas or for certain sub-groups, such as veterans or people
with disabilities, might be more pronounced, and this is a topic we will explore in future work.
Nevertheless, it is important to understand the deprivation faced by this sub-population in its
own right.

8.4 Directions for Future Research

In addition to the findings on characteristics and income and program receipt described in this
paper, we are using our novel data sources to explore several other topics related to
homelessness: transitions in and out of homelessness, migration and geographic dispersion, and
mortality. Our work on transitions examines the length of homeless spells and the dynamics of
housing status for this population, as well as demographic and economic factors associated with
entry to and exit from homelessness. For this work, we link individuals enumerated in the 2010
Census to prior and subsequent ACS surveys and examine their housing statuses in both sources.
Our work on migration and geographic dispersion further examines the determinants of the
geographic distribution of the homeless population and their degree of mobility. Finally, to
explore mortality patterns, we use the SSA's Numident as an administrative source of data on
death and use hazard models to estimate mortality differences between the sheltered, unsheltered,
and domiciled, controlling for demographic factors.




                                                39
9. Citations
Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress. 2007-2018. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of
Housing and Urban Development, Office of Community Planning and Development.
Baggett, Travis P, Stephen W. Hwang, James J. O'Connell, Bianca C. Proneala, Erin J.
Stringfellow, John Orav, Daniel E. Singer, and Nancy A. Rigotti. 2013. Mortality Among
Homeless Adults in Boston. JAMA Internal Medicine 173(4): 189-195.
Baker, Suzan G. 1996. Homelessness and the Latino paradox. Homelessness in America 132-
140.
Barrett, Diane and Deborah Russell. 2012. 2010 Census Service-Based Enumeration Assessment
Report. 2010 Census Planning Memoranda Series. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
Decennial Management Division/Decennial Statistical Studies Division, U.S. Census Bureau.
Brignone, Emily, J. Fargon, and Dennis P. Culhane. 2018. Epidemiology of homelessness among
veterans. Homelessness Among US Veterans, Critical Perspective: 13-34.
Burt, Martha R. 2001. Homeless families, singles, and others: Findings from the 1996 National
Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients. Housing Policy Debate 12(4): 737-780.
Burt, Martha R. 1999. Homelessness: Programs and the people they serve. Diane Publishing.
Burt, Martha R. and Barbara E. Cohen. 1989. Differences among homeless single women,
women with children, and single men. Social problems 36(5): 508-524.
Conroy, Stephen J. and David M. Heer. (2003). Hidden Hispanic homelessness in Los Angeles:
The "Latino paradox" revisited. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences 25(4): 530-538.
Corinth, Kevin and Claire Rossi-de Vries. (2018). Social ties and the incidence of homelessness.
Housing policy debate 28(4): 592-608.
Cronley, C. (2011). A Cross-Level Analysis of the Relationship Between Organizational Culture
and Technology Use Among Homeless-Services Providers. Cityscape, 13(1): 7-31.
Culhane, Dennis P., Stephen Metraux, Thomas Byrne, Magdi Stino, and Jay Bainbridge. 2013.
The age structure of contemporary homelessness: Evidence and implications for public policy.
Analyses of social issues and public policy 13(1): 228-244.
Early, Dirk W. 2015. An empirical investigation of the determinants of street homelessness.
Journal of Housing Economics 14(1): 27-47.
Evans, William N., David Phillips, and Krista Ruffini. 2019. Reducing and Preventing
Homelessness: A Review of the Evidence and Charting a Research Agenda (September 2019).
NBER Working Paper No. w26232.
Fazel, Seena, John R. Geddes, and Margot Kushel. 2014. The health of homeless people in high-
income countries: descriptive epidemiology, health consequences, and clinical and policy
recommendations. The Lancet 384(9953): 1529-1540.

                                               40
Glasser, Irene, Eric Hirsch, and Anna Chan. 2013. Ethnographic Study of the Group Quarters
Population in the 2010 Census: Homeless Populations. Center for Survey Measurement Study
Series (Survey Methodology #2013-14). U.S. Census Bureau.
Glasser, Irene, Eric Hirsch, and Anna Chan. 2014. Reaching and Enumerating Homeless
Populations. In Roger Tourangeau, Brad Edwards, Timothy P. Johnson, Kirk M. Wolter, and
Nancy Bates (Eds.), Hard-to-Survey Populations. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press:
180-200.
Glomm, Gerhard, and Andrew John. 2002. Homelessness and labor markets. Regional Science
and Urban Economics 32(5): 591-606.
Gowan, Teresa. 2010. Sin, sickness, and the system: Making street homelessness in San
Francisco.
Hahn, Judith A., Margot B. Kushel, David R. Bangsberg, Elise Riley, and Andrew R. Moss.
2006. BRIEF REPORT: the aging of the homeless population: fourteen-year trends in San
Francisco. Journal of general internal medicine 21(7): 775-778.
Harding, David J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Claire W. Herbert. 2013. Home is hard to find:
Neighborhoods, institutions, and the residential trajectories of returning prisoners. The Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 647(1): 214-236.
Johnson, Guy, Rosanna Scutella, Y. Tseng, and Gavin Wood. 2017. How Do Housing and
Labour Markets Affect Homeless Entry and Exits? Unpublished manuscript.
Kushel, Margot B., Eric Vittinghoff, and Jennifer S. Haas. 2001. Factors associated with the
health care utilization of homeless persons. Jama 285(2): 200-206.
Kushel, Margot B., Judith A. Hahn, Jennifer L. Evans, David R. Bangsberg, and Andrew R.
Moss. 2005. Revolving doors: imprisonment among the homeless and marginally housed
population. American Journal of Public Health 95(10): 1747-1752.
Lee, Barrett A., Kimberly A. Tyler, and James D. Wright. 2010. The New Homelessness
Revisited. Annual Review of Sociology 36: 501-521.
Levin, Rebekah, Lise McKean, and Jody Raphael. 2004. Pathways to and from homelessness:
Women and children in Chicago shelters. Center for Impact Research.
Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA). 2018. Report and Recommendations of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Black People Experiencing Homelessness.
Metraux, Stephen, and Dennis P. Culhane. 2004. Homeless shelter use and reincarceration
following prison release. Criminology & Public Policy 3(2): 139-160.
Metraux, Stephen, and Dennis P. Culhane. 2006. Recent incarceration history among a sheltered
homeless population. Crime & Delinquency 52(3): 504-517.




                                                41
Metraux, Stephen, Jamison D. Fargo, Nicholas Eng, and Dennis P. Culhane. 2018. Employment
and Earnings Trajectories During Two Decades Among Adults in New York City Homeless
Shelters. Cityscape 20(2): 173-202.
Metraux, Stephen, Janna Manjelievskaia, Dan Treglia, Roy Hoffman, Dennis P. Culhane, and
Bon S. Ku. 2016. Posthumously Assessing a Homeless Population: Services Use and
Characteristics. Psychiatric Services 67(12): 1334-1339.
Metraux, Stephen, Meagan Cusack, Thomas H. Byrne, Nora Hunt-Johnson, and Gala True. 2017.
Pathways into homelessness among post-9/11-era veterans. Psychological services 14(2): 229.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Nikolas Mittag. 2019. Using linked survey and administrative data to better
measure income: Implications for poverty, program effectiveness, and holes in the safety net.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(2): 176-204.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace KC Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. Household surveys in crisis.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(4): 199-226.
Meyer, Bruce D., Derek Wu, Victoria R. Mooers, and Carla Medalia. 2021. The Use and Misuse
of Income Data and Extreme Poverty in the United States. Journal of Labor Economics 39 (S1):
S5-S58.
Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. "The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration."
Unpublished Working Paper.
O'Flaherty, Brendan. 2004. Wrong person and wrong place: for homelessness, the conjunction is
what matters. Journal of Housing Economics 13(1): 1-15.
O'Flaherty, Brendan. 2011. Homelessness in the United States. In The Oxford Handbook of
Urban Economics and Planning.
O'Flaherty, Brendan. 2019. Homelessness Research: A Guide for Economists (and Friends).
Journal of Housing Economics.
Orange County Continuum of Care. 2017. 2017 Homeless Count and Survey Report.
Roncarati, Jill S., Travis P. Bagett, James J. O'Connell, Stephen Hwang, Francis Cook, Nancy
Krieger, Glorian Sorensen. 2018. Mortality Among Unsheltered Homeless Adults in Boston,
Massachusetts, 2000-2009. JAMA Internal Medicine 178(9):1242-1248.
Russell, Deborah, and Diane F. Barrett. 2013. 2010 Census Service-Based Enumeration
Assessment Report. 2010 Census Planning Memo No. 250.
Smith, Amy Symens, Charles Holmberg, and Marcella Jones-Puthoff. 2010. The Emergency and
Transitional Shelter Population, 2010. CENSR (Series): C 2010 SR-02. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Dept. of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Census Bureau.
Snow, David A. and Leon Anderson. 1993. Down on their luck: A study of homeless street
people. Univ of California Press.


                                              42
Von Wachter, Till, Geoffrey Schnorr, and Nefara Riesch. 2020. Employment Among LA County
Residents Experiencing Homelessness. UC Berkeley: California Policy Lab.
Wagner, Deborah and Mary Layne. 2014. The Person Identification Validation System (PVS).
Center for Administrative Records Research and Application (CARRA) Working Paper No.
#2014-01, U.S. Census Bureau.
Zuvekas, Samuel H. and Steven C. Hill. 2000. Income and employment among homeless people:
the role of mental health, health and substance abuse. The journal of mental health policy and
economics 3(3): 153-163.




                                              43
10. Appendix
10.1 Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW) Methodology
10.1.1 American Community Survey (ACS)
This section describes the IPW specifications used to generate adjusted weights for PIKed
individuals in group quarters and in emergency and transitional shelters in the 2006-2016
American Community Survey (ACS). These adjusted weights allow us to approximate the mean
work and program income as well as the share of shelter homeless individuals filing 1040s using
only PIKed individuals in our 2006-2016 ACS shelter homeless sample.
We run probit models over three groups in the ACS to predict the probability an individual in
each of the 2006-2016 ACS surveys would be PIKed based on household, income, and
demographic information available in the ACS. These four groups are: homeless, GQ non-
homeless, and non-GQ individuals.
The model controls for the following factors:
       Age, education, race (White, Black, Asian, all other races), Hispanic origin, citizenship,
       sex, employment status (employed, unemployed, not in labor force), household income
       categories, an interaction term for whether an individual is Hispanic and in a household
       making less than $20,000 per year, indicator variables for SNAP, OASDI, SSI, and
       TANF receipt, indicator for whether an individual worked in construction, indicator for
       whether English is spoken at home, indicator variables for military participation, marital
       status, health insurance (public, private, both, or no insurance), migration (moved from a
       different state or country in the last year, GQ category, household type, number of
       children, number of adults, and number of years in the United States.
10.1.2 2010 Census
This section describes the IPW specifications used to generate adjusted weights for PIKed
individuals in the 2010 Census. These adjusted weights allow us to approximate the mean work
and program income as well as the share of shelter homeless individuals filing 1040s using only
PIKed individuals in the 2010 Census.
We run a probit to predict the probability an individual in the 2010 Census is PIKed based on
demographic and housing information available in the dataset. We run the model over five
different groups in the Census: street homeless, shelter homeless, non-homeless GQ
institutionalized, non-homeless GQ non-institutionalized, and non-GQ individuals.
Relative to the ACS, the 2010 Census provides fewer potential covariates. The model controls
for the following factors:
       Age, race (White, Black, Asian, Native American, Pacific Islander, other), Hispanic
       origin, interactions between Hispanic status and age, sex, interactions between sex and
       GQ type, interactions between sex and Hispanic origin, state dummy variables, an
       indicator for urban, indicators for GQ enumeration site type, building structure type (one-

                                                44
         family house, multi-unit building, trailer/mobile home, other), tenure type (vacant, owned
         with mortgage, owned without mortgage, rented, occupied without rent),
         household/family type.

10.2 Definitions of Measures of Income and Program Receipt
                   Table A1: Definitions of Measures of Income and Program Receipt
 Share filing 1040        We link adults ages 18-64 in the corresponding ACS survey year to primary and
 with positive total      secondary filers on IRS 1040 forms from 2003-2015. In 2016, we only have data
 money income             from IRS 1040 forms filed during the first 39 weeks of the year. We report the
                          share of individuals who are primary or secondary filers on a 1040 with positive
                          total money income. Among those filing a 1040 with positive total money
                          income, we report the median total money income and median wage and salary
                          income for the tax unit.
 Share filing 1040        This row reports the share of individuals in a given tax year who are a primary or
 with self-               secondary filer on a 1040 with a flag indicating they filed a schedule C, F, or SE.
 employment               For all samples (sheltered homeless, unsheltered homeless, and non-group
 income                   quarters adults), this share roughly doubles between 2003 and 2015, from a little
                          under five percent to a little under 10 percent.
 Median self-             We estimate the amount of self-employment income received by subtracting
 employment               interest income, rental income, wage and salary income, and social security
 income                   income from total money income. The median of this value is reported for those
                          filing a self-employment schedule. 32   31F




 Share filing 1040        We report the share of adults in our samples who are a primary or secondary filer
 with social              on a 1040 with positive social security income. We also report the median social
 security                 security income among those filing a 1040 with positive social security income.
 Share receiving a        We report the share of adults in our samples who receive at least one W-2 with
 W-2                      positive wages and tips, and/or deferred compensation.
 Median W-2               We report the median of wages and tips earned across all W-2s received by adults
 wages and tips           in our samples who receive at least one W-2 with positive wages and tips,
                          deferred compensation, and/or FICA wages.
 Mean number of           As an estimate of the total of number of jobs an individual held, we count the
 W-2s                     number of unique employer TINs across W2s they received. We report the mean
                          of this value for all adults receiving at least one W-2 in a given year.
 Share receiving          We report the share of individuals receiving a 1099-R, which includes
 1099-R                   information on employer-sponsored IRA as well as pensions and annuities in a
                          given tax year.
 Share receiving          We report the share of individuals linking to our HUD PIC and TRACS dataset as
 housing benefits         receiving HUD program benefits in a given year. We report the mean value of
                          these benefits among recipients as gross rents (imputed for public housing) minus
                          total tenant payments for each year from 2005-2015.
 Share receiving          We have VA data for fiscal years 2007-2015. This contains information for
 VA benefits              calendar years 2007-2014. We report the share of individuals receiving VA
                          pensions or compensation for at least one month in each of these years.
 Share receiving          We have SNAP data for Indiana (2006-2016), Tennessee (2006-2016), New
 SNAP                     Jersey (2007-2016), New York (2007-2016), Illinois (2009-2016). Among
                          individuals residing in a state for which we have SNAP data in a given calendar

32 This value will overestimate self-employment income, because unemployment compensation, taxable retirement

income/pensions, and alimony estimates were not subtracted from total money income.

                                                            45
                    year in 2010, we report the share who received benefits according to the admin
                    SNAP data. We also estimate the mean value of SNAP benefits and mean months
                    of SNAP receipt among recipients for each year from 2006-2016.
Share receiving     We report the share of individuals receiving Medicare Part A or B according to
Medicare Part A     our administrative datasets from 2006-2016. We also report the share of adults
or B                receiving Medicare due to DI and the share receiving Medicare due to OASI.
Share enrolled in   We report the share of individuals enrolled in Medicaid from 2007-2015. In 2014-
Medicaid            2015, our Medicaid data no longer cover all states, so we report Medicaid receipt
                    only among individuals who were living in states for which we have Medicaid
                    data in 2014-2015 in their corresponding survey year. Depending on migration
                    patterns into and out of Medicaid states, this could result in an over- or under-
                    estimate of the true share receiving Medicaid in these years.
Share receiving     Among individuals who lived in a state for which we have SNAP data in a given
any benefits        year in their survey year, we report the share linking to SNAP, HUD PIC and
                    TRACS, VA, Medicare, or Medicaid datasets from 2007-2015.
Share receiving     We define earnings as the sum of wage and salary income and positive estimated
any earnings        self-employment income on a 1040, plus deferred compensation from any linked
                    W2s minus any PIKed cofiler's W2 wages and tips. When an individual does not
                    file a 1040, we define earnings as W2 wages and tips plus deferred compensation.
                    For individuals who do not file a 1040 or receive a W2, earnings are zero.
Earnings            We define earnings as the sum of wage and salary income and positive estimated
                    self-employment income on a 1040, plus deferred compensation from any linked
                    W2s minus any PIKed cofiler's W2 wages and tips. When an individual does not
                    file a 1040, we define earnings as W2 wages and tips plus deferred compensation.
                    For individuals who do not file a 1040 or receive a W2, earnings are zero.
Pre-tax income      Pre-tax income is reported for 2005-2015 as total money income, when an
                    individual files as 1040. If an individual does not file a 1040, it is the sum of W2
                    wages and tips, deferred compensation, 1099-R IRA and employer sponsored
                    retirement distributions. For those without a 1040, W-2, and 1099-R, pretax
                    income is set to zero.
Pre-tax income      This is the sum of pretax income, defined above, plus the annualized value of
and in-kind         SNAP for individuals who reside in a state for which we have SNAP data in a
transfers           given year, in their year of survey. We report the mean, 25th, 50th, and 75th
                    percentile for each year from 2006-2015.




                                                 46
     11. Tables and Figures
                  Table 1: Description of 2010 Census Service-Based Enumeration (SBE) Locations

Category                  Sheltered Locations                                      Unsheltered Locations
Group                                                                                   Regularly             Targeted Non-
                                         Transitional
Quarters       Emergency Shelters                              Soup Kitchens        Scheduled Mobile        Sheltered Outdoor
                                           Shelters
(GQ) Type                                                                              Food Vans            Locations (TNSOLs)
               First-come, first-                                                                          Geographically
                                                                                   Mobile food vans
               served shelters       Shelters providing     Soup kitchens, food                            identifiable outdoor
                                                                                   that that regularly
               typically requiring   transitional housing   lines, and programs                            locations, open to
                                                                                   visit designated
               people to leave in    programs for up to     for distributing                               the elements,
Description                                                                        locations to provide
               the morning           two years and          prepared                                       where people
                                                                                   food to people
               without a             including support      breakfasts, lunches,                           might be living
                                                                                   experiencing
               guaranteed bed the    services.              or dinners.                                    without paying to
                                                                                   homelessness.
               following night.                                                                            stay there.
                                                                                                           Includes car, RV,
               Missions; hotels      Missions; hotels       Food service lines;                            and tent
               and motels on         and motels on          bag or box lunch                               encampments;
                                                                                   Each stop of a van
               contract to provide   contract to provide    services. May or                               does not include
Examples                                                                           meeting the above
               housing to people     housing to people      may not have a                                 pay-for-use
                                                                                   description.
               experiencing          experiencing           place to sit and eat                           campgrounds or
               homelessness          homelessness           a meal.                                        commercial sites
                                                                                                           (e.g. diners)
Sources: Russell and Barrett (2012); Smith, Homberg, and Jones-Puthoff (2012)




                                                            47
                                          Table 2: Comparison of Data Sources
                                                              HMIS Aggregated
                    2010 Decennial              ACS                                 HMIS Micro-Data       HUD Point-in-Time
                                                                     Data
                                        National ­ based     National ­ Shelters   Shelters w/ federal
                                                                                                          National. Includes
Coverage          National              on Decennial         receiving federal     funding; currently
                                                                                                          domestic violence.
                                        shelter list.        funding.              L.A. and Houston
Inclusion of
                  Yes                   No                   No                    No                     Yes
Unsheltered
                                                                                   2004-2014 (L.A.)
Years             2010                  2006-2016            2007-2018             2004-2015              2007-2018
                                                                                   (Houston)
                                        Publicly available                         Some CoCs publish
                  Aggregate data is                          Aggregate data is                            Aggregate data is
Public                                  data do not                                local reports.
                  available in Census                        in HUD's AHAR                                in HUD's AHAR
Availability                            identify the                               Micro-data
                  Special Report.                            report to Congress.                          report to Congress.
                                        homeless.                                  restricted.
Ability to Link   Yes                   Yes                  No                    Yes                    No (no PII)
                                                                                   All shelter users in   One night typically
                  Conducted March       Throughout the       October-
Seasonality                                                                        the given time         in January; varies
                  29-31, 2010           year                 September
                                                                                   frame                  by year
                                        Called "period
                  Cross-section of      estimates" by the    Anyone who            Anyone who             Cross-section of
                  individuals           Census;              experienced           experienced            individuals
Time Frame
                  experiencing          approximately        homelessness in a     homelessness in a      experiencing
                  homelessness          point-in-time        given time period     given time period      homelessness
                                        estimates
                  Subjects asked
                                                                                   Data quality issues    Methodology
                  whether they had      Post-2010, whole     Extrapolates to
                                                                                   include incomplete     varies by CoC using
Methodology       usual home            person records       non-HMIS shelters
                                                                                   reporting of shelter   a variety of HUD-
Notes             elsewhere; de-        imputed into not-    to form national
                                                                                   spell start/end        approved
                  duplication           in-sample GQs.       estimates.
                                                                                   dates.                 methods.
                  attempted.
                  Unsheltered           Uses MAF as basis                          Ratio of HMIS-
                  counts may not be     for sampling.        Only federally        covered beds to
                                                                                                          PIT counts are run
                  complete (see         Frame expanded       funded shelters       total beds varies by
Representative-                                                                                           by local CoCs.
                  2010 Census           after 2010           required to report;   year and CoC;
ness                                                                                                      Quality of count
                  Special Report).      Decennial. Doesn't   some shelters         median coverage
                                                                                                          may vary by CoC.
                  Doesn't include all   include all HMIS     report voluntarily.   rate 80-85% in
                  HMIS shelters.        shelters.                                  most years.




                                                             48
                                     Table 3: Homeless Counts in Restricted Census Bureau and Public HUD Datasets, 2006-2018
ACS Sheltered Homeless               162,700    208,200      200,600      200,200    165,400          290,000   263,700     283,900     267,900     262,300     272,900
   SE                                (2,189)    (2,050)     (14,370)     (13,460)    (8,951)          (5,187)   (4,971)     (4,920)     (4,167)     (4,613)     (4,337)
Decennial Sheltered Homeless                                                         209,000
Decennial Soup Kitchen                                                               162,000
Decennial Food Van                                                                    11,500
Decennial TNSOL                                                                       36,500
Decennial Unsheltered Homeless                                                       210,000
Total Decennial Homeless                                                             420,000
HUD PIT Sheltered Homeless*                      391,401     386,361     403,308      403,543      392,316       390,155     394,698     401,051     391,440     373,571     360,867    358,363
HUD PIT Unsheltered Homeless*                    255,857     253,423     226,919      233,534      231,472       231,398     195,666     175,399     173,268     176,357     190,129    194,467
Total HUD PIT Homeless*                          647,258     639,784     630,227      637,077      623,788       621,553     590,364     576,450     564,708     549,928     550,996    552,830
HMIS One-Year Estimate of                       1,588,595   1,593,794   1,558,917    1,593,150    1,502,196     1,488,371   1,422,360   1,488,465   1,484,576   1,421,196   1,416,908
Sheltered Homeless*

Sources: 2007-2018 Annual Homelessness Assessment Reports, U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2010 Decennial Census
Note: Table reports the count of sheltered and unsheltered homeless individuals according to the HUD PIT, HMIS One-Year estimates, and 2010 Decennial Census. The total weighted count of
ACS sheltered homeless individuals in the 2006-2016 ACS is also reported. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS,
visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004, CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004, and CBDRB-FY21-
ERD002-19.
*Indicates data obtained from public sources.




                                                                                                 49
      Table 4: Race and Ethnicity of Sheltered Homeless in Restricted Census Bureau and Public HUD Datasets
                   2006    2007                   2008         2009         2010         2011         2012         2013         2014         2015         2016
White
    ACS           0.446    0.487                 0.461        0.437        0.470        0.417        0.382         0.377        0.385        0.397        0.430
      ACS SE     (0.010)  (0.011)               (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.025)      (0.036)      (0.028)       (0.027)      (0.024)      (0.022)      (0.024)
    Decennial                                                              0.448
    HMIS*¹                 0.567                 0.495        0.496        0.513         0.485        0.484        0.476        0.502        0.549        0.539
Black
    ACS           0.438    0.360                 0.417        0.421        0.406        0.437        0.468         0.458        0.465        0.489        0.454
      ACS SE     (0.011)  (0.012)               (0.026)      (0.025)      (0.020)      (0.031)      (0.026)       (0.025)      (0.021)      (0.023)      (0.027)
    Decennial                                                              0.408
    HMIS*                  0.332                 0.417        0.387        0.370         0.381        0.394        0.418        0.406        0.372        0.380
Asian
    ACS           0.013    0.015                 0.020        0.012        0.018        0.007         0.012        0.019        0.018        0.014        0.018
      ACS SE     (0.003)  (0.004)               (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.006)
    Decennial                                                              0.019
    HMIS*                  0.006                 0.008        0.007        0.007         0.007        0.008        0.008        0.008        0.008        0.009
Am. Indian/Pac. Islander
    ACS           0.046    0.046                 0.033        0.040        0.032        0.031         0.045        0.040        0.050        0.030        0.038
      ACS SE     (0.004)  (0.004)               (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.008)
    Decennial                                                              0.030
    HMIS*                  0.023                 0.026        0.039        0.038         0.048        0.042        0.033        0.036        0.036        0.034
Other Race
    ACS            0.067   0.093                 0.068        0.090        0.074        0.108         0.093        0.106        0.083        0.070        0.060
      ACS SE     (0.005)  (0.008)               (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.011)      (0.022)       (0.020)      (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.012)      (0.013)
    Decennial                                                              0.051
    HMIS*                    ---                   ---          ---          ---           ---          ---          ---          ---          ---          ---
Multiple Races
    ACS              ---     ---                   ---          ---           ---          ---          ---          ---          ---          ---          ---
      ACS SE         ---     ---                   ---          ---           ---          ---          ---          ---          ---          ---          ---
    Decennial                                                               0.042
    HMIS*                  0.073                 0.054        0.071         0.072        0.079        0.072        0.065        0.048        0.035        0.038
Hispanic
    ACS            0.157   0.176                 0.181        0.155        0.170        0.204         0.190        0.199        0.203        0.195        0.224
      ACS SE     (0.007)  (0.009)               (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.020)       (0.016)      (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.024)
    Decennial                                                              0.179
    HMIS*                  0.216                 0.195         0.195       0.164         0.156        0.163        0.164        0.158        0.128        0.125
Total
    ACS          162,700 208,200                200,600       200,200
                                                                    165,400 290,000 263,700 283,900 267,900 262,300 272,900
      ACS SE     (2,189)  (2,050)              (14,370)      (13,460)
                                                                    (8,951)   (5,187)   (4,971)   (4,920)   (4,167)   (4,613)   (4,337)
    Decennial                                                       209,000
    HMIS*                1,588,595             1,593,794 1,558,917 1,593,150 1,502,196 1,488,371 1,422,360 1,488,465 1,484,576 1,421,196
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2010 Decennial Census, 2007-2016 Annual Homelessness Assessment Reports
to Congress One-Year Estimates of Sheltered Homelessness
Note: Table reports, by survey and survey year, the share of sheltered homeless individuals identifying as a given race, regardless of whether they identify as
Hispanic. The total counts of sheltered homeless individuals in each survey and survey year are reported in the bottom rows of the table. The ACS counts are
weighted using survey weights prior to 2011. From 2011 onwards, the Census implemented a new group quarters (GQ) estimation methodology, whereby whole
person records taken from the interviewed sample were imputed into not-in-sample GQs. For 2011-2016 ACS characteristics, we include only non-imputed ACS
records, which are scaled up by a constant such that the new weighted count of non-imputed observations is equal to the old weighted sum of imputed and non-
imputed records. Standard errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and
definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004,
CBDRB-FY21-ERD002-19, and CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹From 2010-2016 HMIS, one year estimates of the share of sheltered homeless who are white are computed by subtracting the share of sheltered homeless
individuals who are black, Asian, Native American/Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, or multiple races from one. The share of sheltered homeless
individuals who were white was not directly reported in the AHAR for these years, but should include those who identify as white, Hispanic and white, Non-
*Indicates data obtained from publicly available sources.

                                                                                50
     Table 5: Age and Gender of Sheltered Homeless in Restricted Census Bureau and Public HUD Datasets
                     2006         2007          2008         2009         2010         2011          2012         2013         2014         2015         2016
Under Age 18
    ACS              0.178        0.189        0.159         0.131        0.153        0.135        0.104        0.133        0.158         0.128        0.122
      ACS SE        (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.022)       (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.026)      (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.026)       (0.027)      (0.020)
    Decennial                                                             0.202
    HMIS*                         0.214        0.204         0.222        0.218        0.221        0.226         0.222        0.223        0.223        0.223
18-30
    ACS              0.155        0.198        0.199         0.183        0.209        0.198        0.206        0.188         0.170        0.185        0.194
      ACS SE        (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.018)       (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.015)       (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.017)
    Decennial                                                             0.184
    HMIS*                         0.202        0.225         0.223        0.235        0.238        0.235         0.229        0.228        0.224        0.220
31-50
    ACS              0.453        0.367        0.398         0.435        0.352        0.397        0.386        0.369         0.355        0.367        0.332
      ACS SE        (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.020)       (0.019)      (0.015)      (0.022)      (0.018)      (0.022)       (0.015)      (0.021)      (0.019)
    Decennial                                                             0.368
    HMIS*                         0.405        0.403         0.383        0.370        0.358        0.350         0.346        0.342        0.338        0.333
51-61
    ACS              0.171        0.199        0.199         0.201        0.230        0.221        0.249        0.246         0.257        0.247        0.266
      ACS SE        (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.016)      (0.018)      (0.020)      (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.021)      (0.017)      (0.020)
    Decennial                                                             0.201
    HMIS*                         0.134         0.140        0.144        0.149        0.155        0.156         0.168        0.170        0.172        0.177
62 and Older
    ACS              0.044        0.047        0.043         0.050        0.055        0.049        0.055        0.065         0.061        0.073        0.085
      ACS SE        (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.010)       (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.010)
    Decennial                                                             0.045
    HMIS*                         0.029         0.028        0.028        0.028        0.029        0.032         0.035        0.038        0.042        0.047
Male
    ACS              0.616        0.574        0.636         0.631        0.621        0.612        0.636        0.597         0.603        0.626        0.606
      ACS SE        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.034)      (0.025)      (0.032)       (0.027)      (0.028)      (0.025)
    Decennial                                                             0.621
    HMIS*¹                        0.653         0.640        0.637        0.623        0.628        0.632         0.634        0.623        0.621        0.629
Female
    ACS              0.384        0.426        0.364         0.369        0.379        0.388        0.364        0.403         0.397        0.374        0.394
      ACS SE        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.028)       (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.034)      (0.025)      (0.032)       (0.027)      (0.028)      (0.025)
    Decennial                                                             0.379
    HMIS*                         0.347         0.360        0.363        0.377        0.372        0.368         0.366        0.377        0.379        0.371
Total
    ACS             162,700      208,200       200,600       200,200
                                                               165,400 290,000 263,700 283,900 267,900 262,300 272,900
      ACS SE        (2,189)      (2,050)      (14,370)      (13,460)
                                                               (8,951)   (5,187)   (4,971)   (4,920)   (4,167)   (4,613)   (4,337)
    Decennial                                                  209,000
    HMIS                        1,588,595 1,593,794 1,558,917 1,593,150 1,502,196 1,488,371 1,422,360 1,488,465 1,484,576 1,421,196
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 ACS 1-year data, 2010 Decennial Census, 2007-2016 Annual Homelessness Assessment Report HMIS One-Year
Estimates of Homelessness
Note: Table displays the share of sheltered homeless individuals in the 2006-2016 ACS and 2010 Decennial Census who fall into a given age or gender category.
Age categories in the ACS and Decennial are selected to correspond with publicly available HMIS age distributions. The HMIS estimates report the share of
                                                                 st              th
individuals at first shelter entry in a given year from October 1 to September 30 of the designated year in a given age category. The HMIS only reports the
distribution of genders for sheltered homeless adults over a one year period. The HMIS only reports gender distributions for homeless adults; these shares exclude
children. The HMIS reports one year estimates by age and gender for the preceding one year period beginning October 1st of the preceeding year and ending
September 30th of the designated year. Total counts of sheltered homeless individuals are reported in final rows. The ACS counts are weighted using survey
weights prior to 2011. From 2011 onwards, a new group quarters (GQ) estimation methodology was implemented, whereby whole person records taken from the
interviewed sample were imputed into not-in-sample GQs. For 2011-2016 ACS characteristics, we include only non-imputed ACS records, which are scaled up by
a constant such that the new weighted count of non-imputed observations is equal to the old weighted sum of imputed and non-imputed records. Standard errors
are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit
www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004, CBDRB-FY21-ERD002-
19, and CBDRB-FY21-045.
*Indicates data obtained from publicly available sources.

                                                                               51
                   Table 6: Demographic Characteristics of Unsheltered Homeless, 2010 Decennial Census
                                                                                                 Targeted Non-Sheltered
                                                                    Regularly Scheduled
                                      Soup Kitchens                                                Outdoor Locations                           Total
                                                                     Mobile Food Vans
                                                                                                       (TNSOLs)
Total                                  162,000                          11,500                          36,500                           210,000
Age
  Under 18                              13,500            8.4%           1,000           8.7%            3,800          10.3%              18,500              8.8%
  18 to 30                              25,000           15.5%           2,000          17.4%            6,400          17.4%              33,500             16.0%
  31 to 50                              68,000           41.9%           4,900          42.3%           16,000          43.5%              88,500             42.1%
  51 to 61                              39,500           24.3%           2,500          21.1%            8,100          22.1%              50,000             23.8%
  62 or Older                           16,000           10.0%           1,200          10.5%            2,400           6.7%              20,000              9.5%
Sex
  Female                                48,000           29.6%           3,600          31.3%            9,500          26.0%             61,000              29.0%
  Male                                 114,000           70.4%           8,000          69.6%           27,000          74.0%            149,000              71.0%
Ethnicity
  Hispanic                              28,500           17.6%           2,600          22.6%            6,500          17.8%             37,500              17.9%
  Non-Hispanic                         133,000           82.1%           9,100          79.1%           30,500          83.6%            173,000              82.4%
Race
  White                                 85,000           52.5%           6,600          57.4%           19,500          53.4%            111,000              52.9%
  Black                                 57,000           35.2%           2,900          25.2%           11,500          31.5%             71,000              33.8%
  Native Am/Pac Islander                 5,600            3.5%             400           3.6%            1,200           3.3%              7,200               3.4%
  Asian                                  3,000            1.9%             450           3.9%            1,100           3.0%              4,700               2.2%
  Some other race                        7,000            4.3%             800           7.0%            2,200           6.0%             10,000               4.8%
  Multiple races                         4,600            2.8%             450           3.9%            1,200           3.3%              6,300               3.0%
PIK Status
  PIKed                                 67,500           41.7%           4,900          42.6%            6,500          17.8%             79,000              37.6%
  unPIKed                               94,000           58.0%           6,700          58.3%           30,500          83.6%            131,000              62.4%
Source: 2010 Decennial Census
Note: Table displays the count and share of individuals enumerated in soup kitchens, regularly scheduled mobile food vans, and targeted non-sheltered outdoor
locations (TNSOLs) in the 2010 Decennial Census by demographic characteristic. The total number of individuals enumerated in each group quarter category in the
2010 Decennial is provided in the first row. Shares in some categories will not sum to one due to Census Bureau rounding requirements. All results were approved for
release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.




                                                                                 52
                   Table 7: Sheltered Homeless Characteristics Across Census Bureau Datasets
                                                                       HMIS Person-Weighted       HMIS Day-Weighted
                  ACS (Pooled 2006-2016)       Decennial (2010)      (Pooled 2004-2014 for LA, (Pooled 2004-2014 for LA,
                                                                       2004-2015 for Houston)    2004-2015 for Houston)

Los Angeles
          White                  0.365              0.359                       0.432                   0.422
          Black                  0.483              0.454                       0.468                   0.480
  Under Age 18                   0.045              0.124                       0.129                   0.135
        Female                   0.318              0.359                       0.343                   0.357
       Hispanic                  0.232              0.256                       0.294                   0.299
          Total               148,000              9,500                     202,000                 202,000
Houston
          White                  0.427              0.381                       0.351                   0.340
          Black                  0.539              0.549                       0.604                   0.630
  Under Age 18                   0.084              0.176                       0.207                   0.255
        Female                   0.317              0.350                       0.402                   0.489
       Hispanic                  0.085              0.123                       0.122                   0.111
          Total                28,000              3,700                      89,000                  89,000
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2010 Decennial Census, 2004-
2015 Houston CoC HMIS Data
Note: ACS data is subject to error. The Los Angeles CoC covers LA county excluding Pasadena, Long Beach, and
Glendale. The Houston CoC includes Houston, Harris, Fort Bend, and Montgomery counties. The total counts of
sheltered homeless individuals in each CoC are reported in the bottom rows of the table. We restrict the HMIS data to
emergency and transitional shelters, and we drop HMIS observations with no entry date, no exit date, or neither. HMIS
day-weighted characteristics are computed by weighting each person appearing in an HMIS shelter in a given year by
the number of days the individual spent in the shelter that year. When the entry date equals the exit date we count these
as one-day spells. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and
definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.




                                                           53
                                                 Table 8: Unweighted Homeless PIK Rates Across Census Bureau Datasets (2004-2016)
                                               2004          2005          2006          2007          2008           2009          2010          2011          2012          2013          2014          2015          2016
ACS Sheltered Homeless                                                 0.760        0.736       0.699       0.726        0.827        0.772      0.763                        0.774         0.790         0.779         0.750
Decennial Sheltered Homeless                                                                                             0.686
Decennial Soup Kitchen                                                                                                   0.418
Decennial Food Van                                                                                                       0.424
Decennial TNSOL                                                                                                          0.172
Houston HMIS Sheltered Homeless¹           0.800         0.949         0.979        0.967       0.955       0.956        0.955        0.961      0.962                        0.965         0.965
Los Angeles HMIS Sheltered Homeless²       1.000         0.895         0.939        0.945       0.870       0.861        0.879        0.906      0.922                        0.923         0.925
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 ACS 1-year data, 2010 Decennial Census, 2004-2014 Los Angeles CoC HMIS Data, 2004-2014 Houston CoC HMIS Data
Note: Table reports the unweighted shares of sheltered and unsheltered homeless individuals who are PIKed in the 2006-2016 ACS and Decennial Census by GQ type. The shares of non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals who
are PIKed are reported from 2011-2016. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the
Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.
¹Houston Housing Management Information System (HMIS) data contains demographic and shelter use information for individuals who visited an emergency or transitional shelter (but not those in permanent supportive housing or
service-only programs) in the Houston CoC in years 2004-2015. The Houston CoC encompasses shelters in Houston, Harris, Fort Bend, and Montgomery Counties.
²Los Angeles Housing Management Information System (HMIS) data contains demographic and shelter use information for individuals who visited an emergency or transitional shelter (but not those in permanent supportive housing
or service-only programs) in the Los Angeles CoC in years 2004-2015. The Los Angeles CoC encompasses shelters in Los Angeles excluding Glendale, Long Beach, and Pasadena.




                                                                                                               54
             Table 9a: Survey Summary Statistics for Sheltered Homeless Adults by Whether PIKed in ACS
                                                                                PIKed Homeless Adults                                unPIKed Homeless Adults                    Difference in Means

                                                                                   Mean for Non-         Share of                         Mean for Non-   Share of             PIKed ­ unPIKed (All
                                                                  Mean for All       Imputed           Responses Not      Mean for All      Imputed     Responses Not              Responses)
                                                                   Responses        Responses            Imputed           Responses       Responses      Imputed


Demographic Characteristics
Age (Years)                                                          43.76              43.75             0.99              41.39           41.26               0.96                    2.38 ***
Male (%)                                                             64.35              64.36             1.00              58.27           58.39               0.99                    6.08 ***
Race (%)
       White                                                         45.65              48.53             0.94              41.01           45.45               0.90                    4.64 ***
       Black                                                         43.11              45.92             0.94              44.50           49.32               0.90                   -1.40
       Native American                                                2.77               2.92             0.94               2.09            2.17               0.90                    0.68 *
       Asian                                                          1.42               1.50             0.94               1.98            2.19               0.90                   -0.57 *
       Other                                                          7.06               1.13             0.94              10.41            0.87               0.90                   -3.36 ***
Hispanic (%)                                                         14.56              13.83             0.98              23.00           22.01               0.97                   -8.44 ***
Place of Birth (%)
       Born in Current State                                         52.86              51.23             0.89              50.18           45.46               0.74                    2.69 *
       Born in Different US State                                    37.57              38.79             0.89              27.65           27.78               0.74                    9.92 ***
       Born Outside US                                                9.56               9.98             0.89              22.17           26.76               0.74                 -12.62 ***
Years of Education¹ (%)
       Primary                                                        5.70               5.54             0.91               8.19            8.73               0.72                   -2.49 ***
       Less than High School                                         33.91              33.33             0.91              34.16           33.85               0.72                   -0.25
       High School                                                   30.08              30.14             0.91              32.96           32.32               0.72                   -2.89 **
       Some College                                                  25.27              25.95             0.91              19.87           19.84               0.72                    5.41 ***
       College Graduate                                               5.04               5.04             0.91               4.82            5.26               0.72                    0.22
Marital Status (%)
       Married                                                        9.59               9.43             0.94               9.70            9.59               0.80                   -0.10
       Divorced                                                      23.30              23.45             0.94              17.46           18.13               0.80                    5.84 ***
       Separated                                                      8.25               8.29             0.94               7.71            7.52               0.80                    0.54
       Widowed                                                        3.45               3.41             0.94               3.44            3.60               0.80                    0.01
       Never Married                                                 55.41              55.42             0.94              61.70           61.16               0.80                   -6.29 ***
Mean Number of Times Married                                          0.52               0.56             0.82               0.40            0.35               0.75                    0.11 ***
Veteran (%)                                                          12.28              12.04             0.94               9.27            8.69               0.81                    3.01 ***
Has VA Disability Rating (%)                                          1.55               1.66             0.86               1.39            1.19               0.86                    0.17
Difficulty Remembering or Making Decisions (%)                       25.90              25.93             0.95              19.61           18.83               0.81                    6.28 ***
Difficulty Dressing or Bathing (%)                                    4.71               4.67             0.95               3.93            4.12               0.82                    0.78
Difficulty Walking or Climbing Stairs (%)                            21.76              21.66             0.95              16.23           15.83               0.82                    5.53 ***
Difficulty Doing Errands Alone (%)                                    8.92               8.85             0.95               7.76            7.75               0.82                    1.16 *
Employment & Program Participation
Worked in Past Year (%)                                              42.88              42.63             0.91              35.42           34.11               0.76                    7.46 ***
       Mean Wks Worked in Past 12 Mos Cond. on Work                  28.54              27.75             0.94              29.80           28.43               0.87                   -1.26 *
       Mean Hrs Worked Per Weekk Conditional on Work                 33.23              33.22             0.94              33.46           33.21               0.87                   -0.24
Benefit Receipt Rates and Amounts
Reported Amount of Employment Income² (%)                            42.84              35.86             0.77              35.42           25.85               0.62                    7.41 ***
       Mean Amount Conditional on Receipt ($)²                      $11,200            $9,112             0.77             $12,560         $10,880              0.62                -$1,359
Retirement or Pension Income Receipt Rate (%)                          2.42              2.04             0.91               1.91            1.25               0.99                    0.52
       Mean Amount Conditional on Receipt ($)                        $9,170            $8,785             0.91             $10,300         $10,810              0.72                -$1,133
Medicaid Receipt Rate (%)                                             46.67             50.71             0.77              47.60           49.45               0.64                   -0.92
Food Stamp Receipt Rate (?%)                                          62.54             62.09             0.91              53.43           50.66               0.76                    9.11 ***
SSI Receipt Rate (%)                                                  11.42              8.75             0.89               9.44            3.99               0.94                    1.99 **
       Mean Amount Conditional on Receipt ($)                        $7,815            $7,951             0.89              $8,062          $8,235              0.71              -$247.60
Public Assistance Receipt Rate (%)                                    18.56             16.21             0.88               21.19           11.76              0.89                   -2.63 **
       Mean Public Assistance Amount ($)                             $2,566            $2,570             0.88              $2,964          $3,138              0.89              -$398.10 *
Received Any Transfer Income (%)                                      28.85             24.38             0.83               57.74           49.98              0.84                 -28.89 ***
Received Any Retirement or Employment Income (%)                      44.79             38.10             0.76               37.08           27.56              0.62                    7.71 ***
Other Income Receipt³ (%)                                              9.30              5.82             0.87                7.32            3.56              0.70                    1.97 ***
       Mean Amount Conditional on Receipt ($)                        $5,640            $5,300             0.87              $6,306          $4,881              0.70                  -$666
Any Income Receipt (%)                                                76.43             70.50             0.68              68.84           55.63               0.52                    7.59 ***
       Mean Amount Conditional on Receipt ($)                       $10,170            $8,843             0.68             $10,650         $9,379               0.52              -$478.10
Sample Size (N)                                                                          21,500                                               6,100
ACS Weighted Count                                                                     1,759,000                                            489,100
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data
Note: Table displays means and weighted shares of ACS variables for PIKed and unPIKed non-imputed adult sheltered homeless individuals in the 2006-2016 ACS. Missing values were recoded as
zeros, because all missing values were coded as as non-imputed responses. Conditional shares and means are provided in indented row below overall receipt rates. Far right column displays difference
between PIKed and unPIKed variable mean for all responses. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit
www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.
¹"Primary school" includes those with up to and including 8 years of schooling. "Less than high school" includes those with more than 8 years of schooling, but no high school diploma or equivalent.
"High school" includes those with a high school diploma or equivalent. "Some college" includes those with more than a high school education, but less than a 4 year college degree. Those with
associates degrees would fall in this category. "College" includes those with a 4 year college degree or more.
²Employment Income includes income from wages and salaries or self employment income.
³Other income includes regular sources of income from sources excepting wages, salaries, bonuses, and tips from employment, self-employment income, interest, dividends, net rental income, royalty
income, estate income, Social Security or Railroad Retirement income, Supplemental Security income, public assistance or welfare, and retirement, survivor, or disability pensions. This includes VA
payments, unemployment compensation, and child support or alimony.
* p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001


                                                                                                  55
Table 9b: Descriptive Statistics for Sheltered Homeless in 2010 Decennial Census by PIK Status
                               UnPIKed                      PIKed                     PIKed-UnPIKed
                                    Percent                      Percent
                        Mean                          Mean                      Difference      Significance
                                    Imputed                     Imputed
Age (%)                               33.87                        3.29
   0-17                  25.42                        19.85                        -5.57            ***
   18-24                  8.81                        10.07                         1.27            ***
   25-39                 21.66                        21.43                        -0.23
   40-49                 19.87                        21.37                        1.50             ***
   50-64                 22.01                        24.89                        2.88             ***
   65 or older            2.22                         2.38                        0.16              *
Sex (%)                                7.03                        2.69
   Female                36.74                        38.37                         1.63            ***
   Male                  63.26                        61.63                        -1.63            ***
Race (%)                              21.80                       13.19
   White                 43.86                        45.90                         2.04            ***
   Black                 45.14                        40.83                        -4.31            ***
   Asian                 1.79                          1.78                        -0.01
   Native American       1.96                          2.55                         0.60            ***
   Pacific Islander      0.62                          0.84                         0.22            ***
   Other                 3.68                          3.37                        -0.31             **
   Multiple Races        2.96                          4.74                        1.78             ***
Hispanic                21.45         29.03           16.95       16.23            -4.50            ***
Total Count             65,500                       144,000
Source: 2010 Decennial Census
Note: Table displays the share of sheltered homeless individuals who have a non-imputed given demographic
characteristic, by PIK status. The total count of PIKed and unPIKed homeless individuals in the 2010 Decennial
Census is reported at the bottom of the table. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.
* p<.05 **p<.01 ***p<.001




                                                      56
Table 9c: Descriptive Statistics for Unsheltered Homeless in 2010 Decennial Census by PIK Status
                                  UnPIKed                       PIKed                   PIKed-UnPIKed
                                          Percent                      Percent
                            Mean                         Mean                      Difference Significance
                                          Imputed                     Imputed
Age (%)                                    55.62                         3.28
   0-17                      7.30                          7.83                        0.53            ***
   18-24                     6.67                          7.61                        0.94            ***
   25-39                    25.24                         19.75                       -5.49            ***
   40-49                    24.97                         25.26                        0.29
   50-64                    29.29                         32.07                        2.78            ***
   65 or older               6.52                          7.47                        0.95            ***
Sex (%)                                     9.48                         2.62
   Female                   26.53                         31.51                        4.98            ***
   Male                     73.47                         68.49                       -4.98            ***
Race (%)                                   23.29                         6.34
   White                    51.97                         52.66                        0.69             **
   Black                    38.30                         32.85                       -5.45            ***
   Asian                     2.07                          2.21                        0.14             *
   Native American           2.39                          4.17                        1.78            ***
   Pacific Islander          0.48                          0.46                       -0.03
   Other                     2.99                          3.50                        0.51            ***
   Multiple Races            1.80                          4.15                        2.35            ***
Hispanic                    21.60          32.48          16.88          8.04         -4.73            ***
Total Count                131,000                       79,000
Source: 2010 Decennial Census
Note: Table displays the share of shelter homeless individuals who have a non-imputed given demographic
characteristic, by PIK status. The total count of PIKed and unPIKed homeless individuals in the 2010
Decennial Census is reported at the bottom of the table. All results were approved for release by the Census
Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.
* p<.05 **p<.01 ***p<.001




                                                     57
        Table 10a: Demographic Characteristics of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups, 2006-2010 ACS
                                                                                                                 Single Poor Housed (Non-           Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                    Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                     Group Quarters)                    Quarters)

                                                                                     Mean             SE             Mean             SE             Mean             SE
Demographic Characteristics--All Ages
Age (Years)
    Mean Age                                                                         36.89           (0.36)          29.82           (0.15)         36.85            (0.03)
    <5                                                                               6.08            (0.32)          13.00           (0.27)         7.03             (0.04)
    5-17                                                                             10.11           (0.57)          25.29           (0.26)         17.83            (0.07)
    18-24                                                                            9.80            (0.43)          12.20           (0.21)         9.22             (0.05)
    25-44                                                                            34.46           (0.65)          22.66           (0.26)         27.38            (0.07)
    45-64                                                                            36.48           (0.73)          16.93           (0.23)         26.02            (0.06)
    >64                                                                              3.08            (0.29)          9.93            (0.18)         12.52            (0.05)
Male (%)                                                                             61.42           (1.07)          39.59           (0.29)         48.94            (0.07)
Race (%)
    White                                                                            46.07           (0.97)          55.48           (0.28)          75.61           (0.07)
    Black                                                                            40.73           (0.84)          30.62           (0.27)          12.48           (0.06)
    American Indian/Alaskan Native                                                   3.34            (0.23)          2.17            (0.08)          1.14            (0.02)
    Asian                                                                            1.55            (0.16)          2.43            (0.09)          4.81            (0.03)
    Other                                                                            8.31            (0.48)          9.30            (0.18)          5.96            (0.05)
Hispanic (%)                                                                         16.64           (0.58)          23.78           (0.26)          16.11           (0.06)
Place of Birth (%)
    Born in Current State                                                            54.69           (0.84)          66.82           (0.34)          58.96           (0.09)
    Born in Different US State                                                       37.56           (0.89)          21.28           (0.28)          27.40           (0.07)
    Born Abroad                                                                      7.75            (0.34)          11.90           (0.19)          13.64           (0.06)
Mobility (%)
    Lived in Different State One Year Ago                                            12.64           (0.45)          2.50            (0.10)          2.17            (0.03)
    Lived in Different Region One Year Ago                                           6.66            (0.25)          1.14            (0.07)          1.12            (0.02)
    Lived Abroad One Year Ago                                                        0.76            (0.08)          0.62            (0.05)          0.54            (0.01)
Rural (%)                                                                            3.72            (0.41)          17.61           (0.22)          23.35           (0.08)
Citizenship (%)
    Non-Citizen                                                                      4.88            (0.24)          7.90            (0.18)          7.33            (0.05)
    Naturalized                                                                      2.24            (0.23)          3.41            (0.11)          5.55            (0.04)
Total Sample Size                                                                   12,000                          37,000                         547,000
Weighted Count                                                                      935,100                        3,006,000                      36,970,000
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2010 American Community Survey 1-year data
Notes: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among sheltered homeless individuals and members of comparison
groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Standard errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling
error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-
FY21-045.




                                                                                      58
        Table 10b: Demographic Characteristics of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups, 2011-2018 ACS
                                                                                                                Single Poor Housed (Non-            Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                    Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                    Group Quarters)                     Quarters)

                                                                                     Mean             SE             Mean             SE            Mean              SE
Demographic Characteristics--All Ages
Age (Years)
    Mean Age                                                                        39.16            (0.40)         30.75            (0.13)         38.18           (0.03)
    <5                                                                              4.46             (0.32)         11.74            (0.18)         6.35            (0.04)
    5-17                                                                            8.11             (0.62)         25.88            (0.28)         17.16           (0.07)
    18-24                                                                           8.39             (0.44)         10.96            (0.21)         8.97            (0.06)
    25-44                                                                           34.77            (0.83)         22.48            (0.28)         26.55           (0.08)
    45-64                                                                           40.20            (0.89)         18.95            (0.25)         26.38           (0.08)
    >64                                                                             4.07             (0.25)         9.99             (0.19)         14.59           (0.05)
Male (%)                                                                            60.45            (0.98)         40.99            (0.35)         48.99           (0.09)
Race (%)
    White                                                                            39.55           (0.89)         56.99            (0.37)         74.93           (0.08)
    Black                                                                            46.82           (0.89)         29.65            (0.34)         12.89           (0.06)
    American Indian/Alaskan Native                                                   2.40            (0.19)         2.07             (0.08)         1.13            (0.02)
    Asian                                                                            1.75            (0.28)         2.75             (0.11)         5.70            (0.04)
    Other                                                                            9.48            (0.60)         8.53             (0.21)         5.34            (0.05)
Hispanic (%)                                                                         21.46           (0.71)         26.42            (0.35)         18.16           (0.08)
Place of Birth (%)
    Born in Current State                                                            56.29           (0.90)         67.16            (0.30)         58.40           (0.08)
    Born in Different US State                                                       30.94           (0.85)         20.67            (0.26)         27.06           (0.08)
    Born Abroad                                                                      12.77           (1.01)         12.17            (0.22)         14.53           (0.06)
Mobility (%)
    Lived in Different State One Year Ago                                            8.90            (0.39)         2.46             (0.10)         2.17            (0.03)
    Lived in Different Region One Year Ago                                           4.42            (0.27)         1.28             (0.08)         1.15            (0.02)
    Lived Abroad One Year Ago                                                        1.78            (0.43)         0.63             (0.06)         0.56            (0.01)
Rural (%)                                                                            0.85            (0.33)         16.28            (0.24)         19.76           (0.09)
Citizenship (%)
    Non-Citizen                                                                      9.54            (1.02)          7.58            (0.19)          7.12           (0.05)
    Naturalized                                                                      2.58            (0.20)          4.09            (0.15)          6.50           (0.05)
Total Sample Size                                                                   26,000                          36,500                         500,000
Weighted Count                                                                     2,172,000                       2,693,000                      31,140,000
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2011-2018 American Community Survey 1-year data
Notes: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals and members of
comparison groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Standard errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection,
sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number
CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                                      59
   Table 11a: Education, Mobility, Disability, and Veteran Status of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups,
                                                  2006-2010 ACS
                                                                                                                Single Poor Housed (Non-            Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                    Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                    Group Quarters)                     Quarters)
                                                                                     Mean             SE           Mean          SE                 Mean          SE
Survey Characteristics--Ages 5-17
Attended School in Past Three Months (%)
    Among Ages 5-17                                                                  93.24           (0.85)          95.15           (0.28)          96.73          (0.06)
    Among Ages 5-15                                                                  95.12           (0.78)          96.43           (0.43)          97.01          (0.10)
    Among Ages 16-17                                                                 85.18           (2.92)          90.37           (1.50)          95.49          (0.31)
Survey Characteristics--Ages 18-64
Place of Birth (%)
    Born in Current State                                                            51.29           (0.97)          57.46           (0.47)          52.24          (0.11)
    Born in Different US State                                                       40.72           (1.00)          25.80           (0.41)          30.31          (0.10)
    Born Abroad                                                                       7.99           (0.38)          16.74           (0.30)          17.46          (0.08)
Mobility (%)
    Lived in Different State One Year Ago                                            13.09           (0.49)          3.02            (0.15)          2.49           (0.03)
    Lived in Different Region One Year Ago                                            6.73           (0.30)          1.32            (0.10)          1.29           (0.02)
    Lived Abroad One Year Ago                                                         0.67           (0.09)          0.87            (0.08)          0.64           (0.02)
Years of Education¹ (%)
    Mean Years of Post-Kindergarten Education                                        11.56           (0.04)          11.61           (0.02)          13.09          (0.01)
    Primary                                                                          14.46           (0.58)          13.34           (0.30)           6.52          (0.06)
    Less than High School                                                            42.18           (0.87)          42.80           (0.41)          40.50          (0.10)
    High School                                                                      23.09           (0.74)          20.67           (0.34)          16.98          (0.09)
    Some College                                                                     17.16           (0.64)          18.05           (0.30)          19.49          (0.09)
    College Graduate                                                                  3.12           (0.27)           5.14           (0.19)          16.51          (0.09)
Marital Status (%)
    Married                                                                           9.26           (0.46)           5.97           (0.18)          53.35          (0.11)
    Divorced                                                                         24.38           (0.62)          22.58           (0.31)          11.49          (0.06)
    Separated                                                                         8.62           (0.32)           8.99           (0.27)           2.56          (0.04)
    Widowed                                                                           2.87           (0.20)           4.33           (0.17)           1.73          (0.03)
    Never Married                                                                    54.86           (0.75)          58.13           (0.36)          30.87          (0.10)
Mean Number of Times Married                                                          1.35           (0.02)           1.35           (0.01)           1.29          (0.00)
Veteran (%)                                                                          14.84           (0.63)           3.62           (0.16)           7.38          (0.05)
Has VA Disability Rating (%)                                                          1.73           (0.22)           0.54           (0.09)           1.09          (0.03)
Functional Limitations (%)
    Difficulty Remembering or Making Decisions                                       24.70           (0.74)          12.26           (0.29)          4.24           (0.04)
    Difficulty Dressing or Bathing                                                    4.56           (0.30)           5.31           (0.20)          1.93           (0.03)
    Difficulty Walking or Climbing Stairs                                            20.60           (0.64)          15.56           (0.30)          6.16           (0.05)
    Difficulty Doing Errands Alone                                                    7.89           (0.42)           9.14           (0.24)          3.28           (0.04)
    Difficulty Hearing                                                                5.32           (0.46)           2.80           (0.17)          2.11           (0.04)
    Difficulty Seeing                                                                 7.09           (0.58)           4.38           (0.22)          1.72           (0.04)
    Any of the Above Difficulties                                                    36.68           (1.26)          23.00           (0.44)         10.00           (0.09)
Total Sample Size                                                                   12,000                          37,000                         547,000
Weighted Count                                                                      935,100                        3,006,000                      36,970,000
Ages 18-64                                                                           9,800                          18,500                         327,000
Ages 5-17                                                                            1,200                           9,100                          96,500
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2010 American Community Survey 1-year data
Note: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals and members of
comparison groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Standard errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection,
sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number
CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹"Primary school" includes those with up to and including 8 years of schooling. "Less than high school" includes those with more than 8 years of schooling, but no high school
diploma or equivalent. "High school" includes those with a high school diploma or equivalent. "Some college" includes those with more than a high school education, but less
than a 4 year college degree. Those with associates degrees would fall in this category. "College" includes those with a 4 year college degree or more.




                                                                                      60
    Table 11b: Education, Mobility, Disability and Veteran Status of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups,
                                                  2011-2018 ACS
                                                                                                                  Single Poor Housed (Non-           Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                     Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                      Group Quarters)                    Quarters)
                                                                                     Mean              SE            Mean          SE                Mean          SE
Survey Characteristics--Ages 5-17
Attended School in Past Three Months (%)
    Among Ages 5-17                                                                   89.75           (3.53)          95.77           (0.25)          96.85           (0.08)
    Among Ages 5-15                                                                   93.63           (1.89)          96.10           (0.27)          96.96           (0.09)
    Among Ages 16-17                                                                  68.90          (10.75)          93.67           (0.95)          96.26           (0.22)
Survey Characteristics--Ages 18-64
Place of Birth (%)
    Born in Current State                                                             54.61           (0.96)          58.54           (0.39)          52.26           (0.11)
    Born in Different US State                                                        32.73           (0.94)          24.50           (0.37)          29.12           (0.11)
    Born Abroad                                                                       12.66           (1.10)          16.96           (0.36)          18.63           (0.09)
Mobility (%)
    Lived in Different State One Year Ago                                             9.08            (0.41)           2.97           (0.16)           2.49           (0.04)
    Lived in Different Region One Year Ago                                            4.45            (0.29)           1.57           (0.13)           1.32           (0.03)
    Lived Abroad One Year Ago                                                         1.05            (0.30)           0.81           (0.09)           0.64           (0.02)
Years of Education¹ (%)
    Mean Years of Post-Kindergarten Education                                         11.76           (0.04)          11.85           (0.02)          13.33           (0.01)
    Primary                                                                            1.77           (0.25)           3.31           (0.17)           1.84           (0.03)
    Less than High School                                                             28.67           (0.67)          22.52           (0.34)           9.86           (0.07)
    High School                                                                       36.44           (0.65)          34.04           (0.41)          26.66           (0.12)
    Some College                                                                      27.29           (0.59)          30.71           (0.38)          32.13           (0.12)
    College Graduate                                                                   5.84           (0.36)           9.43           (0.24)          29.52           (0.11)
Marital Status (%)
    Married                                                                           10.01           (0.45)           6.08           (0.22)          50.51           (0.13)
    Divorced                                                                          18.91           (0.66)          21.94           (0.33)          11.17           (0.08)
    Separated                                                                          7.21           (0.37)           7.49           (0.24)           2.35           (0.04)
    Widowed                                                                            2.69           (0.22)           4.14           (0.16)           1.66           (0.02)
    Never Married                                                                     61.18           (0.80)          60.35           (0.43)          34.31           (0.12)
Mean Number of Times Married                                                           1.33           (0.01)           1.34           (0.01)           1.27           (0.00)
Veteran (%)                                                                            8.08           (0.48)           3.15           (0.15)           5.47           (0.05)
Has VA Disability Rating (%)                                                           1.22           (0.19)           0.58           (0.07)           1.15           (0.03)
Functional Limitations (%)
    Difficulty Remembering or Making Decisions                                       23.64            (0.78)          11.53           (0.30)          4.24            (0.04)
    Difficulty Dressing or Bathing                                                    3.90            (0.32)           4.58           (0.20)          1.80            (0.03)
    Difficulty Walking or Climbing Stairs                                            18.39            (0.56)          12.84           (0.32)          5.04            (0.04)
    Difficulty Doing Errands Alone                                                    8.30            (0.50)           9.27           (0.24)          3.59            (0.04)
    Difficulty Hearing                                                                5.18            (0.34)           3.39           (0.19)          2.02            (0.04)
    Difficulty Seeing                                                                 6.84            (0.35)           4.62           (0.18)          1.84            (0.03)
    Any of the Above Difficulties                                                    36.13            (0.98)          23.05           (0.40)         10.14            (0.06)
Total Sample Size                                                                   26,000                           36,500                         500,000
Weighted Count                                                                     2,172,000                        2,693,000                      31,140,000
Ages 18-64                                                                          22,000                           18,500                         290,000
Ages 5-17                                                                            2,100                            9,000                          81,000
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2011-2018 American Community Survey 1-year data
Note: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals and members of
comparison groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Standard errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection,
sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number
CBDRB-FY21-045.

¹"Primary school" includes those with up to and including 8 years of schooling. "Less than high school" includes those with more than 8 years of schooling, but no high school
diploma or equivalent. "High school" includes those with a high school diploma or equivalent. "Some college" includes those with more than a high school education, but less
than a 4 year college degree. Those with associates degrees would fall in this category. "College" includes those with a 4 year college degree or more.




                                                                                       61
         Table 12a: Survey-Reported Economic Characteristics of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups,
                                                2006-2010 ACS
                                                                                                             Single Poor Housed (Non-            Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                 Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                 Group Quarters)                     Quarters)
                                                                                 Mean              SE           Mean          SE                 Mean          SE
Employment & Program Participation Among Adults Ages 18-64
Worked in Past Year (%)                                                           49.40           (1.01)          49.70          (0.44)          80.19           (0.10)
    Mean Weeks Worked in Past 12 Months (Cond. On +)                              29.71           (0.38)          34.05          (0.21)          45.51           (0.03)
    Mean Hours Worked Per Week (Cond. On +)                                       34.59           (0.28)          31.45          (0.17)          39.44           (0.02)
Benefit Receipt Rates and Amounts Among Adults Ages 18-64
Earnings in Last 12 Months² (%)                                                  49.34           (1.01)          49.37            (0.44)        79.85             (0.10)
    75th Percentile of Earnings                                                 6,520.00        (270.70)        7,085.00        (147.60)      51,550.00         (133.50)
    Mean Earnings Amount ($)² (Cond. On +)                                     10,970.00        (312.50)        7,939.00         (66.94)      47,940.00         (131.40)
Retirement or Pension Income Receipt Rate (%)                                     2.27           (0.21)           2.68            (0.12)         4.52             (0.04)
    Mean Retirement or Pension Inc. Amt. ($) (Cond. On +)                      12,200.00       (1543.00)        5,814.00        (201.50)      22,780.00         (205.50)
Medicaid Receipt Rate (%)                                                        43.89           (1.58)          38.44            (0.56)         9.74             (0.08)
Food Stamp Receipt Rate (%)                                                      52.77           (0.94)          47.70            (0.45)        10.22             (0.09)
SSI Receipt Rate (%)                                                              8.84           (0.38)           9.07            (0.23)         2.13             (0.03)
    Mean SSI Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                            8,388.00        (152.50)        7,481.00         (89.75)       8,663.00          (60.77)
Public Assistance Receipt Rate (%)                                               17.81           (0.71)           8.51            (0.27)         1.51             (0.03)
    Mean Public Assistance Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                              2,730.00        (114.30)        3,122.00         (77.27)       3,615.00          (67.66)
Received Any Transfer Income (%)                                                 60.23           (0.84)          51.10            (0.46)        11.72             (0.09)
Received Any Retirement or Employment Income (%)                                 51.07           (0.96)          51.66            (0.43)        82.20             (0.09)
Other Income Receipt³ (%)                                                        11.32           (0.49)          13.97            (0.26)         7.59             (0.06)
    Mean Other Income Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                   6,347.00        (356.50)        5,040.00         (93.40)       9,601.00          (84.08)
Any Income Receipt (%)                                                           78.25           (0.74)          76.71            (0.42)        89.71             (0.07)
    75th Percentile of Total Income                                            12,330.00        (201.20)       10,320.00         (76.56)      56,430.00         (153.40)
    Mean Total Income Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                  10,580.00        (216.20)        8,395.00         (48.16)      47,170.00         (134.30)
Total Sample Size                                                                12,000                          37,000                        547,000
Weighted Count                                                                  935,100                        3,006,000                      36,970,000
Ages 18-64                                                                        9,800                          18,500                        327,000
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2010 American Community Survey 1-year data
Note: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals and members of
comparison groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Conditional shares and means are provided in indented row below overall receipt rates. Standard
errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit
www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY21-045.
1
Earnings includes wages and salaries and/or self employment income.
2
 Other income includes regular sources of income from sources excepting wages, salaries, bonuses, and tips from employment, self-employment income, interest, dividends,
net rental income, royalty income, estate income, Social Security or Railroad Retirement income, Supplemental Security income, public assistance or welfare, and retirement,
survivor, or disability pensions. This includes VA payments, unemployment compensation, and child support or alimony.




                                                                                    62
         Table 12b: Survey-Reported Economic Characteristics of Sheltered Homeless & Comparison Groups,
                                                2011-2018 ACS
                                                                                                             Single Poor Housed (Non-            Housed (Non-Group
                                                                                 Sheltered Homeless
                                                                                                                 Group Quarters)                     Quarters)
                                                                                 Mean              SE           Mean          SE                 Mean          SE
Employment & Program Participation Among Adults Ages 18-64
Worked in Past Year (%)                                                           39.40           (0.93)          45.54          (0.51)          78.44           (0.09)
    Mean Weeks Worked in Past 12 Months (Cond. On +)                              29.56           (0.47)          35.29          (0.25)          45.77           (0.04)
    Mean Hours Worked Per Week (Cond. On +)                                       32.97           (0.32)          30.68          (0.18)          39.13           (0.03)
Benefit Receipt Rates and Amounts Among Adults Ages 18-64
Earnings in Last 12 Months² (%)                                                  39.36           (0.92)          45.33            (0.51)        78.18             (0.10)
    75th Percentile of Earnings                                                 4,193.00        (180.00)        6,854.00        (175.10)      51,920.00         (120.10)
    Mean Earnings Amount ($)² (Cond. On +)                                     14,200.00       (1501.00)        8,325.00         (73.77)      48,850.00         (166.40)
Retirement or Pension Income Receipt Rate (%)                                     1.89           (0.21)           2.49            (0.13)         4.12             (0.04)
    Mean Retirement or Pension Inc. Amt. ($) (Cond. On +)                       8,706.00        (638.40)        6,308.00        (272.80)      23,130.00         (253.50)
Medicaid Receipt Rate (%)                                                        61.94           (0.99)          46.09            (0.40)        13.22             (0.08)
Food Stamp Receipt Rate (%)                                                      64.80           (0.84)          53.94            (0.43)        14.44             (0.09)
SSI Receipt Rate (%)                                                             12.03           (0.55)          10.97            (0.30)         2.79             (0.04)
    Mean SSI Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                            8,759.00        (119.10)        7,982.00         (70.02)       9,076.00          (64.53)
Public Assistance Receipt Rate (%)                                               20.11           (0.89)           7.36            (0.21)         1.57             (0.03)
    Mean Public Assistance Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                              3,543.00        (230.20)        2,910.00         (88.26)       3,057.00          (65.18)
Received Any Transfer Income (%)                                                 71.15           (0.76)          57.40            (0.44)        16.11             (0.10)
Received Any Retirement or Employment Income (%)                                 40.94           (0.93)          47.50            (0.51)        80.41             (0.09)
Other Income Receipt³ (%)                                                         6.97           (0.38)           9.51            (0.25)         5.98             (0.06)
    Mean Other Income Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                   6,684.00        (735.70)        4,447.00        (131.40)       9,810.00         (138.40)
Any Income Receipt (%)                                                           72.64           (0.73)          72.95            (0.41)        88.33             (0.08)
    75th Percentile of Total Income                                            10,330.00        (109.50)       10,430.00         (58.54)      54,510.00         (136.10)
    Mean Total Income Amount ($) (Cond. On +)                                  12,010.00        (875.30)        8,539.00         (53.67)      47,400.00         (156.60)
Total Sample Size                                                                26,000                          36,500                        500,000
Weighted Count                                                                 2,172,000                       2,693,000                      31,140,000
Ages 18-64                                                                       22,000                          18,500                        290,000
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2011-2018 American Community Survey 1-year data
Note: Table displays weighted means and shares of responses (including imputed responses) to questions among non-imputed sheltered homeless individuals and members of
comparison groups residing in one of the 50 states or Washington, DC. Conditional shares and means are provided in indented row below overall receipt rates. Standard
errors are computed using replicate weights. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit
www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY21-045.
1
Earnings includes wages and salaries and/or self employment income.
2
 Other income includes regular sources of income from sources excepting wages, salaries, bonuses, and tips from employment, self-employment income, interest, dividends,
net rental income, royalty income, estate income, Social Security or Railroad Retirement income, Supplemental Security income, public assistance or welfare, and retirement,
survivor, or disability pensions. This includes VA payments, unemployment compensation, and child support or alimony.




                                                                                    63
                                        Table 13: Income & Benefit Receipt among Sheltered Homeless Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census, 2003-2016
                                                        2003       2004        2005       2006       2007       2008       2009       2010       2011       2012       2013       2014       2015     2016
Share Filing 1040 with Positive Total Money Income¹     0.396      0.392      0.359      0.366      0.438      0.372      0.335      0.375      0.389      0.349      0.344      0.327      0.327
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
   Median Total Money Income (Cond. On +)             $18,257    $17,708    $12,370    $12,415    $11,217    $10,991    $10,651    $12,015    $14,025    $14,241    $14,546    $15,165    $16,001
                                                       ($108)     ($103)      ($85)      ($84)      ($56)      ($62)      ($54)      ($62)      ($71)      ($69)      ($69)      ($61)      ($65)
   Median Wage & Salary Income (Cond. On +)           $16,414    $16,180    $10,022     $9,842     $7,338     $7,767     $6,180     $8,068     $9,745    $10,365    $10,766    $11,544    $12,690
                                                       ($114)     ($109)      ($92)      ($91)      ($71)      ($74)      ($70)      ($61)      ($82)      ($82)      ($87)      ($93)      ($99)
Share Filing 1040 with Self-Employment Income           0.040      0.042      0.042      0.046      0.051      0.052      0.055      0.057      0.062      0.061      0.061      0.060      0.057
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
   Median Self Employment Income (Cond. On +)          $9,951    $10,026     $9,615    $10,145     $9,883    $10,031    $10,796    $10,813    $10,875    $10,855    $10,894    $10,885    $10,940
                                                       ($134)     ($136)     ($132)      ($99)     ($113)     ($106)      ($69)      ($67)      ($53)      ($48)      ($51)      ($57)      ($72)
Share Filing 1040 with Social Security Income           0.005      0.005      0.006      0.010      0.056      0.017      0.015      0.018      0.022      0.023      0.023      0.025      0.028
                                                         (Z)        (Z)         (Z)        (Z)     (0.001)       (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)     (0.001)
   Median Social Security Income (Cond. On +)         $13,202    $13,432    $12,414    $11,224    $10,117    $10,839    $11,728    $12,523    $12,776    $12,446    $11,637    $11,890    $11,925
                                                       ($416)     ($412)     ($380)     ($259)      ($62)     ($174)     ($237)     ($215)     ($128)     ($149)     ($151)     ($149)     ($128)
Share Receiving W2                                                            0.567      0.577      0.576      0.548      0.462      0.457      0.432      0.423      0.421      0.426      0.431      0.435
                                                                             (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
   Median W2 Wages & Tips (Cond. On +)                                       $8,250     $8,015     $7,724     $6,472     $4,542     $5,248     $7,344     $8,559     $9,517    $10,602    $12,071    $12,790
                                                                              ($65)      ($63)      ($59)      ($53)      ($43)      ($47)      ($68)      ($76)      ($84)      ($87)      ($95)      ($97)
   Mean Number of W2s Received (Cond. On +)                                   2.054      2.089      2.091      1.939      1.650      1.651      1.623      1.644      1.688      1.752      1.860      1.896
                                                                             (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.007)
Share Receiving 1099R                                  0.036      0.037       0.035      0.038      0.040      0.040      0.038      0.030      0.030      0.034      0.036      0.040      0.043
                                                      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Share Receiving Housing Benefits                                  0.101       0.102      0.099      0.097      0.093      0.089      0.111      0.129      0.146      0.161      0.168      0.184     0.190
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
 Mean Housing Benefits Cond. On Receipt                          $4,054      $5,680     $5,333     $5,101     $4,687     $4,273     $3,484     $4,291     $4,849     $5,318     $4,837     $4,168    $2,665
                                                                  ($39)        ($48)      ($51)      ($73)      ($48)      ($48)      ($36)      ($37)      ($35)      ($35)      ($35)      ($34)    ($25)
Share Receiving VA Benefits                                                                         0.017      0.019      0.025      0.028      0.030      0.032      0.034      0.035
                                                                                                      (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Share Receiving SNAP²                                                                   0.361       0.482      0.552      0.707      0.809      0.753      0.692      0.656      0.622     0.588      0.559
                                                                                       (0.008)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)
   Mean SNAP Amount (Cond. On +)                                                       $1,873      $2,190     $2,229     $2,686     $2,838     $2,800     $2,820     $2,755     $2,500    $2,553     $2,538
                                                                                        ($49)       ($17)      ($16)      ($15)      ($13)      ($14)      ($15)      ($15)      ($14)     ($15)      ($16)
   Mean Months of SNAP (Cond. On +)                                                     7.158       8.201      8.367      8.589      9.720      9.572      9.628      9.800      9.722     9.822      9.625
                                                                                       (0.097)     (0.033)    (0.032)    (0.025)    (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.025)   (0.025)    (0.027)
Share Receiving Medicare Part A or B                                                    0.055       0.059      0.065      0.070      0.088      0.115      0.141      0.165      0.186     0.200      0.213
                                                                                       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
    Share Receiving OASI in Medicare                                                                                                 0.003      0.008      0.015      0.026      0.038     0.055      0.068
                                                                                                                                    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
    Share Receiving DI in Medicare                                                      0.054      0.059      0.064      0.069       0.084      0.105      0.125      0.139      0.147     0.143      0.144
                                                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Share Enrolled in Medicaid                                                                         0.363      0.379      0.424       0.489      0.508      0.509      0.506      0.561     0.484
                                                                                                  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits²³                                                                     0.674      0.721      0.814       0.888      0.864      0.839      0.822      0.816     0.791
                                                                                                  (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Earnings                                                 0.596      0.604      0.602      0.583      0.514       0.528      0.507      0.477      0.474      0.464     0.464
                                                                            (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits or Earnings²
                                                                                                     64
                                                                                                   0.883      0.894      0.924       0.963      0.955      0.946      0.943      0.941     0.933
                                                                                                  (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.002)
                                      Table 13: Income & Benefit Receipt among Sheltered Homeless Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census, 2003-2016 (continued)
                                                                     2003          2004         2005          2006          2007         2008          2009         2010          2011          2012         2013          2014          2015         2016
Mean Earnings                                                                                  $8,340        $8,369        $7,894       $7,094        $5,673       $6,877        $7,648        $7,184       $7,356        $7,419        $8,169
                                                                                                ($54)         ($91)         ($52)        ($62)         ($49)        ($84)         ($79)         ($60)        ($59)         ($63)        ($118)
SD Earnings                                                                                   $18,140       $30,250       $17,228      $20,621       $16,423      $28,173       $26,439       $19,883      $19,356       $20,660       $38,394
50th Percentile Earnings                                                                        $898         $1,123        $1,176        $749            $1         $170           $1             $0           $0           $0             $0
                                                                                                ($31)         ($33)         ($32)        ($25)          ($4)        ($15)         ($10)           (Z)          (Z)          (Z)            (Z)
75th Percentile Earnings                                                                      $11,040       $11,224       $10,757       $9,269        $6,301       $8,424       $10,533       $10,115      $10,417       $10,560       $11,348
                                                                                                ($82)         ($79)         ($70)        ($70)         ($71)        ($70)         ($64)         ($75)        ($74)         ($75)         ($85)
Mean Pre-Tax Income                                                                            $8,786        $8,891        $8,991       $7,759        $6,410       $7,791        $8,723        $8,060       $8,103        $8,186        $8,885
                                                                                                ($63)         ($95)         ($66)        ($68)         ($57)        ($81)         ($83)         ($65)        ($69)         ($78)        ($101)
SD Pre-Tax Income                                                                             $20,922       $31,571       $21,911      $22,844       $18,908      $26,999       $27,491       $21,624      $22,828       $25,370       $32,914
  th
50 Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                   $1,249        $1,490        $2,763       $1,178         $182         $559          $432            $1           $0           $0             $0
                                                                                                ($34)         ($38)         ($49)        ($31)         ($14)        ($26)         ($31)          ($8)         ($5)          (Z)           ($1)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                $11,863       $12,106       $12,451      $10,407        $7,871      $10,190       $12,064       $11,339      $11,393       $11,544       $12,763
                                                                                                ($87)         ($84)         ($67)        ($66)         ($73)        ($61)         ($80)         ($71)        ($75)         ($84)         ($99)
Mean Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                                $9,276        $9,301       $8,736        $8,762      $10,412       $11,012       $10,638      $10,587       $10,477       $11,086
                                                                                                             ($225)        ($137)       ($135)        ($135)       ($179)        ($170)        ($160)       ($173)        ($214)        ($215)
SD Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                                 $14,343       $21,603      $21,293       $22,986      $30,454       $28,839       $27,030      $29,209       $35,794       $35,816
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                     $4,397        $3,810       $3,207        $3,300       $4,616        $4,694        $4,122       $3,915        $3,349        $3,500
                                                                                                             ($185)         ($76)        ($66)         ($56)        ($67)         ($88)         ($83)        ($85)         ($86)         ($93)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                    $13,640       $12,735      $11,992       $11,716      $14,262       $15,669       $15,477      $15,544       $15,354       $16,472
                                                                                                             ($387)        ($120)       ($137)        ($126)       ($109)        ($119)        ($119)       ($119)        ($128)        ($147)
Share in SNAP State                                                                                           0.036         0.217        0.217         0.253        0.253         0.253         0.254        0.254         0.254         0.255        0.256
Share in Medicaid State                                                                         1.000         1.000         1.000        1.000         1.000        1.000         1.000         1.000        1.000         0.968         0.801
Sample Size                                                         111,000      111,000       111,000      111,000       111,000      111,000       111,000      111,000       111,000       109,000      108,000       107,000       105,000       103,000
Weighted Count                                                      159,500      159,500       159,500      159,500       159,500      159,500       159,500      159,500       158,400       156,700      154,800       152,800       150,700       148,300
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2007-
2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016)
Note: Sample includes the approximately 111,000 PIKed adults enumerated in emergency and transitional shelters in the 2010 Decennial Census who have a non-missing year of birth between 1945 and 1992 (inclusive) in the 2019 Numident. (Z) indicates
a standard error that rounds to zero (but is not equal to zero). Table displays the weighted means, percentiles, and shares for individuals who link to income and benefits datasets from 2003-2016. For disclosure purposes, percentiles are calculated as a
weighted mean of the six observations above and the six observations below the weighted percentile. Sample sizes are rounded to comply with Census Bureau requirements. Dollars are expressed as Chained CPI-U-adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were
approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹ Total money income includes wage and salary, total interest (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony received, business income (+/-), total pensions and annuities, net rents royalties, estates and trusts (+/-), farm income (+/-), unemployment
compensation, and total social security benefits.
² Because our SNAP data cover only certain states and years, the sample underlying year Y of SNAP receipt (or the two outcomes that use SNAP receipt as an input, namely "share receiving any benefits" and "share receiving any earnings") is composed
only of individuals who in 2010 resided in a state for which we have SNAP data in year Y. For example, because we lack 2007 SNAP data from Illinois, 2007 SNAP receipt is calculated as a share of individuals who lived in Indiana, New York, New
Jersey, or Tennessee - but not Illinois - at the time of the 2010 Census.
³ Any benefits includes SNAP, HUD, VA, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits.
 This row reports the share of individuals with positive estimated earnings across IRS 1040 and W2 datasets. Earnings is the sum of 1040 wage and salary income, estimated non-negative 1040 self-employment income (when a self employment schedule
was filed), and W2 deferred compensation less any W2 wages and tips associated with a cofiler for individuals filing a 1040. Self-employment income is equal to total money income less wage and salary income, dividend income, rental income, social
security, and interest income. For individuals without a 1040, earnings is equal to wages and tips across W2s.
 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA SCD compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the calendar year and ¼ of the annual SCD amount of the
fiscal year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages and tips and deferred compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA and employer sponsored
retirement distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations with implausibly high pre-tax income.
 Pre-tax income is measured as above. In-kind transfers include benefits from HUD and SNAP benefits. SNAP benefit amounts are estimated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average monthly SNAP benefit received in that year.




                                                                                                                              65
                  Table 14: Income & Benefit Receipt among Unsheltered Homeless Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census, 2003-2016 (Food Vans and Soup Kitchens)
                                                         2003       2004       2005       2006       2007       2008       2009       2010       2011       2012       2013       2014       2015     2016
Share Filing 1040 with Positive Total Money Income¹     0.361      0.354      0.322      0.324      0.433      0.327      0.295      0.301      0.311      0.272      0.266      0.251      0.250
                                                       (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
   Median Total Money Income (Cond. On +)             $18,797    $18,710    $13,237    $13,361    $11,331    $12,448    $12,632    $14,341    $15,066    $15,315    $15,512    $16,202    $17,562
                                                       ($197)     ($255)     ($179)     ($177)     ($117)     ($164)     ($202)     ($143)     ($186)     ($158)     ($146)     ($149)     ($157)
   Median Wage & Salary Income (Cond. On +)           $16,849    $16,668    $10,431    $10,175     $5,232     $8,185     $7,151     $8,385     $9,205    $10,267    $10,713    $11,324    $12,522
                                                       ($215)     ($260)     ($187)     ($172)     ($161)     ($152)     ($199)     ($132)     ($191)     ($176)     ($158)     ($184)     ($194)
Share Filing 1040 with Self-Employment Income           0.035      0.036      0.038      0.038      0.042      0.043      0.047      0.043      0.044      0.042      0.043      0.041      0.039
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
   Median Self Employment Income (Cond. On +)          $8,965     $8,925     $9,172     $9,383     $9,347     $9,582    $10,115    $10,553    $10,185     $9,975    $10,122     $9,849    $10,004
                                                       ($263)     ($278)     ($232)     ($251)     ($242)     ($228)     ($536)     ($197)     ($205)     ($219)     ($231)     ($227)     ($247)
Share Filing 1040 with Social Security Income           0.008      0.009      0.010      0.018      0.104      0.030      0.029      0.029      0.034      0.034      0.035      0.034      0.036
                                                          (Z)        (Z)        (Z)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
   Median Social Security Income (Cond. On +)         $12,401    $12,854    $11,969    $11,669    $10,116    $11,138    $12,289    $13,584    $13,028    $13,091    $12,656    $13,177    $13,518
                                                       ($471)     ($481)     ($424)     ($311)      ($77)     ($234)     ($295)     ($206)     ($174)     ($226)     ($256)     ($255)     ($286)
Share Receiving W2                                                            0.515      0.513      0.501      0.465      0.376      0.333      0.318      0.321      0.323      0.323      0.330      0.332
                                                                             (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
   Median W2 Wages & Tips (Cond. On +)                                       $7,929     $7,792     $7,386     $6,580     $5,208     $4,913     $6,904     $8,176     $9,356    $10,354    $11,568    $12,105
                                                                             ($144)     ($151)     ($141)     ($115)     ($112)     ($107)     ($134)     ($161)     ($189)     ($180)     ($177)     ($186)
   Mean Number of W2s Received (Cond. On +)                                   1.978      2.008      1.989      1.850      1.586      1.544      1.543      1.560      1.609      1.667      1.759      1.780
                                                                             (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)
Share Receiving 1099R                                  0.035      0.036       0.033      0.036      0.037      0.041      0.041      0.037      0.036      0.039      0.040      0.044      0.046
                                                      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Share Receiving Housing Benefits                                  0.090       0.093      0.092      0.094      0.097      0.097      0.104      0.110      0.119      0.128      0.134      0.146     0.149
                                                                 (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.002)
   Mean Housing Benefits Cond. On Receipt                        $3,490      $5,068     $4,956     $4,927     $4,851     $5,060     $4,967     $4,747     $4,901     $5,159     $4,642     $4,060    $2,508
                                                                  ($49)        ($57)      ($56)      ($56)      ($55)      ($57)      ($54)      ($51)      ($49)      ($47)      ($48)      ($48)    ($35)
Share Receiving VA Benefits                                                                         0.017      0.018      0.021      0.022      0.024      0.025      0.026      0.027
                                                                                                   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Share Receiving SNAP²                                                                   0.408       0.439      0.496      0.581      0.647      0.624      0.598      0.584      0.567     0.548      0.521
                                                                                       (0.010)     (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)
   Mean SNAP Amount (Cond. On +)                                                       $1,717      $1,665     $1,714     $2,240     $2,340     $2,274     $2,231     $2,227     $2,019    $2,021     $1,908
                                                                                        ($56)       ($24)      ($23)      ($24)      ($21)      ($21)      ($20)      ($21)      ($20)     ($21)      ($21)
   Mean Months of SNAP (Cond. On +)                                                     8.014       8.351      8.443      9.047      9.553      9.664      9.852    10.050     10.080     10.090      9.700
                                                                                       (0.124)     (0.062)    (0.060)    (0.048)    (0.040)    (0.042)    (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.043)   (0.044)    (0.048)
Share Receiving Medicare Part A or B                                                    0.104       0.112      0.120      0.127      0.148      0.170      0.192      0.213      0.233     0.246      0.261
                                                                                       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
    Share Receiving OASI in Medicare                                                                                                 0.005      0.013      0.023      0.036      0.051     0.075      0.092
                                                                                                                                       (Z)        (Z)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
    Share Receiving DI in Medicare                                                      0.103      0.111      0.120      0.126       0.142      0.157      0.168      0.177      0.181     0.170      0.169
                                                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Share Enrolled in Medicaid                                                                         0.358      0.373      0.397       0.435      0.460      0.473      0.474      0.546     0.462
                                                                                                  (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits²³                                                                     0.624      0.672      0.728       0.781      0.778      0.773      0.776      0.784     0.767
                                                                                                  (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.004)
Share Receiving Any Earnings                                                 0.545      0.539      0.529      0.501      0.430       0.404      0.393      0.366      0.368      0.353     0.354
                                                                            (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits or Earnings²                                                            66
                                                                                                   0.871      0.881      0.890       0.916      0.917      0.913      0.919      0.921     0.914
                                                                                                  (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)
             Table 14: Income & Benefit Receipt among Unsheltered Homeless Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census, 2003-2016 (Food Vans and Soup Kitchens) (continued)
                                                                     2003          2004         2005          2006          2007         2008          2009          2010         2011          2012          2013         2014          2015          2016
Mean Earnings                                                                                  $8,186        $8,049        $7,849       $7,085        $5,953        $6,332       $6,700        $6,406        $6,494       $6,467        $6,934
                                                                                               ($129)        ($111)        ($118)       ($100)         ($81)        ($104)        ($93)        ($109)         ($89)        ($89)         ($96)
SD Earnings                                                                                   $31,627       $27,158       $28,816      $24,508       $19,779       $25,441      $22,769       $26,428       $21,458      $21,351       $22,697
  th
50 Percentile Earnings                                                                          $139          $112          $33            $1           $0            $0            $0           $0            $0           $0            $0
                                                                                                ($28)         ($25)         ($19)         ($2)          (Z)           (Z)           (Z)          (Z)           (Z)          (Z)           (Z)
  th
75 Percentile Earnings                                                                         $9,235        $9,085        $8,505       $7,206        $4,360        $4,537       $5,690        $4,165        $4,630       $4,100        $4,682
                                                                                               ($188)        ($182)        ($191)       ($176)        ($172)        ($199)       ($214)        ($218)        ($233)       ($235)        ($263)
Mean Pre-Tax Income                                                                            $8,887        $8,925        $9,765       $8,147        $7,118        $7,885       $8,188        $7,637        $7,705       $7,711        $8,221
                                                                                               ($154)        ($136)        ($142)       ($126)        ($101)        ($155)       ($102)        ($125)        ($115)       ($116)        ($116)
SD Pre-Tax Income                                                                             $37,740       $33,353       $34,764      $30,903       $24,658       $38,054      $24,829       $30,254       $27,659      $27,662       $27,402
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                  $372          $377         $2,092        $123           $0            $0            $0           $0            $0           $0            $0
                                                                                                ($42)         ($43)        ($101)        ($22)          (Z)           (Z)          (Z)           (Z)           (Z)          (Z)           (Z)
  th
75 Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                  $10,306       $10,369       $11,943       $9,224        $7,093        $7,625       $8,605        $7,022        $7,239       $6,794        $7,690
                                                                                               ($198)        ($191)        ($155)       ($182)        ($202)        ($180)       ($208)        ($248)        ($257)       ($272)        ($306)
Mean Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                               $10,099       $11,053      $10,004        $9,479       $10,381      $10,553       $10,386       $10,512       $9,850       $10,594
                                                                                                             ($661)        ($384)       ($310)        ($238)        ($389)       ($287)        ($446)        ($408)       ($293)        ($305)
SD Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                                 $31,644       $34,480      $27,893       $23,295       $38,076      $27,973       $43,205       $39,264      $28,007       $28,953
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                     $2,222        $3,251       $2,264        $2,650        $2,710       $2,630        $2,579        $2,525       $2,386        $2,439
                                                                                                             ($146)        ($203)        ($46)         ($21)         ($10)         ($7)         ($13)         ($10)        ($17)         ($18)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                    $11,094       $13,220      $11,775       $10,656       $11,473      $11,987       $11,145       $11,202      $10,498       $11,474
                                                                                                             ($510)        ($393)       ($530)        ($463)        ($458)       ($469)        ($488)        ($499)       ($584)        ($594)
Share in SNAP State                                                                                           0.035         0.147        0.147         0.172         0.172        0.173         0.173         0.173        0.173         0.173         0.173
Share in Medicaid State                                                                         1.000         1.000         1.000        1.000         1.000         1.000        1.000         1.000         1.000        0.973         0.831
Sample Size                                                         60,000       60,000        60,000        60,000        60,000       60,000        60,000        60,000       59,500        59,000        58,000       57,000        56,000       55,000
Weighted Count                                                      143,200      143,200       143,200      143,200       143,200      143,200       143,200       143,200      142,100       140,500       138,600      136,400       134,200       131,900
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2007-
2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Sample includes the approximately 60,000 PIKed adults enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans in the 2010 Decennial Census who have a non-missing year of birth between 1945 and 1992 (inclusive) in the 2019
Numident. (Z) indicates a standard error that rounds to zero (but is not equal to zero). Table displays the weighted means, percentiles, and shares for individuals who link to income and benefits datasets from 2003-2016. For disclosure purposes,
percentiles are calculated as a weighted mean of the six observations above and the six observations below the weighted percentile. Sample sizes are rounded to comply with Census Bureau requirements. Dollars are expressed as Chained CPI-U-adjusted
2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹ Total money income includes wage and salary, total interest (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony received, business income (+/-), total pensions and annuities, net rents royalties, estates and trusts (+/-), farm income (+/-), unemployment
compensation, and total social security benefits.
² Because our SNAP data cover only certain states and years, the sample underlying year Y of SNAP receipt (or the two outcomes that use SNAP receipt as an input, namely "share receiving any benefits" and "share receiving any earnings") is composed
only of individuals who in 2010 resided in a state for which we have SNAP data in year Y . For example, because we lack 2007 SNAP data from Illinois, 2007 SNAP receipt is calculated as a share of individuals who lived in Indiana, New York, New
Jersey, or Tennessee - but not Illinois - at the time of the 2010 Census.
³ Any benefits includes SNAP, HUD, VA, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits.
 This row reports the share of individuals with positive estimated earnings across IRS 1040 and W2 datasets. Earnings is the sum of 1040 wage and salary income, estimated non-negative 1040 self-employment income (when a self employment schedule
was filed), and W2 deferred compensation less any W2 wages and tips associated with a cofiler for individuals filing a 1040. Self-employment income is equal to total money income less wage and salary income, dividend income, rental income, social
security, and interest income. For individuals without a 1040, earnings is equal to wages and tips across W2s.
 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA SCD compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the calendar year and ¼ of the annual SCD amount of the
fiscal year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages and tips and deferred compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA and employer sponsored
retirement distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations with implausibly high pre-tax income.

 Pre-tax income is measured as above. In-kind transfers include benefits from HUD and SNAP benefits. SNAP benefit amounts are estimated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average monthly SNAP benefit received in that year.


                                                                                                                              67
                                         Table 15: Income & Benefit Receipt Among ACS Adults Ages 18-64 in Single-Adult Households in Poverty, 2003-2016
                                                           2003      2004      2005      2006      2007      2008      2009      2010      2011      2012      2013      2014      2015     2016
Share Filing 1040 with Positive Total Money Income¹        0.537     0.547     0.508     0.530     0.620     0.554     0.531     0.520     0.546     0.545     0.549     0.553     0.557
                                                         (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)
Median Total Money Income (Cond. On +)                   $20,008   $19,403   $13,162   $13,288   $12,002   $12,539   $11,819   $13,381   $14,573   $15,799   $16,659   $17,604   $19,092
                                                           ($91)     ($92)     ($75)     ($73)     ($54)     ($60)     ($50)     ($55)     ($49)     ($54)     ($56)     ($62)     ($76)
   Median Wage & Salary Income (Cond. On +)              $17,441   $17,002   $9,418    $9,171    $6,688    $7,929    $6,251    $7,808    $9,821    $11,500   $12,635   $13,784   $15,299
                                                          ($101)    ($101)     ($85)     ($82)     ($72)     ($68)     ($66)     ($64)     ($69)     ($73)     ($82)     ($84)     ($87)
Share Filing 1040 with Self-Employment Income                                  0.090     0.097     0.103     0.108     0.114     0.110     0.115     0.114     0.115     0.118     0.119
                                                                             (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
   Median Self Employment Income (Cond. On +)                                $9,715    $9,468    $9,333    $9,177    $9,853    $10,168   $10,247   $10,254   $10,195   $10,108   $10,327
                                                                               ($98)    ($101)    ($112)    ($104)     ($82)     ($70)     ($64)     ($71)     ($76)     ($80)     ($82)
Share Filing 1040 with Social Security Income              0.008     0.009     0.009     0.018     0.082     0.030     0.030     0.029     0.033     0.035     0.036     0.039     0.042
                                                            (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)    (0.001)      (Z)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
   Median Social Security Income (Cond. On +)            $12,831   $12,995   $13,037   $11,580   $9,904    $10,755   $11,682   $11,676   $11,998   $12,349   $12,433   $12,622   $13,015
                                                          ($342)    ($329)    ($318)    ($190)     ($50)    ($119)    ($137)    ($130)    ($134)    ($133)    ($129)    ($121)    ($127)
Share Receiving W2                                                             0.525     0.545     0.558     0.542     0.484     0.480     0.501     0.516     0.527     0.536     0.546    0.547
                                                                             (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
Median W2 Wages & Tips (Cond. On +)                                          $10,887   $10,620   $10,349   $9,604    $8,144    $8,682    $10,918   $12,790   $14,397   $15,888   $17,877   $19,445
                                                                               ($81)     ($76)     ($75)     ($70)     ($60)     ($61)     ($71)     ($76)     ($84)     ($89)     ($95)    ($99)
Mean Number of W2s Received (Cond. On +)                                       1.722     1.751     1.748     1.659     1.498     1.531     1.556     1.566     1.604     1.645     1.702    1.705
                                                                             (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)
Share Receiving 1099R                                     0.036     0.038      0.038     0.044     0.050     0.056     0.062     0.058     0.055     0.059     0.060     0.066     0.071
                                                         (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
Share Receiving Housing Benefits                                    0.146      0.151     0.155     0.164     0.172     0.182     0.190     0.190     0.182     0.179     0.174     0.176    0.176
                                                                   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 Mean Housing Benefits Cond. On Receipt                            $4,249     $6,212    $6,126    $6,295    $6,527    $6,930    $7,036    $6,424    $6,395    $6,546    $5,868    $5,054   $2,847
                                                                    ($37)      ($51)     ($46)     ($43)     ($43)     ($44)     ($41)     ($38)     ($45)     ($39)     ($38)     ($45)    ($31)
Share Receiving VA Benefits                                                                        0.005     0.006     0.007     0.007     0.008     0.008     0.009     0.009     0.010    0.010
                                                                                                    (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)      (Z)
Share Receiving SNAP²                                                                   0.439      0.437     0.474     0.536     0.590     0.587     0.556     0.531     0.510     0.480    0.453
                                                                                       (0.009)   (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
   Mean SNAP Amount (Cond. On +)                                                       $3,010    $2,997    $3,066    $3,956    $4,039    $3,777    $3,593    $3,440    $3,093    $3,050    $2,825
                                                                                        ($53)      ($36)     ($34)     ($36)     ($37)     ($31)     ($30)     ($28)     ($24)     ($27)    ($29)
   Mean Months of SNAP (Cond. On +)                                                     9.031      9.312     9.409     9.714   10.020      9.976   10.010    10.170    10.030      9.999    9.565
                                                                                       (0.100)   (0.057)   (0.050)   (0.036)   (0.034)   (0.032)   (0.034)   (0.030)   (0.033)   (0.035)   (0.041)
Share Receiving Medicare Part A or B                                                    0.062      0.069     0.076     0.082     0.095     0.112     0.129     0.145     0.158     0.167    0.178
                                                                                       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
    Share Receiving OASI in Medicare                                                                                             0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.001     0.001    0.071
                                                                                                                                  (Z)       (Z)       (Z)       (Z)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
    Share Receiving DI in Medicare                                                      0.062     0.068     0.075     0.081      0.094     0.105     0.112     0.117     0.118     0.107    0.106
                                                                                       (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
Share Enrolled in Medicaid                                                                        0.428     0.437     0.466      0.484     0.483     0.462     0.448     0.458     0.344
                                                                                                 (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits²³                                                                    0.627     0.653     0.686      0.725     0.733     0.720     0.707     0.708     0.683
                                                                                                 (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)
Share Receiving Any Earnings                                                  0.595     0.613     0.626     0.615     0.573      0.567     0.590     0.597     0.603     0.606     0.612
                                                                             (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)
Share Receiving Any Benefits or Earnings²                                                          68
                                                                                                  0.886     0.893     0.891      0.912     0.924     0.929     0.933     0.938     0.935
                                                                                                 (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
                                    Table 15: Income & Benefit Receipt Among ACS Adults Ages 18-64 in Single-Adult Households in Poverty, 2003-2016 (continued)
                                                                      2003          2004          2005        2006         2007          2008         2009          2010         2011          2012         2013         2014           2015         2016
Mean Earnings                                                                                   $10,087      $10,310      $10,222       $9,299       $7,626        $7,918       $9,501        $10,739      $11,849      $12,905       $14,429
                                                                                                 ($102)       ($88)        ($83)         ($86)        ($65)         ($52)        ($54)         ($73)        ($69)        ($90)         ($115)
SD Earnings                                                                                     $33,560      $31,268      $31,394       $27,073      $24,337       $19,783      $19,021       $23,064      $24,601      $30,279       $34,863
  th
50 Percentile Earnings                                                                          $1,250        $1,731       $2,139       $1,718         $461         $846         $1,775       $2,403        $3,093       $3,605       $4,518
                                                                                                 ($46)         ($51)        ($57)        ($55)         ($40)        ($50)         ($73)        ($86)         ($98)       ($112)       ($123)
75th Percentile Earnings                                                                        $13,911      $14,149      $14,047       $12,904      $10,703       $11,473      $13,970       $15,530      $16,744      $17,981       $19,983
                                                                                                  ($90)        ($82)        ($82)         ($73)        ($53)         ($64)       ($60)          ($66)        ($74)        ($84)        ($101)
Mean Pre-Tax Income                                                                             $11,134      $11,308      $12,262       $11,032      $9,477        $9,684       $11,198       $12,327      $13,506      $14,590       $16,179
                                                                                                 ($128)       ($350)       ($205)        ($144)       ($188)        ($176)       ($97)         ($152)       ($110)       ($119)        ($137)
SD Pre-Tax Income                                                                               $50,079      $91,743      $61,806       $49,802      $66,059       $47,629      $36,728       $40,637      $37,554      $42,325       $45,519
  th
50 Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                    $2,302        $3,078       $6,354       $3,741        $2,643       $3,201        $4,534       $5,243        $6,122       $6,887       $8,161
                                                                                                 ($53)         ($60)        ($67)        ($64)         ($63)        ($73)         ($86)        ($96)        ($100)       ($108)       ($110)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                                                  $15,171      $15,664      $16,117       $14,876      $13,113       $14,307      $15,997       $17,497      $18,740      $20,085       $22,246
                                                                                                 ($81)         ($77)        ($72)         ($63)        ($62)         ($59)        ($60)         ($65)        ($75)        ($90)        ($103)
Mean Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                                $12,209      $13,622       $12,927      $12,231       $12,624      $13,773       $14,606      $16,128      $16,694       $17,981
                                                                                                              ($354)       ($313)        ($544)       ($349)        ($272)       ($291)        ($278)       ($427)       ($408)        ($373)
SD Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                                  $26,018      $36,679       $77,650      $48,193       $40,346      $41,954       $38,111      $57,006      $55,251       $54,248
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                                     $5,701       $7,790        $5,956       $6,610        $7,127       $7,778        $8,428       $8,617       $8,892        $10,160
                                                                                                              ($201)       ($148)        ($123)       ($102)        ($109)       ($139)        ($178)       ($178)       ($205)        ($225)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                                             $16,343    $17,134    $16,232    $15,954    $17,186    $18,671    $19,926    $21,182    $21,874    $23,902
                                                                                                      ($381)     ($204)     ($181)     ($163)     ($149)     ($158)     ($171)     ($169)     ($190)     ($206)
Share in SNAP State                                                                                    0.046      0.129      0.129      0.169      0.169      0.169      0.168      0.168      0.168      0.168     0.168
Share in Medicaid State                                                                    1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000      0.972      0.765
Sample Size                                                         153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    153,000    151,000    150,000    149,000    148,000    147,000
Weighted Count                                                     14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,140,000 14,090,000 14,000,000 13,920,000 13,830,000 13,720,000 13,620,000
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2006-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014
Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2004-2015 Medicaid dataset, 2007-2016 SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana, New York, New Jersey, and Tennessee.
Note: Sample includes the approximately 153,000 individuals in single-adult households were identified as living in poverty in the 2010 ACS who have a non-missing year of birth between 1945 and 1992 (inclusive) in the 2019
Numident. (Z) indicates a standard error that rounds to zero (but is not equal to zero). Table displays the weighted means, percentiles, and shares for individuals who link to income and benefits datasets from 2003-2016. Poverty status
is attributed using survey-reported characteristics in the ACS. For disclosure purposes, percentiles are calculated as a weighted mean of the six observations above and the six observations below the weighted percentile. Sample sizes
are rounded to comply with Census Bureau requirements. Dollars are expressed as Chained CPI-U-adjusted 2018 dollars. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the
ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹ Total money income includes wage and salary, total interest (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony received, business income (+/-), total pensions and annuities, net rents royalties, estates and trusts (+/-), farm income
(+/-), unemployment compensation, and total social security benefits.
² Because our SNAP data cover only certain states and years, the sample underlying year Y of SNAP receipt (or the two outcomes that use SNAP receipt as an input, namely "share receiving any benefits" and "share receiving any
earnings") is composed only of individuals who in 2010 resided in a state for which we have SNAP data in year Y . For example, because we lack 2007 SNAP data from Illinois, 2007 SNAP receipt is calculated as a share of
individuals who lived in Indiana, New York, New Jersey, or Tennessee - but not Illinois - at the time of the 2010 Census.
³ Any benefits includes SNAP, HUD, VA, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits.
 This row reports the share of individuals with positive estimated earnings across IRS 1040 and W2 datasets. Earnings is the sum of 1040 wage and salary income, estimated non-negative 1040 self-employment income (when a self
employment schedule was filed), and W2 deferred compensation less any W2 wages and tips associated with a cofiler for individuals filing a 1040. Self-employment income is equal to total money income less wage and salary income,
dividend income, rental income, social security, and interest income. For individuals without a 1040, earnings is equal to wages and tips across W2s.
 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA SCD compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the calendar year and ¼ of the annual SCD amount of the fiscal
year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages and tips and deferred compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA and employer sponsored retirement
distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations with implausibly high pre-tax income.
 Pre-tax income is measured as above. In-kind transfers include benefits from HUD and SNAP benefits. SNAP benefit amounts are estimated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average monthly SNAP benefit received in that year.

                                                                                                                             69
                     Table 16a: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Sheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group
                                                                                   Male                                                          Female
                                                                                                             Non-                                                              Non-
                                                        All       White      Black      Other     Hispanic              All       White      Black      Other     Hispanic
                                                                                                           Hispanic                                                          Hispanic
Share Filing 1040 with Positive Total Money Income¹     0.326      0.301      0.347      0.366      0.351    0.321      0.467      0.423      0.513      0.465      0.502      0.459
                                                       (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.005)  (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.003)
Median Total Money Income (Cond. On +)                $12,421    $11,789    $12,692    $14,228    $13,731  $12,229    $11,676    $10,856    $12,184    $12,376    $12,477    $11,495
                                                        ($99)     ($132)     ($156)     ($356)     ($281)   ($104)      ($70)     ($113)     ($110)     ($244)     ($167)      ($74)
    Median Wage & Salary Income (Cond. On +)           $9,124     $8,366    $10,022    $10,108     $9,658   $9,049     $6,949     $6,646     $7,118     $7,381     $6,533     $7,022
                                                        ($94)     ($118)     ($138)     ($385)     ($301)   ($100)      ($87)     ($125)     ($133)     ($273)     ($241)      ($90)
Share Filing 1040 with Self-Employment Income           0.033      0.025      0.037       0.053      0.049   0.030      0.102      0.065      0.139      0.109      0.156      0.091
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.002)  (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.002)
    Median Self Employment Income (Cond. On +)         $9,761     $7,858    $10,157    $10,877    $10,854   $9,152    $11,051    $10,405    $11,096    $11,382    $11,292    $10,947
                                                       ($229)     ($483)     ($267)     ($520)     ($397)   ($283)      ($63)     ($232)      ($73)     ($256)     ($174)      ($71)
Share Filing 1040 with Social Security Income           0.017      0.018      0.016       0.013      0.013   0.017      0.021      0.028      0.015      0.016      0.014      0.022
                                                         (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)
    Median Social Security Income (Cond. On +)        $12,963    $13,528    $12,545    $10,809    $11,274  $13,110    $12,071    $13,437    $11,138    $10,767    $10,474    $12,274
                                                       ($229)     ($292)     ($327)     ($661)     ($666)   ($230)     ($328)     ($500)     ($465)     ($881)     ($819)     ($333)
Share Receiving W2                                      0.445      0.446      0.442       0.448      0.457   0.443      0.478      0.474      0.486      0.467      0.480      0.478
                                                       (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.005)  (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.003)
Median W2 Wages & Tips (Cond. On +)                    $5,224     $5,117     $5,024     $6,786     $6,491   $5,076     $5,299     $5,031     $5,225     $6,790     $6,000     $5,167
                                                        ($62)      ($85)      ($94)     ($263)     ($206)    ($64)      ($72)     ($103)     ($110)     ($248)     ($213)      ($77)
Mean Number of W2s Received (Cond. On +)                1.670      1.671      1.668      1.671      1.782    1.651      1.618      1.627      1.616      1.592      1.589      1.624
                                                       (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.020)    (0.021)  (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.033)    (0.019)    (0.009)
Share Receiving 1099R                                   0.031      0.034      0.029       0.027      0.025   0.032      0.029      0.035      0.026      0.017      0.019      0.031
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)
Share Receiving Housing Benefits                        0.087      0.071      0.109       0.080      0.075   0.089      0.154      0.128      0.193      0.118      0.133      0.159
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)  (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.002)
   Mean Housing Benefits Cond. On Receipt              $2,876     $2,647     $2,892     $3,813     $3,619   $2,771     $4,111     $3,480     $4,381     $5,102     $5,152     $3,935
                                                        ($44)      ($60)      ($65)      ($179)     ($170)   ($44)      ($56)      ($76)      ($81)     ($220)     ($190)      ($57)
Share Receiving VA Benefits                             0.041      0.041      0.046       0.022      0.021   0.044      0.005      0.005      0.005      0.004      0.002      0.005
                                                       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)  (0.001)      (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (Z)
Share Receiving SNAP²                                   0.770      0.709      0.816       0.770      0.804   0.761      0.864      0.820      0.899      0.811      0.883      0.857
                                                       (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.010)    (0.007)  (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.010)    (0.006)    (0.004)
    Mean SNAP Amount (Cond. On +)                      $2,283     $2,096     $2,332     $2,666     $2,650   $2,180     $3,515     $3,309     $3,591     $3,631     $3,857     $3,393
                                                        ($14)      ($21)      ($18)       ($49)      ($34)   ($14)      ($21)      ($39)      ($27)      ($57)      ($41)      ($24)
    Mean Months of SNAP (Cond. On +)                    9.266      8.825      9.472      9.686      9.711    9.141     10.280      9.873     10.440     10.420     10.590     10.160
                                                       (0.027)    (0.048)    (0.036)    (0.080)    (0.056)  (0.031)    (0.024)    (0.052)    (0.030)    (0.068)    (0.043)    (0.029)
Share Receiving Medicare Part A or B                    0.095      0.100      0.094       0.079      0.070   0.100      0.074      0.088      0.064      0.055      0.047      0.079
                                                       (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)
    Share Receiving OASI in Medicare                    0.004      0.004      0.003       0.003      0.004   0.004      0.002      0.003      0.001      0.002      0.002      0.002
                                                         (Z)        (Z)        (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)      (Z)
    Share Receiving DI in Medicare                      0.091      0.095      0.089          70
                                                                                          0.075      0.065   0.095      0.071      0.085      0.062      0.052      0.045      0.076
                                                       (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)
             Table 16a: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Sheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group (continued)
                                                                                     Male                                                               Female
                                                                                                                      Non-                                                              Non-
                                                           All     White       Black         Other    Hispanic                   All      White       Black       Other   Hispanic
                                                                                                                   Hispanic                                                           Hispanic
Share Enrolled in Medicaid                               0.392      0.357      0.418         0.470       0.478       0.378      0.667      0.611      0.730       0.654      0.761      0.648
                                                       (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.003)
Share Receiving Any Benefits²³                           0.856      0.808      0.893         0.856       0.872       0.852      0.932      0.902      0.953       0.905      0.950      0.925
                                                       (0.003)     (0.005)    (0.003)       (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.007)    (0.004)    (0.003)
Share Receiving Any Earnings                             0.503       0.483      0.525         0.513       0.518       0.501     0.573       0.539     0.612        0.560      0.597     0.568
                                                       (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.003)
Share Receiving Any Benefits or Earnings²                0.951       0.932      0.965         0.955       0.953       0.951     0.980       0.973     0.986        0.970      0.983     0.979
                                                       (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.002)       (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.004)    (0.002)    (0.001)
Mean Earnings                                          $6,856      $6,029     $7,332        $9,129      $8,207      $6,631     $6,913     $5,932     $7,838      $7,317     $7,519     $6,791
                                                        ($126)      ($136)     ($183)        ($770)      ($361)      ($134)     ($67)      ($104)     ($96)       ($190)     ($151)     ($74)
SD Earnings                                           $33,605     $25,892    $30,477       $65,041     $34,734     $33,413    $13,336    $14,024    $12,466     $13,381    $11,947    $13,595
  th
50 Percentile Earnings                                     $0          $0      $140           $21        $120           $0      $898       $217      $2,404       $686      $1,867      $755
                                                          ($7)        ($2)      ($28)         ($47)       ($47)        ($6)     ($51)       ($39)    ($127)      ($151)     ($212)      ($51)
75th Percentile Earnings                               $7,314      $5,850     $8,545        $9,027      $9,421      $7,002    $10,436     $7,607    $11,845    $10,851     $11,856    $10,073
                                                         ($77)     ($114)     ($149)        ($343)      ($294)        ($83)     ($77)     ($150)     ($120)      ($278)     ($194)     ($101)
Mean Pre-Tax Income                                    $7,701      $6,991     $8,015       $10,027      $8,713      $7,532     $7,957     $7,155     $8,721     $8,262      $8,228     $7,903
                                                        ($115)     ($123)     ($146)        ($776)      ($183)      ($130)      ($91)     ($124)     ($149)      ($274)     ($161)     ($104)
SD Pre-Tax Income                                     $30,748     $23,600    $24,345       $65,560     $17,660     $32,419    $18,225    $16,723    $19,366    $19,309     $12,760    $19,151
  th
50 Percentile Pre-Tax Income                             $203        $68       $492          $265        $442        $179      $1,625      $742      $3,433     $1,330      $2,851     $1,472
                                                         ($21)       ($16)      ($51)         ($92)       ($91)       ($21)     ($70)       ($64)    ($161)      ($216)     ($257)      ($71)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                         $8,881      $7,624    $10,167       $10,919     $11,087      $8,585    $11,461     $9,638    $12,918    $11,924     $12,884    $11,214
                                                         ($97)     ($109)     ($134)        ($375)      ($303)        ($98)     ($80)     ($155)     ($143)      ($285)     ($220)      ($81)
Mean Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                          $9,569      $8,950     $9,686       $11,253     $10,137      $9,417    $11,574    $10,041    $12,297    $11,924     $11,755    $11,506
                                                        ($273)     ($504)     ($364)        ($465)      ($265)      ($336)     ($198)     ($282)     ($304)      ($361)     ($218)     ($254)
SD Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                           $35,310     $40,639    $33,469       $19,512     $15,120     $38,946    $22,053    $17,197    $25,497    $14,566     $11,947    $24,605
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind               $2,858      $2,710     $3,280        $3,731      $3,630      $2,726     $7,509     $5,292     $9,063     $8,179      $8,665     $7,220
                                                         ($48)       ($23)      ($93)       ($230)      ($163)        ($40)    ($159)     ($186)     ($237)      ($457)     ($356)     ($173)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind              $11,642      $9,907    $12,331       $14,499     $13,268     $11,250    $16,317    $13,923    $17,152    $17,468     $16,983    $16,023
                                                        ($168)     ($263)     ($211)        ($643)      ($435)      ($180)     ($139)     ($292)     ($179)      ($381)     ($276)     ($162)
Share in SNAP State                                      0.226      0.173      0.290         0.239       0.332       0.208      0.302      0.201      0.401       0.327      0.460      0.270
Share in Medicaid State                                  1.000      1.000      1.000         1.000       1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000      1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000
Sample Size                                            71,500      36,500     28,000          7,100       9,300     62,500     40,000     18,000     17,000        5,000      6,300    33,500
Weighted Count                                         103,200     51,890     41,010        10,300      14,770      88,430     56,330     25,430     23,990        6,915      9,485    46,850
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative
VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2008-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2006-2016), and Tennessee
(2004-2016)


                                                                                             71
                 Table 16a: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Sheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group (notes)
Note: Table displays the IPW weighted share adults enumerated as homeless in the 2010 Decennial Census and 2019 Numident dataset with a non-missing year of birth born between 1945 and 1992
(inclusive) linking to income and benefits datasets in 2010. Z indicates a standard error that rounds to zero (but is not equal to zero). For disclosure purposes, percentiles are calculated as a weighted mean
of the six observations above and the six observations below the weighted percentile. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. Sample sizes are rounded to comply with Census Bureau
requirements. Dollars are expressed as Chained CPI-U-adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-
FY21-045.
¹ Total money income includes wage and salary, total interest (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony received, business income (+/-), total pensions and annuities, net rents royalties, estates
and trusts (+/-), farm income (+/-), unemployment compensation, and total social security benefits.
² We report the share of individuals receiving SNAP benefits, any benefits, or any benefits or earnings, who were enumerated in New York, New Jersey, Tennessee, Indiana, or Illinois in the 2010
Decennial Census.
³ Any benefits includes SNAP, HUD, VA, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits.
This row reports the share of individuals with positive estimated earnings across IRS 1040 and W2 datasets. Earnings is the sum of 1040 wage and salary income, estimated non-negative 1040 self-
employment income (when a self employment schedule was filed), and W2 deferred compensation less any W2 wages and tips associated with a cofiler for individuals filing a 1040. Self-employment
income is equal to total money income less wage and salary income, dividend income, rental income, social security, and interest income. For individuals without a 1040, earnings is equal to wages and tips
across W2s.
 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA SCD compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the
calendar year and ¼ of the annual SCD amount of the fiscal year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages
and tips and deferred compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA and employer sponsored retirement distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations with implausibly high pre-tax
income.
 Pre-tax income is measured as above. In-kind transfers include benefits from HUD and SNAP benefits. SNAP benefits are calculated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average
monthly SNAP benefit received in that year.




                                                                                                      72
                        Table 16b: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Unsheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group
                                                                                    Male                                                          Female
                                                                                                              Non-                                                              Non-
                                                         All       White      Black      Other     Hispanic              All       White      Black      Other     Hispanic
                                                                                                            Hispanic                                                          Hispanic
Share Filing 1040 with Positive Total Money Income¹      0.276      0.256      0.296      0.304      0.321    0.268      0.367      0.346      0.396      0.383      0.432      0.355
                                                        (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.006)  (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.004)
Median Total Money Income (Cond. On +)                 $14,533    $14,307    $14,183    $17,051    $18,022  $13,979    $13,991    $13,912    $13,991    $14,273    $14,883    $13,720
                                                        ($199)     ($275)     ($284)     ($984)     ($535)   ($225)     ($195)     ($289)     ($277)     ($628)     ($419)     ($223)
    Median Wage & Salary Income (Cond. On +)            $8,989     $8,028     $9,800    $10,294    $11,856   $8,617     $7,405     $6,765     $8,076     $7,509     $9,035     $7,240
                                                        ($182)     ($192)     ($300)     ($918)     ($649)   ($178)     ($180)     ($254)     ($342)     ($744)     ($534)     ($193)
Share Filing 1040 with Self-Employment Income            0.033      0.029       0.035      0.046      0.048   0.030      0.070       0.056      0.091      0.075      0.101     0.064
                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.003)  (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.002)
    Median Self Employment Income (Cond. On +)          $9,872     $8,496    $10,207    $10,398    $11,473   $9,336    $10,884    $10,349    $11,144    $10,163    $11,157    $10,845
                                                        ($321)     ($576)     ($372)     ($910)     ($872)   ($361)     ($217)     ($508)     ($247)     ($836)     ($644)     ($275)
Share Filing 1040 with Social Security Income            0.026      0.028       0.024      0.025      0.020   0.027      0.039       0.046      0.032      0.031      0.030     0.041
                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.002)
    Median Social Security Income (Cond. On +)         $13,821    $14,036    $13,799    $12,545    $12,003  $14,013    $12,929    $13,787    $11,823    $10,343    $10,522    $13,245
                                                        ($253)     ($411)     ($353)    ($1,112)    ($886)   ($278)     ($379)     ($441)     ($719)    ($1,957)    ($804)     ($404)
Share Receiving W2                                       0.331      0.335      0.322      0.349      0.392    0.320      0.337       0.339      0.323      0.369      0.408     0.325
                                                        (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.006)  (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.004)
Median W2 Wages & Tips (Cond. On +)                     $4,574     $4,685     $3,821     $7,391     $8,502   $4,075     $5,809     $5,728     $5,378     $7,229     $8,757     $5,261
                                                        ($126)     ($135)     ($203)     ($462)     ($422)   ($121)     ($174)     ($230)     ($305)     ($632)     ($532)     ($175)
Mean Number of W2s Received (Cond. On +)                 1.555      1.587      1.511      1.556      1.702    1.522      1.515      1.523      1.482      1.555      1.593      1.497
                                                        (0.009)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.027)    (0.027)  (0.009)    (0.012)    (0.016)    (0.021)    (0.035)    (0.032)    (0.013)
Share Receiving 1099R                                    0.036      0.038       0.034      0.036      0.030   0.038      0.040       0.042      0.037      0.033      0.030     0.041
                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.002)  (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.002)
Share Receiving Housing Benefits                         0.082      0.069       0.104      0.065      0.054   0.087      0.162       0.133      0.226      0.120      0.142     0.165
                                                        (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.003)  (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.003)
   Mean Housing Benefits Cond. On Receipt               $4,374     $3,776     $4,758     $5,257     $5,307   $4,268     $5,766     $4,993     $6,235     $7,362     $8,084     $5,418
                                                         ($65)      ($85)      ($102)     ($241)     ($250)   ($66)      ($89)      ($111)     ($143)     ($338)     ($324)     ($88)
Share Receiving VA Benefits                              0.029      0.027       0.035      0.021      0.013   0.033      0.003       0.003      0.004      0.004      0.004     0.003
                                                        (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)  (0.001)      (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (Z)
Share Receiving SNAP²                                    0.638      0.615       0.668      0.568      0.603   0.648      0.670       0.669      0.698      0.551      0.679     0.668
                                                        (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.019)    (0.014)  (0.006)    (0.009)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.027)    (0.021)    (0.010)
    Mean SNAP Amount (Cond. On +)                       $2,083     $2,008     $2,091     $2,372     $2,259   $2,040     $2,958     $2,914     $2,954     $3,175     $3,289     $2,879
                                                         ($20)      ($34)       ($27)      ($79)      ($53)   ($22)      ($49)       ($75)      ($71)    ($152)     ($123)      ($53)
    Mean Months of SNAP (Cond. On +)                     9.397      8.969      9.627      9.790      9.628    9.342      9.930      9.799     10.040      9.899     10.090      9.891
                                                        (0.049)    (0.085)    (0.065)    (0.159)    (0.111)  (0.055)    (0.066)    (0.104)    (0.093)    (0.197)    (0.149)    (0.073)
Share Receiving Medicare Part A or B                     0.150      0.158       0.147      0.121      0.097   0.160      0.143       0.157      0.133      0.102      0.091     0.152
                                                        (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.004)  (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.003)
    Share Receiving OASI in Medicare                     0.005      0.006       0.005      0.004      0.004   0.005      0.005       0.006      0.005      0.004      0.004     0.006
                                                          (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (Z)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
    Share Receiving DI in Medicare                       0.144      0.152       0.141      0.116      0.092   0.154      0.137       0.151      0.126      0.097      0.086     0.145
                                                        (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)   73
                                                                                         (0.005)    (0.004)  (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.003)
                Table 16b: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Unsheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group (continued)
                                                                                              Male                                                               Female
                                                                                                                          Non-                                                                   Non-
                                                                   All       White      Black       Other     Hispanic                 All       White       Black       Other     Hispanic
                                                                                                                       Hispanic                                                               Hispanic
Share Enrolled in Medicaid                                        0.384       0.373      0.396      0.395       0.383    0.384         0.569      0.561       0.607      0.501       0.547      0.573
                                                                 (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.007)     (0.006)  (0.003)       (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.004)
Share Receiving Any Benefits²³                                    0.772       0.749      0.802      0.700       0.696    0.792         0.802      0.796       0.823      0.732       0.798      0.803
                                                                 (0.005)     (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.018)     (0.013)  (0.005)       (0.007)    (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.024)     (0.018)    (0.008)
Share Receiving Any Earnings                                       0.395       0.377      0.414      0.413       0.447    0.385         0.428      0.405       0.457      0.455       0.504      0.414
                                                                 (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.007)     (0.006)  (0.003)       (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.004)
Share Receiving Any Benefits or Earnings²                          0.908       0.903      0.913      0.907       0.901    0.910         0.935      0.930       0.944      0.912       0.945      0.932
                                                                 (0.004)     (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.011)     (0.009)  (0.004)       (0.005)    (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.015)     (0.010)    (0.005)
Mean Earnings                                                    $6,354      $5,813     $6,749     $7,585      $8,863   $5,889        $6,275     $5,510      $7,176     $7,383      $7,833     $6,003
                                                                  ($135)      ($183)     ($241)     ($284)      ($264)   ($151)        ($134)     ($191)      ($211)     ($374)      ($300)     ($148)
SD Earnings                                                     $27,778     $27,225    $30,206    $19,614     $20,529  $28,907       $17,762    $18,903     $15,436    $18,067     $14,634    $18,236
25th Percentile Earnings                                            $0          $0         $0          $0         $0       $0            $0         $0           $0         $0         $0         $0
                                                                    (Z)         (Z)        (Z)         (Z)        (Z)      (Z)           (Z)        (Z)          (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)
  th
50 Percentile Earnings                                              $0          $0         $0          $0         $0       $0            $0         $0           $0         $0         $0         $0
                                                                    (Z)         (Z)        (Z)         (Z)        (Z)      (Z)           (Z)        (Z)         ($4)       ($5)       ($97)       (Z)
  th
75 Percentile Earnings                                           $3,902      $2,866     $5,434     $5,716      $8,784   $3,261        $6,347     $4,066      $9,405     $7,308     $11,360     $5,361
                                                                 ($225)      ($233)     ($443)    ($1,166)    ($1,080)  ($194)        ($215)     ($280)      ($327)     ($694)      ($531)     ($247)
Mean Pre-Tax Income                                              $7,694      $7,267     $8,016     $8,626      $9,891   $7,287        $8,391     $8,330      $8,320     $8,873      $8,792     $8,321
                                                                 ($146)      ($190)     ($274)     ($297)      ($276)   ($165)        ($406)     ($707)      ($245)     ($434)      ($320)     ($470)
SD Pre-Tax Income                                               $30,149     $28,241    $34,395    $20,495     $21,443  $31,482       $53,693    $70,066     $17,909    $20,958     $15,605    $57,826
25th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                      $0          $0         $0          $0         $0       $0            $0         $0           $0         $0         $0         $0
                                                                    (Z)         (Z)        (Z)         (Z)        (Z)      (Z)           (Z)        (Z)          (Z)        (Z)        (Z)        (Z)
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                      $0          $0         $0          $0         $0       $0            $0         $0           $0         $0       $234         $0
                                                                    (Z)         (Z)        (Z)        ($7)       ($52)     (Z)           (Z)        (Z)        ($46)      ($63)     ($231)        (Z)
  th
75 Percentile Pre-Tax Income                                     $7,024      $5,553     $7,981     $8,567     $12,184   $6,252        $9,798     $8,135     $11,288     $9,966     $13,290     $9,012
                                                                 ($242)      ($351)     ($373)    ($1,134)    ($1,163)  ($261)        ($222)     ($324)      ($303)     ($737)      ($502)     ($243)
Mean Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                   $10,133      $9,789     $9,998    $12,376     $11,597   $9,757       $11,010     $9,714     $11,563    $13,336     $11,585    $10,874
                                                                 ($527)      ($500)     ($929)    ($1,034)     ($654)   ($634)        ($380)     ($484)      ($637)    ($1,080)     ($595)     ($447)
SD Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                                     $43,090     $25,610    $54,156    $26,604     $22,776  $46,918       $20,416    $17,006     $22,877    $20,280     $13,516    $21,714
25th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                          $838        $555      $1,027     $1,410      $1,386    $766         $1,645     $1,264      $1,912     $2,162      $2,433     $1,463
                                                                 ($104)      ($203)       ($85)    ($255)      ($414)     ($63)         ($84)    ($130)      ($108)     ($289)      ($103)       ($97)
50th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                         $2,698      $2,588     $2,692     $2,710      $2,710   $2,607        $3,312     $2,748      $3,647     $4,605      $5,033     $3,007
                                                                   ($22)     ($103)       ($15)    ($326)      ($248)     ($17)       ($169)     ($184)      ($313)    ($1,031)     ($831)     ($159)
75th Percentile Pre-Tax Income + In-Kind                        $10,025      $9,231     $9,863    $14,386     $15,650   $8,895       $14,058    $12,308     $15,029    $17,401     $17,593    $12,816
                                                                 ($627)     ($1,402)    ($532)    ($2,124)    ($3,065)  ($414)        ($550)     ($801)      ($835)    ($2,344)    ($1,073)    ($632)
Share in SNAP State                                               0.170       0.128      0.231      0.153       0.223    0.160         0.178      0.131       0.261      0.172       0.228      0.170
Share in Medicaid State                                           1.000       1.000      1.000      1.000       1.000    1.000         1.000      1.000       1.000      1.000       1.000      1.000
Sample Size                                                      42,500      22,000     15,500       4,800       6,100  36,500        17,500       9,900       5,400      2,300       2,400    15,000
Weighted Count                                                  104,100      53,270     40,300     10,490      16,290   87,780        39,130     21,730      12,800       4,603       5,819    33,310
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets,  742006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA
Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2008-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2006-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016)
                    Table 16b: Income & Benefit Receipt Among Unsheltered Homeless Adults Ages 18-64 in 2010 Decennial Census by Sub-Group (notes)
Note: Table displays the IPW weighted share adults enumerated as homeless in the 2010 Decennial Census and 2019 Numident dataset with a non-missing year of birth born between 1945 and 1992 (inclusive)
linking to income and benefits datasets in 2010. (Z) indicates a standard error that rounds to zero (but is not equal to zero). Sample sizes are rounded to comply with Census Bureau requirements. Dollars are
expressed as Chained CPI-U-adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
¹ Total money income includes wage and salary, total interest (taxable and tax-exempt), taxable dividends, alimony received, business income (+/-), total pensions and annuities, net rents royalties, estates and trusts
(+/-), farm income (+/-), unemployment compensation, and total social security benefits.
² We report the share of individuals receiving SNAP benefits, any benefits, or any benefits or earnings, who were enumerated in New York, New Jersey, Tennessee, Indiana, or Illinois in the 2010 Decennial
Census.
³ Any benefits includes SNAP, HUD, VA, Medicare, and Medicaid benefits.
This row reports the share of individuals with positive estimated earnings across IRS 1040 and W2 datasets. Earnings is the sum of 1040 wage and salary income, estimated non-negative 1040 self-employment
income (when a self employment schedule was filed), and W2 deferred compensation less any W2 wages and tips associated with a cofiler for individuals filing a 1040. Self-employment income is equal to total
money income less wage and salary income, dividend income, rental income, social security, and interest income. For individuals without a 1040, earnings is equal to wages and tips across W2s.
 For individuals with a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of total money income and VA SCD compensation, measured as ¾ of the annual SCD amount for the fiscal year corresponding to the calendar year
and ¼ of the annual SCD amount of the fiscal year corresponding to the year after the calendar year specified. For individuals without a 1040, pre-tax income is equal to the sum of wages and tips and deferred
compensation in W2s, VA SCD compensation, and IRA and employer sponsored retirement distributions across 1099-Rs. We drop a few observations with implausibly high pre-tax income.
 Pre-tax income is measured as above. In-kind transfers include benefits from HUD and SNAP benefits. SNAP benefits are calculated by multiplying the months of SNAP receipt in a year by the average monthly
SNAP benefit received in that year.




                                                                                                           75
                                                                                   Figure 1: Sheltered Homeless Estimates by Data Source
                                                                  1800

                                                                  1600
                                Population Estimate (Thousands)



                                                                  1400

                                                                  1200

                                                                  1000

                                                                  800

                                                                  600

                                                                  400

                                                                  200

                                                                      0
                                                                            2006     2007    2008    2009    2010     2011     2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019

                                                                                                    2010 Census          ACS          HUD PIT*        HMIS*


Sources: 2007-2018 Annual Homelessness Assessment Reports, U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2010
Decennial Census. *Indicates data obtained from publicly available sources. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-
sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization
number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.


                                                                                 Figure 2: Unsheltered Homeless Estimates by Data Source
                                                300


                                                250
           Population Estimate (Thousands)




                                                200


                                                150


                                                100


                                                          50


                                                                  0
                                                                          2006     2007     2008    2009    2010     2011    2012     2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018    2019

                                                                                                                   2010 Census         HUD PIT*


Sources: 2007-2018 Annual Homelessness Assessment Reports, U.S. Census Bureau 2006-2016 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2010
Decennial Census. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit
www.census.gov/acs. *Indicates data obtained from publicly available sources. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004

                                                                                                                             76
                                                        Figure 3: Overall HUD PIT Estimates for New York and California
                                               160

                                               140
             Population Estimate (Thousands)




                                               120

                                               100

                                                80

                                                60

                                                40

                                                20

                                                    0
                                                         2007   2008      2009    2010     2011      2012     2013      2014    2015   2016    2017    2018   2019

                                                                                                  NY Total           CA Total


Source: 2007-2019 HUD PIT estimates by state and CoC, which are publicly available at https://www.hudexchange.info/.


                                                        Figure 4: Overall HUD PIT Estimates for New York and California
                                                                                     Cities
                                               90

                                               80
            Population Estimate (Thousands)




                                               70

                                               60

                                               50

                                               40

                                               30

                                               20

                                               10

                                                0
                                                        2007    2008     2009    2010     2011      2012      2013      2014    2015   2016    2017    2018   2019

                                                                       San Francisco Bay Area           Greater Los Angeles            New York City


Source: 2007-2019 HUD PIT estimates by state and CoC, which are publicly available at https://www.hudexchange.info/. The San Francisco Bay
Area includes the following CoCs: San Francisco CoC, Oakland, Berkeley/Alameda County CoC, San Jose/Santa Clara City & County CoC, and Daly/San
Mateo County CoC. Los Angeles City & County CoC. The Greater Los Angeles area includes the following CoCs: Los Angeles City & County CoC, Santa
Ana, Anaheim/Orange County CoC, Long Beach CoC, Pasadena CoC, Oxnard, San Buenaventura/Ventura County CoC, and Glendale CoC. New York
City includes only the New York City CoC.

                                                                                                         77
                                             Figure 5: Los Angeles and San Francisco HUD PIT Estimates
                                    60000


                                    50000
             Population Estimate




                                    40000


                                    30000


                                    20000


                                    10000


                                       0
                                             2007    2010       2011      2012        2013     2014       2015     2016      2017       2018    2019

                                                               S.F. Bay - Sheltered               S.F. Bay - Unsheltered
                                                               Greater L.A. - Sheltered           Greater L.A. - Unsheltered


  Source: 2007-2019 HUD PIT estimates by state and CoC, which are publicly available at https://www.hudexchange.info/. The San Francisco Bay
Area includes the following CoCs: San Francisco CoC, Oakland, Berkeley/Alameda County CoC, San Jose/Santa Clara City & County CoC, and Daly/San
 Mateo County CoC. Los Angeles City & County CoC. The Greater Los Angeles area includes the following CoCs: Los Angeles City & County CoC, Santa
      Ana, Anaheim/Orange County CoC, Long Beach CoC, Pasadena CoC, Oxnard, San Buenaventura/Ventura County CoC, and Glendale CoC.



                                                      Figure 6: New York City HUD PIT Estimates
                                    80,000

                                    70,000

                                    60,000
              Population Estimate




                                    50,000

                                    40,000

                                    30,000

                                    20,000

                                    10,000

                                        -
                                              2007   2008    2009      2010   2011      2012   2013      2014    2015     2016   2017    2018   2019

                                                            New York City - Sheltered                 New York City - Unsheltered


Source: 2007-2019 HUD PIT estimates by state and CoC, which are publicly available at https://www.hudexchange.info/. This chart displays the
HUD PIT Estimate for the New York City CoC.


                                                                                          78
                                     Figure 7: Average Daily Shelter Occupancy by City and Month
                    12000



                    10000



                     8000
    Shelter Users




                     6000



                     4000



                     2000



                       0
                            Jan.   Feb.   March      April      May       June        July      Aug.       Sept.      Oct.       Nov.       Dec.

                                          Houston (Pooled 2009-2015)           Los Angeles (Pooled 2009-2014)


Sources: 2009-2015 Houston CoC HMIS data, 2009-2014 Houston CoC HMIS data.

Note: The Los Angeles CoC covers LA county excluding Pasadena, Long Beach, and Glendale. The Houston CoC includes Houston, Harris, Fort Bend,
and Montgomery counties. Seasonality is computed using the set of all individuals appearing at any point in the HMIS dataset over the 2004 to 2015
(for Houston) or 2014 (for LA) time frame. We only compute occupancy for emergency and transitional shelters. We drop observations with no entry
date, no exit date, or neither. When the entry date equals the exit date, we count these as one-day spells. To calculate average daily shelter users, we
first sum up the number of person-days of shelter occupancy in a given month and year, and then divide this by the number of days in that month and
year to find average daily shelter occupancy. We then take the average of the monthly average shelter occupancies over 2009-2014 or 2009-2015. All
results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization number CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-004.




                                                                          79
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets.
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure depicts the mortality-
adjusted, IPW-weighted share of individuals in a given group who have positive earnings in administrative datasets. Earnings are defined as in Tables
11-13. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs.
All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare
Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016),
and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Among individuals who lived in
a state for which we have SNAP data in a given year in their survey year, table reports the IPW-weighted share linking to SNAP, HUD PIC and TRACS,
VA, Medicare, or Medicaid datasets from 2006-2015. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and
definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-
ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
                                                                        80
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets.
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Earnings are calculated as in
Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-
sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization
numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets.
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Earnings are calculated as in
Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling
error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-
FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
                                                                         81
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare
Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016),
and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Pretax income and in-kind
transfers are calculated as in Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. For more information on confidentiality protection,
sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets,
2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare
Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016),
and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Pretax income and in-kind
transfers are calculated as in Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. For more information on confidentiality protection,
sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.
                                                                          82
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-
2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure reports the IPW-weighted
share of individuals receiving SNAP benefits who were enumerated in New York, New Jersey, Tennessee, Indiana, or Illinois in the 2010 Decennial
Census, conditional on our having administrative data for that state in a given year. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling
error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau,
authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure reports the IPW-weighted
share of individuals receiving Medicaid benefits. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and
definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-
ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.

                                                                       83
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2006-2016 Medicare dataset
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure reports the IPW-weighted
share of individuals enrolled in Medicare Part A or B. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and
definitions in the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-
ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2007-2014 Administrative VA
dataset
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult is drawn from the 2010 ACS.
Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure reports the IPW-weighted share
of individuals receiving VA benefits. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in the ACS,
visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-
FY21-045.
                                                                          84
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, U.S. Census Bureau 2010 American Community Survey 1-year data, 2019 Numident, 2006-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS
Note: Sheltered and unsheltered homeless groups are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census, and the single poor adult group is drawn from the 2010
ACS. Unsheltered group includes individuals enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Figure reports the IPW-weighted
share of individuals receiving HUD benefits. For more information on confidentiality protection, sampling error, non-sampling error, and definitions in
the ACS, visit www.census.gov/acs. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and
CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                         85
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets.
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Earnings are calculated as in Tables 11-13 using IPW weights. Dollars are
expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-
007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                        86
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets, 2006-2016 IRS 1099R Datasets, 2004-2016
HUD PIC & TRACS, 2007-2014 Administrative VA Dataset, 2006-2014 Medicare Datasets, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset, SNAP datasets for Illinois
(2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey (2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Pre-tax income and in-kind transfers are calculated as in Tables 11-13 using
IPW weights. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization
numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.


                                                                        87
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets.
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Earnings are calculated as in Tables 11-13 using IPW weights. Dollars are
expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-
007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.


                                                                        88
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2003-2016 IRS 1040 Datasets, 2006-2016 W2 Datasets.
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Benefit receipt is defined as in Tables 11-13 using IPW weights. Dollars are
expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-
007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                        89
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, SNAP datasets for Illinois (2009-2016), Indiana (2004-2016), New York (2007-2016), New Jersey
(2007-2016), and Tennessee (2004-2016).
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. SNAP receipt is limited to people enumerated in New York, New Jersey,
Tennessee, Indiana, or Illinois in the 2010 Decennial Census. Dollars are expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for
release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                         90
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2007-2015 Medicaid dataset
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Medicaid receipt is as defined in Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-
CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and
CBDRB-FY21-045.




                                                                         91
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2006-2016 Medicare dataset
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Disability benefit receipt is as defined in Tables 11-13. Dollars are
expressed as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-
ERD002-007 and CBDRB-FY21-045.

                                                                         92
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2007-2014 Administrative VA dataset
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. VA benefit receipt is as defined in Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed as C-
CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and CBDRB-
FY21-045.




                                                                        93
Sources: 2010 Decennial Census, 2019 Numident, 2006-2016 HUD PIC & TRACS
Note: Homeless individuals' race, Hispanic ethnicity, and sex are identified in the 2010 Decennial Census. The unsheltered group includes individuals
enumerated at soup kitchens and regularly scheduled mobile food vans. Housing benefit receipt is as defined in Tables 11-13. Dollars are expressed
as C-CPI-U adjusted 2018 dollars. All results were approved for release by the Census Bureau, authorization numbers CBDRB-FY20-ERD002-007 and
CBDRB-FY21-045.

                                                                        94
