                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COMMON AGENT OR DOUBLE AGENT? PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS
                  IN THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG MARKET

                                         Rena M. Conti
                                       Brigham Frandsen
                                       Michael L. Powell
                                       James B. Rebitzer

                                      Working Paper 28866
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28866


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We would like to thank Keith Ericson, Tal Gross, Robin Feldman, Kate Ho, Luca Maini, Renee
Rushnawitz, Amanda Starc, Alan White, and participants at the BU, Harvard, MIT Health
Economics seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual caveat applies The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Rena M. Conti, Brigham Frandsen, Michael L. Powell, and James B. Rebitzer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Common Agent or Double Agent? Pharmacy Benefit Managers in the Prescription Drug Market
Rena M. Conti, Brigham Frandsen, Michael L. Powell, and James B. Rebitzer
NBER Working Paper No. 28866
May 2021
JEL No. I1,I11,L1,L14

                                         ABSTRACT

In the U.S., pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) manage prescription drug purchases for payers.
Firms selling branded pharmaceuticals bid for preferred slots on the PBM's formulary by offering
rebates off of list price. We find that PBMs enhance efficiency, but the gains do not accrue to
consumers or drug makers. Our analysis offers insights into otherwise puzzling questions. Why
do drug makers pay rebates to PBMs? Why do payers delegate formulary operations to a few
large PBMs? Why are list prices so high? Why might PBMs vertically integrate with payers? Our
framework also offers insights into proposals for market reform.


Rena M. Conti                                     Michael L. Powell
Boston University                                 Kellogg School of Management
Questrom School of Business                       2211 Campus Drive
Department of Markets,                            Evanston, IL 60208
Public Policy and Law                             mike-powell@kellogg.northwestern.edu
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215                                  James B. Rebitzer
rconti@bu.edu                                     Boston University
                                                  Questrom School of Business
Brigham Frandsen                                  Department of Markets,
Department of Economics                           Public Policy and Law
Brigham Young University                          595 Commonwealth Ave
Provo, UT 84602                                   Boston, MA 02215
frandsen@byu.edu                                  and NBER
                                                  rebitzer@bu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28866
   Common Agent or Double Agent? Pharmacy
 Benefit Managers in the Prescription Drug Market
         Rena Conti,             Brigham Frandsen,                 Michael Powell,
                                   James B. Rebitzer§
                                       May 11, 2021


                                         Abstract
           In the U.S., pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) manage prescription drug
       purchases for payers. Firms selling branded pharmaceuticals bid for preferred
       slots on the PBM's formulary by offering rebates off of list price. We find that
       PBMs enhance efficiency, but the gains do not accrue to consumers or drug
       makers. Our analysis offers insights into otherwise puzzling questions. Why
       do drug makers pay rebates to PBMs? Why do payers delegate formulary
       operation to a few large PBMs? Why are list prices so high? Why might
       PBMs vertically integrate with payers? Our framework also offers insights
       into proposals for market reform.



1      Introduction
Every national healthcare system relies on a set of policies and institutions to balance
the tricky tradeoff between innovation incentives and access to new, innovative drugs
(Scherer, 2000).1 The U.S. system relies on a peculiar a set of organizations called
    
     Boston University
    
     Brigham Young University
   
     Northwestern University
   §
     Boston University
   1
     The U.S. healthcare market also faces well known principal-agent challenges: physicians act as
agents for patients in their demand for medical care and health insurance plans act as payers for
medical services provided by physicians and other medical providers to patients (McGuire, 2000;
Pauly, 2000).

                                                1
pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs).
    PBMs are for-profit, non-governmental companies that manage pharmacy bene-
fits on behalf of health plans and other payers. Virtually every commercial health
insurance plan in the U.S. uses a PBM. Medicare, the government insurance program
for the elderly and disabled, also relies on PBM services to manage drugs purchased
under Medicare Part D drug plans and Medicare Advantage plans. Many states also
use PBMs in their Medicaid prescription drug programs covering vulnerable individ-
uals including children, pregnant women and the poor (Kaiser Family Foundation,
2020; Yost, 2018; Royce et al., 2019).
    PBMs play a central role in drug markets and they are a focus of increasing
scrutiny from policymakers, but little attention has been devoted to analyzing the
economics of these organizations. This is in part due to the opaque contracts govern-
ing PBMs' relationships with payers on one side and drug makers on the other.2 In
this paper, we offer a microeconomic analysis of the role of PBMs in the U.S. mar-
ket for on-patent prescription drugs, also known in the industry as branded drugs.
While non-patented "generic" drugs make up the bulk of prescriptions sold in the
U.S., branded drugs account for nearly three quarters of total drug spending (IQVIA
Institute for Human Data Science, 2018).
    To manage drug spending, PBMs make use of a formulary. A formulary is a list
of covered drugs with associated prices for consumers and plans. It is common for
formularies to feature different "tiers" of drug coverage. In their role as formulary
operators, PBMs allocate drugs to the different formulary tiers. A branded drug
assigned to a preferred tier will enjoy lower copays (the portion of the price paid by
the consumer) and hence higher demand.3
   2
     Parties treat these contracts as trade secrets and US regulators generally agree with this per-
spective. What little is known of the workings of PBMs comes largely from their own public
shareholder reports, court fillings, and documents revealed through government hearings and in-
vestigations.
   3
     Generally, PBMs allocate generic drugs to the most preferred tier. PBMs do more than struc-
ture competition between the makers of branded drugs. They also develop generic substitution poli-
cies, prior authorization programs, and disease management services. PBMs also strike agreements
with pharmacies over the amount and timing of professional fees for dispensing drugs (Feldman,
2020). We do not include these auxiliary functions in our theoretical model of PBMs.



                                                 2
    Branded drug makers compete for preferred formulary placement for their drug
by offering PBMs rebates off the drug's list price. Rebates are quite controversial
and raise pointed questions. Are they a kind of side-payment that undermines PBM
incentives to negotiate drug prices aggressively on behalf of their clients? If so, then
why do payers rely on such potentially compromised representatives? If not, why do
branded drug makers pay the rebates at all? Would consumers be better served if
rebates were prohibited altogether or, alternatively, directly handed over to health
plans or to consumers themselves?
    Other questions result from the enormous size of PBMs and the high degree
of concentration in the industry. In 2018, three PBMs (Express Scripts, CVS
Health/Caremark, and OptumRX) accounted for 80 percent of prescription drug
volume and six PBMs account for 95 percent of the prescription drug market (Fein,
2019; Feldman, 2020). The CVS-Health/Caremark PBM alone reports nearly 90
million members in its PBM business--and so negotiates on behalf of a customer
population larger than the population of Germany (CVS Health, 2017). Do such
large PBMs in a highly concentrated industry obtain lower drug prices on behalf of
payers and consumers, or do they leverage their monopsony position to gain at the
expense of consumers, health plans and branded drug makers?
    Our analysis model builds on three observations about the operation of PBMs.
The first concerns the incentives that formularies implicitly provide to drug makers.
Formularies assign branded drugs to tiers. If a branded drug is assigned to a preferred
tier, enrollees in the formulary pay little or nothing for the drug. Enrollees using
drugs assigned to a less preferred tier pay more. Thus branded drug makers who win
a spot in a favored tier gain a boost in sales. Drug makers compete for a preferred
spot on the formulary by offering per-unit rebates off the drug's list price. From this
perspective, tiered formularies have the same incentive structure as all-pay contests:
the per-unit rebates constitute the "bid," and the prize for winning the contest is a
favored position in the formulary.
    Our second observation is that PBMs are market intermediaries who have to
offer value to both upstream branded drug manufacturers and downstream health
plans. Branded drug makers will participate in formularies if doing so is at least as

                                           3
profitable as the alternative of selling at list price. Payers will, similarly, seek out
formulary services to the extent that the formulary offers net prices below list. Any
account of PBMs as market intermediaries must also explain why payers delegate
formulary operation to large PBMs who act as a common agent for many payers.
     Our third observation concerns the high list prices of branded drugs sold on
formularies administered by PBMs.4 In a drug market without rebates, list prices
are transaction prices. With rebates, however, few transactions may take place at
list price. In an extension to our baseline model, we find that high list prices matter
for overall market efficiency and consumer welfare even if very few transactions take
place at list price.5
     The theoretical framework we use is stylized and abstract, but it nevertheless
helps us understand formulary incentives, the PBM's role as intermediary, and the
importance of high list prices. As a result of their incentive structure, formularies im-
prove efficiency relative to the alternative of selling branded drugs at their monopoly
prices. The surplus generated by these efficiency-improving contests could, in prin-
ciple, enhance consumer welfare, or make more resources available to drug makers
for innovation but instead they accrue as rents to PBMs. On this basis, the chal-
lenges PBMs pose for economic policy have more to do with distribution than static
efficiency.
     The framework also offers insights into why a health plan would delegate the
formulary function to large PBMs who act as a common agent for many commercial
and government payers. In an extension to our baseline model, we find efficiency
gains when all the payers delegate the formulary operation to a single, large, PBM.
These efficiency gains are not the result of technological economies of scale or scope.
Neither do they rely on any relationship between bargaining power and the size of the
   4
     IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science (2020), for example, documents a growing disconnect
between the list prices for branded drugs and their net price accounting for rebates.
   5
     The term list price often refers to the Average Wholesale Price (AWP). A joke in the industry
refers to AWP as "Ain't What's Paid," underscoring the divergence between list and transaction
prices. As an empirical matter, previous studies suggest a significant number of insured Americans
pay list price for at least some of their drugs because their health plan provides incomplete coverage.
In addition, individuals who are uninsured for prescription drugs also pay list prices (Augustine
et al., 2018).


                                                  4
intermediary. Rather efficiency increases because a large PBM can better internalize
externalities resulting from the widespread use of most favored nation provisions that
promise purchasers the highest rebates (or equivalently the lowest net drug price)
offered anywhere in the market.
    The analysis also clarifies the economic significance of list prices in the market
for branded prescription drugs. The central insight is that rebates are available
only for drugs sold on the formulary. Otherwise, branded drugs sell at their list
price. Thus, when a branded drug maker sets a high list price for their drug they
are, all else equal, increasing the value to consumers of purchasing the drug on the
formulary at a discount. If participating in the formulary becomes more valuable,
the PBM can extract more value from consumers than would be possible with lower
list prices. In an extension to our baseline model we find that in equilibrium, some
branded drug makers will set list prices very far above monopoly prices, and PBMs
will bias their formulary contest to favor such high list price branded drugs. Biased
formularies make the pharmaceutical market less efficient and consumers less well
off, while increasing the surplus accruing to PBMs and branded drug makers.
    Finally our analysis of PBMs as a common agent for many payers sheds some light
on the benefits of vertical integration. In the past several years, large PBMs have
vertically consolidated with health insurers, including UnitedHealth Plans (health
plan) with OptumRx (PBM), Aetna (health plan) with CVS Caremark (PBM), and
Blue Cross Blue Shield plans (health plan) with PrimeTherapeutics (PBM). Verti-
cal integration can enhance efficiency or it can be anti-competitive. Understanding
which outcome prevails requires an institutionally informed applied theoretical model
(Gaynor, 2006). In the case of mergers between an agent (the PBM) and its principal
(the payer), the central theoretical issue is what problems a merger solves that are
not solved by a contract between the parties. In a setting where a PBM captures
the joint surplus produced by itself and a payer, there is little economic reason to
vertically integrate because there is an easy alignment of interests between principal
and agent as separate entities. In a richer setting, a payer may want to induce the
PBM to take actions that may benefit the payer but not the PBM. A payer may,
for example, wish to promote the use of low price generic drugs that offer no rebates

                                          5
to PBMs. In a conventional principal-agent relationship, both parties would realize
benefits from enhanced generic use and there would also be little reason to vertically
integrate. Common agency, in contrast, can severely limit the use and effectiveness
of such contracts. In this setting, vertical integration between a PBM and payers
may benefit both parties without making the market less competitive.
    We are not the first to observe that auction-like competition can help make mar-
kets for patented innovations more efficient. Kremer (1998), for example, proposes
that governments offer to purchase patents at their estimated private value as deter-
mined by an auction. Selling these products to consumers at a price equal to marginal
cost would eliminate monopoly price distortions while still providing innovation in-
centives. Formularies in our model similarly reduce monopoly price distortions to
the extent that they offer copays for drugs that approximate marginal cost. Con-
trary to Kremer's analysis, however, the bidding for preferred formulary slots aims
to generate large rebates rather than to elicit the branded drug maker's private in-
formation about the value of their product. Formularies more closely resemble the
all-pay contests analyzed in Siegel (2009) in which players make irreversible bids
before the outcome of the competition is known.
    Our primary theoretical contribution to the literature on contests is that we
derive the equilibrium structure of prizes and rules for selecting winners when the
contest is operated by a market intermediary. Creating value for both upstream and
downstream players shapes equilibrium contest design for market intermediaries in
ways that have not been previously studied. So too does the contracting externality
that causes payers to delegate formulary operations to a single large PBM who acts
as a common agent for many payers.6 We are not aware of any other formal models
of contest design by market intermediaries.
    The paper proceeds in four sections. In the next section we describe what is
known of the PBM business model. Section 3 sets up our analytical framework. In
Section 4, we present the baseline model in which a single third party payer designs
   6
    For a general analysis of contracting externalities see Segal (1999). For prior analyses of common
agency in other aspects of healthcare see Frandsen et al. (2019); Glazer and McGuire (2002); Einav
et al. (2020). The foundational analysis of the general theory of common agency is Bernheim and
Whinston (1986).


                                                  6
the formulary and drug makers choose rebates for their branded drugs. In Section
5, we extend the base model to allow for varying degrees of substitutability between
drugs and varying number of branded drugs. In Section 6, we extend the model
to allow for multiple payers and contracting externalities. Section 7 modifies the
baseline model by allowing branded drug makers to endogenously determine both
rebates and list prices. Section 8 discusses how vertical integration results from
common agency. We conclude by discussing some broad policy implications of our
results as well as directions for further research.


2       Institutional Setting: The PBM Business Model
PBMs are intermediaries between drug makers and payers, and operate formularies
for their clients, health plans, and other payers. Figure 1 depicts the PBM' s business
model. For clarity this depiction is highly stylized and it omits a number of features
of real-world markets. The US prescription drug market is complex and entails mul-
tiple parties including drug makers, health plans, consumers, pharmacies, wholesale
distributors and PBMs. In our depiction of the PBM's business model, we ignore
the role played by large wholesale drug distributors such as McKesson. Similarly, we
omit the interactions between PBMs and pharmacies.
    Branded drug manufacturers sell drugs to PBMs at a posted unit list price but
then provide a rebate for each purchase.7 The list price minus the per unit rebate--
what we call the net price--is the effective wholesale price that the PBM pays for
each drug sale. When enrollees purchase a branded drug from the PBM, they pay a
copay and also perhaps some coinsurance rate which is not presented in the Figure.
The PBM bills the insurer the reimbursement price for the drug minus the amount
that the enrollee already paid. In addition to copays, enrollees also pay insurance
premiums and the coverage they receive entitles them to participate in the formulary
and enjoy the drug subsidies that accompany insurance.
    The contracts between health plans and PBMs are closely held trade secrets. We
    7
    Market participants will sometimes refer to the list price as the Average Wholesale Price (AWP)
or alternatively the Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC).


                                                7
learned about these contracts from a sample of contracts that we could examine
directly, from the release of three government reports on PBM business practices
(Grassley and Wyden, 2021; Government Accountability Office, 2019; Yost, 2018),
and from some other reports (Feldman, 2019; Ciaccia, 2020). In the contracts and
other reports we examined, drugs are assigned to different formulary tiers and the
PBM commits to delivering these drugs to the payer at a discount off of the drug's
unit list prices. A contract might, for example, commit the PBM to provide all
branded drugs in the formulary to the payer at an average reimbursement price that
is 11 percent below AWP. Suppose that the PBM's net price for branded drugs
averaged 30 percent below list; then the PBM earns a profit equal to 19 percent of
the list price on each unit of a branded drug sold. Generics were supplied at prices
even further below their unit list price on average--in the neighborhood of 50 percent
below list.8
    In the industry, the difference between the reimbursement price of the drug and
the net price at which the PBM acquires the drug is called the spread. The spread
on branded drugs is generally presumed to be an important source of PBM profits.
Industry reports estimate that the total value of manufacturers' gross-to-net reduc-
tions for brand name drugs was $175 billion in 2019--of which about two-thirds
comes from rebates (Fein, 2020).9
    Finally, the U.S. prescription drug industry features most favored nation rules
(MFNs). MFNs are provisions that guarantee purchasers the lowest net price offered
to any purchasers of the drug. MFNs matter for our model because, as we discuss
below, they create a contracting externality that ends up favoring the emergence of
large PBMs acting as common agents for multiple payers.
   8
      Many contracts also contain commitments to dispense the majority of drugs as generics rather
than brands. These contract features are called "generic effective rates" and are calculated in
aggregate across all dispensed drugs. The contracts we examined also included per member fees
and transaction charges to payers for the handling of drugs. These charges differ depending on
whether the drug order was filled by mail order, in house, or other pharmacies. Fees can be paid
per unit of drug sold or in aggregate. Industry reports suggest these fees may be a growing source
of revenues for PBMs. (Feldman, 2020; Fein, 2017). We do not include these fees in our analysis.
    9
      PBMs can also make money on a variety of fees which are not set to reflect any specific drug's
list price or sales volume.



                                                 8
    There are two types of MFNs in the market for prescription drugs. The first are
contractual provisions between drug makers and PBMs. While the contracts between
drug makers and PBMs are closely guarded trade secrets, details are sometimes
made available in litigation--often in contractual disputes between PBMs and drug
makers when "best price" is at issue. We learned from discussions with lawyers and
economists who have been intimately involved in such litigation, that MFN clauses
are common. Specifically, the contracts between PBMs and drug makers will state
that the PBM is entitled to rebate amounts that reflect the contracts drug makers
make with their peers.10 These arrangements are also described in Feldman and
Frondorf (2017) and Feldman (2019).
    The second type of MFN is the result of administrative pricing rules guaranteeing
certain safety net providers the lowest net price prevailing in the market. The most
important of these is the Medicaid Prescription Drug Rebate Program (MDRP)
(Scott Morton, 1996; Congressional Budget Office, 2005).11 The Medicaid rebate
amount is set in statute and ensures that the program gets the lowest net price
(with some exceptions).12 State Medicaid programs provide coverage for prescription
  10
     These clauses tend to be included in the first contract with the drug maker, but may not be
mentioned in the contract renewals or "amendments."
  11
     In 1990 the Federal Government included a Most Favored Customer (MFC) clause in the
contract (OBRA 90) which would govern the prices paid to firms for pharmaceutical products
supplied to Medicaid recipients. Under the program, a drug maker who wants its drug covered
under Medicaid must enter into a rebate agreement with the Secretary of Health and Human
Services stating that it will rebate a specified portion of the Medicaid payment for the drug to
the states, who in turn share the rebates with the federal government. In exchange, Medicaid
programs cover nearly all of the drug maker's FDA-approved drugs, and the drugs are eligible for
federal matching funds. Though the pharmacy benefit is a state option, all states cover it, but,
within federal guidelines about pricing and rebates, administer pharmacy benefits in somewhat
different ways. Drug makers must also enter into agreements with other federal programs that
serve vulnerable populations.
  12
     The formula for rebates varies by type of drug: brand or generic. The rebate formula is the
same regardless of whether states pay for drugs on a fee-for-service basis or through payments to
managed care plans. For brand name drugs, the rebate is 23.1 percent of average manufacturer price
(AMP) or the difference between AMP and "best price," whichever is greater. Certain pediatric
and clotting drugs have a lower rebate amount of 17.1 percent. Best price is defined as the lowest
available price to any wholesaler, retailer, or provider, excluding certain government programs, such
as the health program for veterans. AMP is defined as the average price paid to drug makers by
wholesalers and retail pharmacies. For generic drugs, the rebate amount is 13 percent of AMP, and
there is no best price provision. Drug makers must report AMP for all covered outpatient drugs to


                                                 9
drugs for those who qualify. As of August 2020, the Medicaid program enrolled over
75 million individuals--roughly one in five Americans (Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, 2020).13 A recent Congressional investigation found evidence
that drug makers took MDRP's MFN provisions into account when setting prices.
"Internal memoranda and correspondence collected for this investigation suggest that
manufacturers seek to avoid triggering Medicaid `best price' when developing their
bids for commercial plans (Grassley and Wyden, 2021, p.68)."14
    Medicaid's MDRP is the basis of at least one other most favored nation rule
governing prescription drugs, 340B drug discounts (Conti et al., 2019). As a condi-
tion of participation in the Medicaid Drug Rebate program, drug makers must also
participate in the Federal 340B program. The 340B program offers discounted drugs
to certain safety net providers that serve vulnerable or underserved populations, in-
cluding Medicaid beneficiaries. 340B ceiling prices are calculated to match Medicaid
prices net of the rebate (Dolan, 2019). Arguably, the 340B drug discount is more im-
portant than the Medicaid MFN, because many more drug purchases are entitled to
340B discounts than Medicaid rebates. The U.S. Government Accountability Office
estimated that more than 50 percent of total sales of some drugs were 340B eligible
(2015).
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and report their best price for brand name
drugs. HHS uses this price data to calculate the unit rebate amount (URA) based on the rebate
formula and inflationary component and provides the URA to states. States multiply the units of
each drug purchased by the URA and invoice the drug maker for that amount. Drug makers then
pay states the statutory rebate amount as well as any negotiated supplemental rebates.
   13
      Medicaid enrollees are diverse in their reasons for eligibility and medical needs: Medicaid covers
many infants, children, pregnant women, and some parents of Medicaid eligible children, but also
many people with disabilities, and elderly people with very low incomes. The Affordable Care Act
(ACA) expanded Medicaid coverage of low-income, non-disabled, childless adults. The ACA made
significant changes to the MDRP. The law increased the rebate amount for both branded drugs and
generic drugs. It also extended rebates to outpatient drugs purchased for beneficiaries covered by
Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs). Previously, only drugs purchased through Medicaid
fee-for-service were eligible for rebates even though most states contract with MCOs to provide
services to Medicaid beneficiaries.
   14
      Earlier studies of the MDRP program have found that MDRP modestly increased the price of
some drugs (Scott Morton, 1996).




                                                  10
3      Model Setup
Our model describes a stylized setting in which multiple makers of branded drugs
sell their products on formularies run by intermediaries. The intermediaries in our
setup are either health insurers (payers) or a PBM hired by the payers. In either
case, customers must enroll in an insurance plan and pay the plan's premium to
gain access to drugs sold on the formulary. Drug makers compete for a preferred
formulary position by offering higher rebates, i.e., by lowering the net price at which
they sell drugs to the intermediary.


3.1    Drug Makers
Each drug maker produces a drug targeted at a distinct disease. The drugs are
produced at zero marginal cost, but each is patent protected so that the drug maker
is a monopolist in its own product market.15 Drug maker i has a list price, p       ¯i at
which it sells its drug to the uninsured who lack access to a formulary. We initially
treat the list prices as exogenous, but allow them to be chosen endogenously in an
extension to the basic model.
    Drug makers compete for a preferred position in the formulary by selling drugs
to the intermediary at a net price that is below their list price. Thus, the net price
for drug i is pi  p¯i . The difference between the list price and the net price at which
the drug is sold to the formulary is the per unit rebate. In our baseline model, the
drugs treat separate and unrelated diseases--clinically they are neither substitutes
nor complements. In an extension, we consider branded drugs that are clinically
partial substitutes. Drug makers choose prices to maximize profit, which is equal
to the net price times the quantity of drug sold. The quantity, of course, depends
on the copay in the formulary tier to which the intermediary assigns the drug. In
most of our analyses, there are two drug makers; in an extension we also consider
the general case with m  2 drug makers.
  15
    Here we follow Scherer (1993); Scott Morton (1999, 2000); Grabowski and Vernon (1992) in
treating drug makers as monopolists in their own market.




                                            11
3.2    Payers, PBMs, and Formularies
Each payer is also assumed to be a monopolist in its market. Payers receive a pre-
mium payment, p0 , from enrollees, and subsidize drug transactions on the formulary.
The magnitude of the per transaction subsidy is the difference between the price
they are charged for the drug and the copay in the formulary tier to which the drug
is assigned.
    Should payers themselves act as the intermediary between drug makers and con-
sumers, they are charged the net price for each drug. When a payer delegates oper-
ation of the formulary to a PBM, the flow of funds is altered. The PBM pays the
net price for the drugs to the drug maker but charges the payer a (possibly higher)
reimbursement price, ri , for drug i. When a consumer purchases a drug, he or she
pays a copay to the PBM. The PBM then charges the payer the difference between
the reimbursement price and the copay. By setting a high reimbursement price, the
PBM can transfer surplus from the payer to itself.
    In some versions of our model, payers will operate the formulary, and in others,
the PBM takes on this role. Indeed, part of the purpose of the model is to explain
why payers may delegate the formulary function to PBMs. The entity in charge of
the formulary specifies a copay for each tier: drugs assigned to the preferred tier have
a low copay, cL , and drugs assigned to the non-preferred tier have a high copay, cH .
The formulary operator decides the rules assigning drugs to tiers. The greater the
difference in copays across tiers, the greater the value to the drug makers of winning
a preferred formulary position. As we will show, the formulary assigns drugs to tiers
by comparing the net prices (or equivalently, rebates) offered by the drug companies.
In this way, the formulary creates an "all-pay" contest where the bidding takes the
form of drug makers offering rebates off list prices. Abusing notation slightly, we
denote the copay assigned to drug d by cd , where cd takes on the value cL if drug d
was assigned to the preferred tier, or cH otherwise.
    When a payer is the intermediary, it chooses the premium p0 , copays cL and cH ,
and drug tier assignments that maximize its profit. Payer profit in this case is equal
to the revenues they get from premiums minus the cost of drug subsidies. Drug


                                          12
subsidy costs are the product of net price minus copay and the volume of drug sold.


3.3    Consumers
Consumers purchase health insurance when healthy, and then become patients in
need of treatment. Treatment consists of purchasing one of the two branded drugs,
depending on which illness becomes manifest. We model uncertainty over the type
of medical condition as a discrete random variable D  {1, 2} with Pr (D = i) = 1/2
for i  {1, 2}. Consumer willingness to pay for the treatment depends on illness
severity, which we denote by random variable V with complementary cdf denoted by
q (p) := Pr (V > p), independent of D. We refer to q (p) as the consumer demand
function and assume that it is strictly downward sloping and differentiable on the
support of V . In some illustrative special cases, we assume it is uniform on the unit
interval, which corresponds to a linear demand curve. Our baseline model does not
rely on this assumption.
    Consumers who enroll in insurance pay a premium p0 to gain access to the formu-
lary. If the drug that becomes relevant for their condition ends up in the preferred
tier, the consumer pays the low copay, cL . If the relevant drug is in the other tier,
they pay a high copay, cH  cL . Thus, consumers using the formulary face a two-part
pricing schedule for accessing drugs: an upfront fixed premium and a copay per unit
of drug purchased. Contrary to conventional two-part pricing, however, the marginal
cost of the drug to the formulary is endogenous to the copays the intermediary assigns
to the formulary tiers.
    Regardless of insured status, consumers also have the option to purchase a drug
at its list price out of pocket. In our baseline model, we assume that these list prices
are identical and exogenously determined to be p   ¯. In subsequent sections, we relax
this assumption in order to examine more fully the economics of list prices.
    Consumers decide whether to purchase health insurance and whether to purchase
a drug by maximizing expected utility. Utility is equal to V minus the sum of the
amount paid for the drug (if he or she purchases the drug relevant to his or her
clinical condition) and the premium (if he or she purchases insurance coverage), and


                                          13
zero otherwise.


3.4    Discussion of Model Assumptions
This section discusses three simplifying assumptions our model makes and the con-
sequences of relaxing them.
     First, our model assumes that each drug maker offers the intermediary a sin-
gle net price that applies whether or not the drug is awarded preferred formulary
placement. An alternative modeling assumption is to allow drug makers to offer
contingent net prices: one that applies if the drug is awarded the preferred tier,
and another if it is not. In Appendix B we solve the model under the alternative
with contingent net prices and show the equilibrium allocation and distribution of
surplus are unaffected. The difference is that in the baseline model, drug makers set
their net price via a mixed strategy equilibrium, whereas in the contingent net price
alternative, the equilibrium involves pure strategies. The pure strategy equilibrium
results in identical allocation and distribution of surplus.
    Second, we assume consumers are identical before their health shocks are realized.
This assumption simplifies the analysis by ruling out any problems with adverse se-
lection - an important issue in insurance markets, but not the focus of this paper.
This simplification also implies that consumer surplus above the out-of-pocket out-
side option can be fully extracted by the insurance premium. If we introduce ex ante
heterogeneity among consumers in their valuation of insurance, we would create a
downward sloping demand curve for insurance. In this case, some consumers would
enjoy consumer surplus and our result that all surplus from the formulary accrues
to the intermediary would thus be softened.
    Third, we assume consumers are risk neutral. Risk aversion would provide an-
other channel whereby the formulary provides value in the market and another force
encouraging low copays. We assume risk neutrality to highlight that even in the
absence of risk aversion, formulary incentives lead to low copays and they enhance
efficiency by replacing distortionary monopoly pricing with a premium and copay
mechanism that approximates a two-part tariff. In our setup, even risk neutral con-


                                         14
sumers purchase health insurance because it gives them access to subsidized drugs.
Assuming that consumers were either risk averse (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976; Zeck-
hauser, 1970) or liquidity constrained (Ericson and Sydnor, 2018) would likely have
the additional effect of reducing the high copay associated with the non-preferred
tier.


4     Baseline model: Payer operates the formulary
In the baseline model, a single payer operates a formulary that allocates two drugs
to two tiers. The list price for each drug is exogenously set to p
                                                                 ¯, the monopoly price
of the drug. The timing is as follows:

    1. the payer chooses the formulary copays cL and cH ;

    2. drug makers set net prices p1 and p2 ;

    3. the payer assigns drugs to formulary tiers and sets the premium, p0 ;

    4. consumers decide whether to purchase insurance;

    5. nature chooses the consumer's medical condition, D, and its intensity, V ;

    6. consumers decide whether to purchase the drug relevant to their condition.


4.1     Equilibrium
We describe each player's equilibrium strategy by working backwards. Consumers
decide whether to purchase a drug, taking list prices, copays, tier assignments, their
health insurance enrollment decision, their medical condition D, and its intensity
V as given. Consumers who enrolled in health insurance purchase the drug corre-
sponding to their medical condition if either the copay or the list price is less than
their willingness to pay for the drug, V . Consumers who do not enroll in insurance
purchase the drug if the list price is less than V . Consumers decide whether to enroll
in insurance taking list prices, copays, tier assignments, and the premium as given.

                                          15
Consumers enroll in insurance if their expected utility with insurance exceeds their
expected utility without insurance by the amount of the premium. Expected utility
without insurance is
                            U0 := E [(V - p
                                          ¯) 1 (V > p¯)] .

Expected utility with insurance is

                             2
                       1
                  U1 =            E [(V - min {ci , p
                                                    ¯}) 1 (V > min {ci , p
                                                                         ¯})] .
                       2    i=1


The following lemma formalizes the consumer's equilibrium strategies.

Lemma 1 (Consumer insurance and drug purchase decisions). In the baseline
model with the payer operating the formulary, in every subgame-perfect Nash equilib-
rium, drug purchasing and insurance enrollment decisions are as follows. Consumers
who enrolled in the insurance plan and have medical condition D = d purchase drug
d if and only if V  min {cd , p
                              ¯}. They purchase it through the formulary if cd  p   ¯
and out-of-pocket otherwise. Consumers who did not enroll in insurance purchase
drug d if and only if D = d and V  p  ¯. Consumers enroll in insurance if and only if

                                          p0  U1 - U0 .                                           (1)

   Next, consider the health insurer's choice of premium and tier assignment. The
payer chooses the premium taking list prices, net prices, and the tier assignment as
given, and does so to maximize its expected profit, which is equal to the premium
minus drug subsidies,

                                                  1
         payer (p0 , c1 , c2 , p1 , p2 ) = p0 -     ((p1 - c1 ) q (c1 ) + (p2 - c2 ) q (c2 )) ,
                                                  2

if consumers purchase insurance, and equal to zero otherwise. The payer will set
the premium so the consumer's enrollment condition, (1), binds, if the profit from
doing so is nonnegative; otherwise it will set a premium that is higher, resulting in a
profit of zero. The payer makes the tier assignment taking list prices and net prices


                                                    16
as given. The payer assigns drug 1 to the preferred tier (that is, sets c1 = cL and
c2 = cH ) if the profit from doing so is greater than the profit from setting c2 = cL
and c1 = cH . That is, drug 1 is assigned to the preferred tier if and only if

                    payer (p0 , cL , cH , p1 , p2 )  payer (p0 , cH , cL , p1 , p2 ) .

This turns out to be satisfied if and only if p1  p2 . The following lemma formalizes
these results.

Lemma 2 (Payer's choice of premium and tier assignment). In the baseline
model with the payer operating the formulary, in every subgame-perfect Nash equi-
librium, strategies for premium and tier assignment are as follows. The payer sets
premium p0 = U1 - U0 if

                               payer (U1 - U0 , c1 , c2 , p1 , p2 )  0                         (2)

and p0 > U1 - U0 otherwise. The payer assigns drug 1 to the preferred tier (that is,
sets c1 = cL and c2 = cH ) if and only if p1  p2 .

    Next, each drug maker takes list prices and copays as given and sets its net price
to maximize expected profit, anticipating the resulting tier assignment. Drug maker
1's expected profit as a function of p1 , taking p2 as given is

                                                1
                                                  p q (cL )
                                                2 1
                                                              , p 1  p2
                           1 (p1 ; p2 ) =       1
                                                                        ,
                                                  p q (cH )
                                                2 1
                                                              , p1 > p2

provided the payer's participation condition (2) is satisfied, and p¯q (¯
                                                                        p) /2 otherwise.
Drug maker 2's profit is defined analogously. Because q (cL ) > q (cH ) whenever
cL < cH (as will be the case in equilibrium), a drug maker's profit discretely increases
as it undercuts the other drug maker's net price. Consequently, there will be no pure
strategy equilibrium.16 Drug makers will play a mixed strategy where net prices are
drawn from a distribution where at the lower end of the support the profit conditional
  16
    Mixed strategies are a general feature of all-pay auctions (Siegel, 2009). Intuitively, suppose
both drug makers offered the same price and so were equally likely to be in either tier. One drug

                                                   17
on winning the formulary contest is equal to the profit from setting a maximal price
(¯
 p) and losing. The following lemma characterizes the mixed strategy equilibrium at
this stage of the game.

Lemma 3 (Drug net price equilibrium distribution). In the baseline model
with the payer operating the formulary, there is a unique subgame-perfect Nash equi-
librium, which is symmetric and involves a continuously mixed net-price strategy.
These net-price strategies are characterized by the following distribution, given co-
pays cL and cH :
                                       
                                       
                                                  0            ,     ¯q
                                                                   p<p  (cH )
                                                                       q (cL )
                                          q (cL )- p
                                                   ¯
                                                     q (cH )
                   F (p; cL , cH ) =
                                       
                                                   p
                                           q (cL )-q (cH )
                                                                 ¯q
                                                               , p  (cH )
                                                                   q (cL )
                                                                             ¯ .
                                                                           p<p
                                                  1            ,     pp
                                                                      ¯

   Note that the modal price in the equilibrium net-price distribution is also the
lowest price in the support:
                                        q (cH )
                                 p=p  ¯         .
                                        q (cL )
The formulary structure is identical to an all-pay contest in which drug companies
bid by offering a low net price and the copays determine the size of the prize. The
greater the demand for the drug at the low copay and the smaller the demand at
the high copay, the greater the incentive to offer a low net price. The following
lemma formalizes this effect of the formulary copays on the equilibrium net price
distribution.

Lemma 4 (Effect of copays on drug net price distribution). The equilibrium
net-price distribution is stochastically increasing in cL and stochastically decreasing
in cH .
maker could break the equilibrium by undercutting the other's price and getting placed in the
preferred tier. This logic holds for a drug price above zero. Zero is not an equilibrium net price
either because at this point neither drug maker is making positive profits. One drug maker could
therefore increase their profits by offering a positive price and being placed in the non-preferred
tier. By similar reasoning, there is also no asymmetric pure strategy equilibrium where the two
drug makers offer different prices. The drug maker with the lower price can deviate by slightly
raising prices. Their profits increase, and they win the preferred tier.

                                                   18
   A consequence of the lemma is that the payer can induce lower net prices for
drugs by increasing the spread between the low and high copays. However, increasing
the spread introduces inefficiency because the socially optimal copays would be set
equal to the marginal cost of each drug, and marginal cost is assumed to be zero.
Increasing the spread between copays also affects other determinants of the payer's
profit: raising cH reduces the value of insurance coverage and thus reduces premium
revenue; lowering cL reduces copay revenue. The payer's optimal choice of cL and cH
navigates these tradeoffs and (as we show formally in the proposition below) results
in a socially inefficient (but profit-maximizing) spread between the low and high
copay. The following lemma describes the optimal copays for the payer.

Lemma 5 (Optimal copays). Suppose p      ¯  q -1 (0). Then the profit-maximizing
choices of copays are cL = 0 and cH = p
                                      ¯.

    In summary, in the baseline model where the payer operates the formulary, the
equilibrium formulary consists of a preferred tier with a copay of zero and a non-
preferred tier with a copay equal to the list price; drug makers compete for the
preferred position on the formulary by offering a distribution of net prices, or, equiv-
alently, rebates; and the payer sets the premium to extract surplus from consumers.
To build intuition for these and subsequent results, the next subsection offers a
graphical representation of the model.


4.2    Graphical Representation of the Formulary
We can build intuition for the model by representing it graphically in the special
case of a linear demand curve (q (p) = 1 - p). The main economic forces in the
model are captured in the tradeoff the intermediary faces in setting the formulary
copays. Figure 2 illustrates several aspects of this tradeoff, plotting total surplus
and combined drug profit and consumer surplus as functions of the low copay, cL ,
holding cH fixed at p
                    ¯. The difference between the two curves is the payer's profit.
Reducing the low copay has several countervailing effects on the profit produced by
the formulary. First, reducing the copay increases drug purchases, which increases


                                          19
total surplus, as shown in the solid blue curve in Figure 2. This also increases the
value of insurance, which the payer captures by charging higher premiums. Consumer
surplus is thus unaffected by the payer's choice of copays.
    Reducing the low copay also increases the value to drug makers of winning the
formulary contest. This potential benefit to drug makers is competed away as drug
makers offer a stochastically lower distribution of net prices, as shown in Lemma 4.
In equilibrium, therefore, drug makers always receive a payoff equal to what they
would earn if they lose the tournament and are assigned to the non-preferred tier. For
this reason, drug maker profit is also unaffected by payer's choice of low copay. The
constant consumer surplus and drug maker profit is represented by the horizontal
dashed red curve in the figure. The difference between the two curves is the payer's
profit from operating the formulary. Because total surplus increases as the copay in
the preferred tier decreases, while consumer surplus and drug maker profit remain
flat, the payer's profit is maximized at cL = 0.


5     Efficiency Enhancing Extensions: Clinical Sub-
      stitutes and Many Drugs
The baseline model considers a formulary composed of two branded drugs, each of
whose demand is entirely independent of the other. This simple setup highlights how
the economic properties of the formulary emerge from competition for a preferred
formulary slot. In this section, we introduce two extensions to the basic design.
The first allows the branded drugs on the formulary to be clinical substitutes. The
second allows the formulary to include more than two drugs. Each of these extensions
heightens the competition between drug makers and enhances the efficiency of the
equilibrium allocation.


5.1    Substitution between branded drugs
The baseline model assumes that branded drugs treat distinct conditions and are
not substitutes. In this section, we extend the model to allow substitution between

                                         20
branded drugs.
    Taking the baseline model in Section 4 as the starting point, we introduce sub-
stitution between drugs by allowing for a fraction   [0, 1] of consumers to benefit
equally from either drug; the remaining fraction 1 -  only benefit from a single
drug. The probability of being able to substitute between drugs is independent of
illness severity and type. The fraction  of consumers purchase the drug with the
lower copay if their willingness to pay V exceeds the lower copay. The remaining
fraction purchases the drug corresponding to their condition if their willingness to
pay exceeds that drug's copay.
    Equilibrium behavior in this extension to the model is similar to the baseline
model, as the proposition below formalizes. Specifically, the drug with the lowest
net price is assigned to the preferred tier, and drug makers set net prices via mixed
strategies of similar form to the baseline model, although the distribution is stochas-
tically lower. Optimal copays are unchanged.

Proposition 1 (Substitution increases formulary efficiency and decreases
drug maker profit). In the symmetric subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium with sub-
stitution between drugs, optimal copays are

                                       cL = 0,
                                       cH = p
                                            ¯,

total surplus is

                   1
            TS =     ((1 +  ) E [V 1 (V  cL )] + (1 -  ) E [V 1 (V  cH )]) ,
                   2

consumer surplus is
                             CS = E [(V - p
                                          ¯) 1 (V > p
                                                    ¯)] ,

drug maker profit is
                                          ¯ (1 -  ) q (cH ) ,
                             drug maker = p

and the equilibrium drug net price distribution is stochastically decreasing in the

                                           21
degree of substitution,  .

   In sum, allowing for partial clinical substitution on the formulary leaves optimal
copays unchanged and consumer surplus unchanged, but increases total surplus and
reduces drug maker profit. The additional surplus from substitution therefore ac-
crues to the intermediary. The reason for this result is that substitution heightens
the competition among the drug makers for the coveted preferred tier placement,
resulting in a lower equilibrium net price distribution.


5.2    Formularies with Many Drugs: Approximately Efficient
Intermediaries in the drug market can attract consumers and drug makers because
the formulary generates a larger economic surplus than the alternative of drug makers
selling directly to consumers at monopoly prices. Indeed, if this were not so, it would
be hard to explain the presence of intermediaries in this market.
    In principle, intermediaries could generate even more surplus by adopting an
efficient two-part pricing strategy where consumers pay a premium for access to the
formulary plus a copay equal to the marginal cost of each drug (which in our model
is zero). In Section 4, however, we showed this was not the case in our baseline
model: instead, the payer sets one of the copays to the list price which is set at
the monopoly price. The result is some deadweight loss: there exist consumers with
willingness to pay higher than the marginal cost of producing the drug who do not
receive the drug.
    The inefficiency of our formulary is entirely due to the high copay for the drug as-
signed to the non-preferred tier. This raises the question of how many slots the payer
will optimally create for drugs in the non-preferred tier. Extending our model to the
case where there are many drugs, we find that in equilibrium only one drug is as-
signed to the non-preferred tier. The remaining drugs are sold using the efficient two
part pricing. This result suggests that formulary tournaments are "approximately"
efficient. Indeed, when the clinical conditions treated by the drugs are equally dis-
tributed in the population, the allocation approaches full efficiency as the number of
drugs grows.

                                          22
      To allow for many drugs we assume that consumers are equally likely to fall ill
with one of m  2 medical conditions. Each of these conditions is treated by a
different branded drug produced by a different drug maker. The payer assigns each
of the m  2 drugs to one of m formulary tiers, each with an associated copay,
c1 , c2 , . . . , cm , where c1  c2  · · ·  cm . The timing of decisions is the same as in
the baseline model.
      Equilibrium behavior in this extension is similar to that in the baseline model.
Specifically, the payer assigns drugs to tiers in order of the net price, with the drug
whose net price is lowest being placed in the most preferred tier. Drug makers also
set net prices using mixed strategies where the net price distribution includes the list
price as its upper bound.
      Most importantly, the payer in equilibrium sets all copays but one to zero, and
it sets the remaining copay to the list price. In other words, the optimal formulary
design includes two tiers: a preferred tier with a copay of zero that includes all drugs
but one, and a non-preferred tier with a copay equal to the list price to which the
remaining drug is relegated. The fact that all but one of the drugs are assigned a
copay of zero means the equilibrium is approximately efficient: as the number of drugs
m increases, the equilibrium converges to full efficiency. The following proposition
formalizes these results.

Proposition 2 (Formulary equilibrium with m drugs is approximately effi-
cient). Equilibrium copays with m drugs are as follows:

                              c1 = c2 = · · · = cm-1 = 0;
                             cm = p
                                  ¯,

and equilibrium total surplus is

                                            1
                           T S = E [V ] -     E [1 (V  p
                                                       ¯) V ] .
                                            m

   Because the first-best surplus is E [V ], the result means that as m increases,
equilibrium surplus converges to full efficiency. For any given number of drugs, m,

                                            23
however, the equilibrium is inefficient. The inefficiency stems entirely from the drug
assigned to the non-preferred tier where the copay is nonzero. Why doesn't the
intermediary assign all drugs to a tier with a copay of zero and thereby achieve a
fully efficient equilibrium? The reason is that the possibility of being relegated to a
non-preferred tier, even if the probability is only 1/m, induces drug makers to offer
substantial rebates off list price, increasing profit for the intermediary. If all tiers
had a copay of zero, drug makers would offer no rebates.


6    Why Do Payers Delegate Formulary Operations
     to a PBM Acting as a Common Agent for Many
     Payers?
We have argued that formularies generate economic surplus relative to the alterna-
tive of selling drugs at monopoly prices. Nothing in our analysis so far suggests that
these formularies need to be operated by PBMs. In this section, we pose the follow-
ing question: why would payers delegate such a critical and potentially profitable
function to a PBM acting as a common agent for many payers?
    Our answer builds on a contracting externality found in pharmaceutical markets,
most favored nation (MFN) clauses. As described in Section 2, MFN clauses require
that the net prices offered to a specific purchaser be at least as low as those offered
to any other purchaser in the market. MFN clauses create the following externality.
If one formulary manages to win lower average net drug prices, the average net drug
prices offered to other formularies with MFN clauses in their contracts must also de-
cline. Since providing higher-powered incentives is costly to the formulary operator,
when the formulary does not capture all the benefits of a reduction in net prices,
equilibrium formulary incentives are weakened. Weaker formulary incentives increase
average net drug prices and also reduce the efficiency of drug markets. Large PBMs
acting as a common agent for many payers can better internalize this externality. As
a result, equilibrium incentives become more powerful, average net drug prices fall
and market efficiency increases. These efficiency gains favor delegation of formulary

                                          24
operations to PBMs acting as a common agent for many payers.
    Industry observers typically assert that MFN clauses are widespread, but the
terms of these contracts are closely held secrets and so these assertions are rarely
based on direct knowledge. We have consulted, however, with economists and lawyers
who work directly with these contracts and they confirm that MFN clauses are
ubiquitous. In addition to these private contractual clauses, Medicaid and the 340B
program have statutorily mandated MFN clauses, as described in Section 2. These
also introduce contracting externalities because purchasers under these programs use
the same PBMs.
    In what follows, we analyze the effects of this contracting externality in detail.
We first consider the case with several payers and no PBM, and then the case with
a single PBM acting as a common agent. In both cases, we revert to our baseline
assumptions that there are only two drugs and that the list prices for these drugs
are exogenously set to p¯.


6.1    Equilibrium with Several Payers: Contracting External-
       ities in the Absence of PBMs
We return to the baseline model with two drugs but extend it to two payers, indexed
by j  {1, 2}. Each payer is a monopolist in its own segment of the insurance market
and serves consumers with mass 1/2. The timing is as follows:

  1. Each payer j  {1, 2} sets formulary copays cj      j
                                                 L and cH ;


  2. drug makers set net prices p1 and p2 ;

  3. each payer assigns drugs to formulary tiers and sets pj
                                                           0;


  4. consumers decide whether to purchase insurance;

  5. nature chooses the consumer's medical condition, D  {1, 2}, and its intensity,
     V;

  6. consumers decide whether to purchase the drug.

                                         25
   At each stage, these choices are made simultaneously and noncooperatively with
the other payer. To reflect the existence of MFN clauses or other frictions, drug
makers continue to set net prices p1 and p2 , which apply to all payers. As before,
we describe each player's equilibrium strategy in the usual way, working backwards.
Consumers' drug purchasing decisions and insurance enrollment decisions are un-
changed from the single payer case (see Lemma 1), except naturally consumers in
payer j 's market make their decision based on pj      j      j
                                                  0 , c1 and c2 . That is, a consumer in
payer j 's market enrolls in insurance, if and only if

                                        pj   j
                                         0  U1 - U0 ,


where
                           2
                j     1
               U1   =           E   V - min cj
                                             i, p
                                                ¯   1 V > min cj
                                                               i, p
                                                                  ¯       .
                      2   i=1

   Each payer's choice of premium and tier assignment are also unchanged from the
result in Lemma 2: payer j 's premium is

                                        pj    j
                                         0 = U1 - U0 ,


as long as its profit is positive, and it assigns cj      j      j    j
                                                     1 = cL and c2 = cH if p1  p2 .
    Drug makers' net price choices are similar, except drug maker profit now depends
on the aggregation of consumer demand for the drug across each payer's copays. Drug
maker 1's profit as a function of its own net price, taking drug 2's net price as given
is
                                          1
                                            pq
                                          2 1
                                              ¯ (cL ) , p1  p2
                         1 (p1 ; p2 ) =   1
                                                                   ,
                                            pq
                                          2 1
                                              ¯ (cH ) , p1 > p2
where q (cL ) = (q (c1         2                          1         2
                     L ) + q (cL )) /2 and q (cH ) = (q (cH ) + q (cH )) /2. Similar to the
single-payer case described in Lemma 3, drug makers choose a mixed strategy net-




                                             26
price distribution with the following cumulative distribution function:
                                     
                                     
                                               0           ,     ¯q
                                                               p<p ¯(cH )
                                                                   q
                                                                   ¯(cL )
                                        ¯(cL )- p
                                        q       ¯
                                                  q
                                                  ¯(cH )
                 F (p; cL , cH ) =
                                        ¯(cL )-q
                                        q
                                                p
                                               ¯(cH )
                                                             ¯q
                                                           , p ¯(cH )
                                                               q
                                                               ¯(cL )
                                                                        ¯ .
                                                                      p<p
                                               1           ,     pp
                                                                  ¯

    The payers' choices of copays cj       j
                                   L and cH are different from the single payer case.
The reason is that an individual payer's choice of copay has less influence on drug
prices, because drug prices respond only to the aggregate incentives provided by all
payers. As a result, the marginal benefit of setting a low preferred tier copay (which
encourages drug makers to set low net prices) decreases with the number of payers.
The following proposition formalizes this argument.

Proposition 3 (With multiple payers, contracting externalities increase the
copay in the preferred tier, reduce payer profits, and reduce total surplus).
In any symmetric equilibrium, the copay in the preferred tier, cL , is greater than zero,
and total payer profit and total surplus are lower than in the one-payer case.

    The proposition states that when multiple payers operate their own formularies,
contracting externalities weaken incentives for drug makers to lower prices and reduce
total profit to the payers. Figure 3 illustrates the effect of these externalities in the
special case of linear demand when we go from n = 1 payer to n = 2 payers. The blue
line in the drawing depicts total surplus generated by pharmaceutical sales. The red
dashed line represents the combined consumer surplus and drug maker profit. The
black dashed curve shows combined consumer surplus, drug maker expected profit,
and the other payer's profit. Consumer surplus and drug maker profit do not depend
on the low copay. The premium extracts all consumer surplus beyond the outside
option which is determined by the list price. Drug maker expected profit in the
formulary tournament is determined by the "loser's" reward, which is a function of
the high copay only. The difference between the black and the red curves is the other
payer's profit, which increases as the one payer's low copay decreases. This reflects
the contracting externality: as one payer's low copay falls, other payers benefit from


                                                27
lower net drug prices. Because formularies do not capture the full benefit of lower
drug prices, the payer's profit is no longer maximized at cL = 0, but rather at a
strictly higher value. Higher copays in the preferred tier also reduce consumers'
consumption and consequently reduce efficiency.


6.2    PBM Acting as a Common Agent Internalizes the Ex-
       ternality
The previous section found that when several payers operate their own formularies,
externalities lead to reduced profits, high drug net prices, and lower total surplus. In
this section, we consider how a PBM acting as a common agent for many payers can
internalize the externality and so raise joint profits among payers and the PBM, and
improve market efficiency. To make this argument, we introduce a single PBM that
operates a formulary on behalf of many payers. The PBM specifies copays, assigns
drugs to tiers, and sets reimbursement prices r1 and r2 which payers must remit to
the PBM for each drug transaction.
    An important feature of this version of the model is that the price of drugs to
payers (reimbursement prices) may differ from the net price a drug company charges
the PBM. Indeed, the spread between reimbursement prices and net prices is an
important source of profits for PBMs. A second key feature is that the PBM offers a
contract to each payer in which the payer delegates operation of the formulary to the
PBM in exchange for a transfer. The contract offer to each payer is contingent on all
other payers accepting the contract. This set up allows for the possibility of trivial
equilibria in which all or some payers refuse the contract. We focus our analysis on
the principal's preferred equilibrium in which all payers accept the contract (Segal,
1999). We continue to assume that there are only two drugs and that list prices are
set exogenously at the monopoly price of the patented drugs. The timing of events
is as follows:

  1. the PBM simultaneously offers a contract to each payer in which the payer
     delegates formulary operation to the PBM and the PBM in exchange makes a


                                          28
      transfer of 0 to each payer; each payer chooses whether to accept the PBM
      contract or to reject in favor of acting as its own intermediary;

  2. the PBM chooses the formulary copays cL and cH ; these copays are common
     for all payers contracting with the PBM;

  3. drug makers set net prices p1 and p2 ;

  4. the PBM assigns drugs to formulary tiers and sets reimbursement prices r1 and
     r2 ;

  5. the payer sets the premium p0 ;

  6. consumers decide whether to purchase insurance;

  7. nature chooses the consumer's medical condition, D, and its intensity, V ;

  8. consumers decide whether to purchase the drug.

   As before, consumers purchase insurance if the premium is less than the utility
gain from doing so:
                                 p0  U1 - U0 ,

where utilities are the following:

               U0 = E [(V - p
                            ¯) 1 (V > p
                                      ¯)]
                               2
                        1
               U1     =             E [(V - min {ci , p
                                                      ¯}) 1 (V > min {ci , p
                                                                           ¯})] .
                        2     i=1


   The payer chooses the premium to maximize its profit:

                                                                2
                                                           1
                    payer (p0 , c1 , c2 , r1 , r2 ) = p0 +           q (ci ) (ci - ri ) .
                                                           2   i=1




                                                  29
Because profit is increasing in the premium, the payer chooses the premium so that
the consumer's insurance decision condition binds, as in Lemma 2:

                                    p0 = U1 - U0 ,

as long as its profit is nonnegative.
    The PBM sets reimbursement prices and makes tier assignments to maximize its
profit,
                                                            2
                                                         1
                    PBM (c1 , c2 , r1 , r2 ; p1 , p2 ) =       q (ci ) (ri - pi ) , (3)
                                                         2 i=1

subject to the constraint that the payer's profit is nonnegative, and taking net prices
as given. The PBM's profit is increasing in the reimbursement prices, meaning the
PBM will set r1 and r2 so that the payer's profit condition binds. This determines
the weighted average reimbursement price, but it does not pin down the individual
reimbursement prices separately because the payer's profit depends on the reimburse-
ment prices only through their weighted average. As in the baseline model where the
payer was the intermediary, the PBM maximizes profit by assigning drugs to tiers by
a simple comparison of the net prices. The following lemma establishes these results.

Lemma 6 (PBM's choice of reimbursement prices and tier assignment).
In the PBM model with exogenous list prices, the PBM sets reimbursement prices to
satisfy
                          2                       2
                       1                       1
                             q (ci ) ri = p0 +       q (ci ) ci .
                       2 i=1                   2 i=1

The PBM assigns drug 1 to the preferred tier (that is, sets c1 = cL and c2 = cH ) if
and only if p1  p2 .

  The fact that the PBM is acting as common agent does not change the drug
makers' problem in setting net prices. The mixed strategy equilibrium determining




                                          30
the net price distribution is identical to the baseline model:
                                     
                                     
                                                0            ,     ¯q
                                                                 p<p  (cH )
                                                                     q (cL )
                                        q (cL )- p
                                                 ¯
                                                   q (cH )
                 F (p; cL , cH ) =
                                     
                                                 p
                                         q (cL )-q (cH )
                                                               ¯q
                                                             , p  (cH )
                                                                 q (cL )
                                                                           ¯ .
                                                                         p<p
                                                1            ,     pp
                                                                    ¯

    Likewise, after substituting the PBM's reimbursement price choice shown in
Lemma 6 into the PBM's profit function, (3), the PBM's profit is identical to the
payer's profit in the baseline model. Consequently, the PBM's choice of copays is
identical to the baseline model. That is, the PBM will set cL = 0 and cH = p  ¯. The
PBM thus resolves the externality in the previous section when several payers acted
as intermediaries on their own. The result is that when a PBM acts as intermedi-
ary, the joint profit among the PBM and payers is higher than when payers act as
intermediary and total surplus is higher, as the following proposition formalizes.

Proposition 4 (When payers select a PBM as a common intermediary,
total surplus and joint profits rise). Suppose there are two payers. Total sur-
plus and joint PBM and payer profit is higher when the PBM acts as a common
intermediary than when payers act as their own intermediaries.

    This result provides the economic rationale for the intermediary role PBMs play
in the industry. When several payers each act as their own intermediary, pricing
externalities among them raise drug prices and reduce profits. Payers can do better
by delegating formulary design to a common agent, the PBM. The presence of a
PBM not only raises joint profit among the payers and the PBM but also improves
efficiency because the PBM will choose a lower copay in the preferred tier than payers
would on their own. Thus, in the first step of the model, all payers accept the PBM's
contract so long as the transfer, 0 , is greater than the equilibrium profit when each
payer operates its own formulary.




                                                 31
7      Endogenous List Prices
In this section, we analyze the economics of list prices by allowing the two drug
makers to set list prices endogenously. We will find that list prices matter because
they determine consumers' outside options. High list prices reduce the value of
purchasing drugs outside the formulary and so make participating in the formulary
more valuable for consumers. PBMs can capture this increase in value and so will
bias formulary incentives in favor of drugs offering high list prices. The result is
an equilibrium in which the list prices of some drugs become detached from their
underlying clinical value and the average list price exceeds the monopoly price. These
high list prices increase the joint surplus of drug makers and PBMs, but they reduce
consumer surplus and make drug markets less efficient.
    To accommodate endogenous list prices, we extend our baseline model by allowing
drug makers to choose their respective list prices, p   ¯1 and p¯2 , before the formulary
design is chosen. For ease of exposition, we assign the label "drug 1" to the drug
with the (weakly) lower list price, so that without loss of generality p ¯1  p¯2 . Unequal
list prices allow for the possibility that cH may be lower than one list price, but not
the other. In this case, if the drug with the lower list price is placed in the non-
preferred tier, we assume that the effective copay reverts to that drug's list price.17
For example, if p  ¯1 < cH  p¯2 , and drug 1 "loses" the formulary tournament so that it
is assigned to the non-preferred tier, we assume the copay charged consumers would
be p¯1 , while if drug 2 were to lose, the copay would be cH . To simplify our analysis,
we return to our baseline assumption that a single payer operates a single formulary.
    The timing is as follows:

    1. drug makers simultaneously choose list prices p
                                                     ¯1 and p
                                                            ¯2 ;

    2. the payer chooses the formulary copays cL and cH , where 0  cL  cH  p
                                                                           ¯2 ;

    3. drug makers set net prices p1 and p2 ;
  17
    This assumption is without loss of generality: it is optimal for payers to set copays no higher
than the list price because consumers have the option to purchase at the list price out of pocket.
The substantive assumption here is that consumers cannot commit to giving up their option to
purchase at the list price.

                                                32
   4. the payer assigns drugs to formulary tiers and sets the premium p0 ;

   5. consumers decide whether to purchase insurance;

   6. nature chooses the consumer's medical condition, D, and its intensity, V ;

   7. consumers decide whether to purchase the drug.

    As before, consumers purchase insurance if the premium is less than the utility
gain from doing so, that is, if p0  U1 - U0 , where utilities now are functions of both
list prices:

                             2
                      1
               U0   =             E [(V - p
                                          ¯i ) 1 (V > p
                                                      ¯i )] ,
                      2     i=1
                             2
                        1
               U1 =               E [(V - min {ci , p
                                                    ¯i }) 1 (V > min {ci , p
                                                                           ¯i })] .
                        2   i=1


    The payer's choice of premium is unchanged from the result in Lemma 2: p0 =
U1 - U0 , as long as its profit is positive. Tier assignment, however, differs importantly:
the possibility of different list prices means the rule for tier assignment is not a simple
comparison of net prices. Instead, the formulary tournament may be tilted in favor
of one drug or the other, as the following result shows:

Lemma 7 (Choice of tier assignment with endogenous list prices). The
intermediary assigns drug 1 to the preferred tier (that is, sets c1 = cL and c2 = cH )
if and only if p2   (p1 ), where  (p) = p if cH  min {p       ¯2 } (Case 1), and
                                                         ¯1 , p

                 q (cL ) - q (¯
                              p1 )    E [V |V > p       p1 ) - E [V |V > cH ] q (cH )
                                                ¯1 ] q (¯
         (p) =                     p+
                 q (cL ) - q (cH )                   q (cL ) - q (cH )

   ¯1 < cH  p
if p        ¯2 (Case 2).

    The lemma shows that when list prices differ, the intermediary may bias the
formulary contest. When both list prices exceed the high copay (Case 1), the tier
assignment is as before: the drug with the lower net price is placed in the preferred

                                                33
tier. But when one of the list prices is lower than the high copay, the formulary
compares the higher list-price drug's net price, p2 , to a transformation of p1 , rather
than to p1 itself. In equilibrium, this second rule is chosen so that the formulary is
biased toward the drug with the higher list price. Why would the PBM favor the
drug with the higher list price? There are two reasons. First, consumers derive more
value from insurance when the formulary favors the higher list price drug rather than
the lower list price drug. Therefore, biasing the formulary toward the higher list price
drug raises the amount of surplus the payer can extract in the premium. Second,
when the drug with the lower list price (drug 1) loses the formulary contest, the high
copay is only p ¯1 , not cH . Consequently, the impact on total surplus is smaller if drug
2 were to lose the formulary contest. Because the payer can extract the increase in
total surplus via the premium, it biases the formulary to make it more likely for drug
2 to win.
    A biased formulary encourages high list prices. We show this in the special case
of linear demand for the drugs: q (p) = 1 - p for p  [0, 1] with unit demand when
p < 0 and zero demand for p > 1. In this case, as we show below, drug maker 2 sets
its list price to the maximum possible, p      ¯2 = 1, and drug maker 1 sets its list price
to the monopoly level: p    ¯1 = 1/2. Before presenting the formal proposition, we build
intuition for the result by describing the basic tradeoffs faced by drug makers and
the intermediary in the formulary contest. In the formulary contest, drug makers
can always earn their default payoff simply by bidding their list price and losing
for certain. For drug maker 1, this payoff is  1 (¯      p1 ; cH ) = q (min {p
                                                                             ¯1 , cH }) p
                                                                                        ¯1 /2, and
for drug maker 2 it is  2 (¯   p2 ; cH ) = q (cH ) p
                                                   ¯2 /2. Any payoff above this amount we
term contest rents. In the baseline version of the model where drug makers are
symmetric, contest rents are always zero. When list prices are allowed to differ, the
contest participants are no longer on an equal footing, and in principle one of the
drug makers could earn contest rents. One might expect the payer to set copays
to minimize contest rents for the drug makers because contest rents come at the
expense of payer profit. This is indeed the case: as the result below shows, the payer
sets copays to ensure contest rents are zero for each drug maker, and this turns out
to mean cH is set higher than p      ¯1 but less than p ¯2 .

                                               34
     The fact that the payer sets copays to eliminate contest rents simplifies the anal-
ysis of the drug makers' choice of list price: they set list prices to maximize their
default payoff. Given that cH > p     ¯1 , drug maker 1's default payoff is q (¯
                                                                               p1 ) p
                                                                                    ¯1 /2. This
is simply its monopoly profit at price p     ¯1 , and is maximized at p
                                                                      ¯1 = 1/2. Drug maker
                                              
2's default payoff is q (cH ) p
                              ¯2 /2, where cH is the intermediary's optimal choice of high
copay given list prices. Drug maker 2's default payoff turns out to be increasing in
p
¯2 , and so is maximized at the upper end of its choice set, p        ¯2 = 1. Neither drug
maker earns contest rents, but drug maker 2 has the higher default payoff and so
enjoys higher equilibrium profit.
     The following result formalizes this intuition:

Proposition 5 (High equilibrium list price when list prices are endoge-
nous). Suppose drug demand is linear. Without loss of generality let p¯1  p¯2 . Then,
in the endogenous list price model, the unique subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium list
prices are p¯1 = 1/2 (the monopoly price) and p¯2 = 1 (the maximum possible price).
Drug maker 2 earns higher profit than drug maker 1, and combined drug maker profit
is higher and the formulary's profit is higher than when list prices are exogenously
fixed at the monopoly level.

    It may not seem surprising that one of the list prices is set to the monopoly level,
since the drug maker's payoff is tied to revenues in the non-preferred tier, which is
maximized at the monopoly list price. But the extremely high value for the other list
price is a surprising result: demand at that price is zero, so no transactions actually
occur at that price. Instead, the extremely high list price on the part of one drug
maker is a response to the biased formulary incentives that tilt the contest in favor
of the drug with the higher list price. One drug company sets a list price as high as
possible, while the other chooses the monopoly level.18
    Figure 4 depicts the list price equilibrium graphically. The figure plots each drug
maker's best response list price as a function of the other's list price. The blue
  18
    This outcome follows from the incentives in of our model, but industry observers note closely
related pricing incentives. For example Feldman (2020, p. 327) comments that drug makers have
an incentive to offer high list prices because this allows the PBM to offer their clients what appears
to be a more attractive discount

                                                 35
points show that when drug maker 1 sets a low enough list price, drug maker 2 will
optimally set its list price as high as possible. When drug maker 1's list price is high,
however, drug maker 2 optimally sets its list price to the monopoly level (one-half).
The figure shows two equilibria where the best response functions intersect: one
where drug maker 2 sets p    ¯2 = 1 and drug maker 1 sets p
                                                          ¯1 = 1/2 and another where
they are reversed.


8      Common Agency and Vertical Integration
Our analysis so far takes a rosy view of the problem of aligning the interests of
PBMs and payers. Formularies, we argue, enable "near" efficient pharmaceutical
markets that benefit formulary operators. Contracting externalities reduce these
benefits when numerous payers operate their own formularies, but near efficiency
can be restored when payers delegate the operation of formularies to a single PBM
acting as a common agent.
    Because PBMs in our model capture the joint surplus produced by themselves
and payers, there is an easy alignment of interests between principal and agent. This
simplifies the analysis, but at the cost of downplaying the possibility that the PBM
may take actions that are not in the interest of payers. For example, suppose that
contrary to our prior analysis, PBMs do not have full information about the demand
for drugs within each payer's population. This information asymmetry prevents the
PBM from capturing all the joint surplus and breaks the alignment between PBMs
and payers. To illustrate the issues created by asymmetric information, consider a
PBM decision that we did not include in our baseline model. Payers would prefer
if the PBM promoted generics so that they could offer their members lower-priced
formulary services. The surplus resulting from these lower cost services, however,
need not flow to the PBM.19
  19
    Similar problems can arise within the market for branded drugs. Feldman (2020) describes how
the use of volume-based rebates for individual drugs or bundled rebates for groups of drugs can
induce PBMs to exclude less expensive or more clinically desirable drugs from a favored formulary
position. Here again, payers would benefit if the PBM promoted the less expensive or clinically
desirable drug, but these benefits needn't flow to the PBM.


                                               36
    One way to resolve this agency problem is through a contract. We have already
reported that contracts between PBMs and payers include penalties if the aggregate
use of generics falls below some pre-specified threshold. Aggregate caps are, however,
a crude instrument for promoting the use of generics. In a conventional principal
agent setting, a payer could motivate the PBM to do more by writing a shared savings
incentive contract with the PBM. Under common agency, however, such agreements
may not be workable. To see this consider that when a PBM invests in the software
and information systems that improve generic substitution, this will likely enable
more generic usage by all its payer clients. This externality leads to inefficiently
weak equilibrium incentives. Indeed, if investments in generic substitution involve
substantial fixed costs, the equilibrium can be one in which no payers will write any
incentive contracts at all (Frandsen et al., 2019).
    Vertical mergers between PBMs and payers may reduce or eliminate the con-
tracting inefficiencies resulting from common agency. The merged entity's profits
will include the value created by enhanced use of generics. As the stock of generic
drugs grows, the benefits of substitution likely increase, and so PBMs will come
under increasing pressure to integrate vertically. Consistent with this logic, in the
past several years, large PBMs have vertically consolidated with substantial insurers,
including UnitedHealth Plans (health plan) with OptumRx (PBM), Aetna (health
plan) with CVSCaremark (PBM), and many Blue Cross Blue Shield plans (health
plan) with PrimeTherapeutics (PBM).
    In justifying vertical integration between PBMs and payers, the business press
often emphasizes the returns to better integrating the information held separately
by PBMs and payers. For example, in the press release announcing the final merger
of CVS with Aetna, the CVS Health President and CEO, Larry Merlo, is quoted as
saying,
     By fully integrating Aetna's medical information and analytics with CVS
     Health's pharmacy data, we can develop new ways to engage consumers
     in their total health and wellness through personal contacts and deeper
     collaboration with their primary care physicians. As a result, we ex-
     pect patients will benefit from earlier interventions and better-connected

                                         37
     care, leading to improved health outcomes and low medical costs. (CVS
     Health, 2018)

    Recent research finds that the incentives to integrate information systems are also
influenced by the limits that common agency imposes on incentive contracts (Frand-
sen et al., 2019, Section 5). To see this, consider that both CVS and Aetna likely
benefit from having sole control over their own information systems, but information
sharing becomes more efficient when they sacrifice some of this autonomy and op-
erate their systems in close concert. As separate organizations, the weak incentives
induced by common agency may provide inadequate compensation for giving up this
autonomy. Under integrated governance, however, these distortions are removed,
and incentives for maximizing the value created by integrated information systems
increase. In this way, common agency creates a complementarity between vertically
integrated governance structures and integrating information systems.


9    Conclusion
Pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) dominate the market for branded pharmaceu-
ticals in the United States. Our analysis offers insights into otherwise puzzling ques-
tions about the economics of PBMs. First, why do drug makers pay rebates to
PBMs? Rebates are drug maker bids in an all-pay contest for placement in preferred
formulary tiers. The additional surplus generated by these tournaments accrues as
rents to the PBM rather than to consumers or pharmaceutical manufacturers. This
result suggests that the challenges PBMs pose for economic policy have more to do
with distribution than static efficiency.
    Secondly, why do payers delegate the crucial and potentially profitable formu-
lary function to an independent actor and why do large PBMs acting as a common
agent for many other payers dominate the market? Payers delegate because a com-
mon agent PBM is better able to internalize the contracting externality created by
most favored nation arrangements. By internalizing this externality, large PBMs can
deliver lower net drug prices and improved market efficiency.


                                          38
    Third, what role do high list prices play in a pharmaceutical market where rel-
atively few transactions actually take place at list price? Because drugs can be
purchased outside of the formulary at list price, high list prices increase the value of
participating in the PBM's formulary. If PBMs can capture this surplus, they may
bias formulary contests in favor of drugs with high list prices. In equilibrium, some
drug makers will set list prices at the monopoly price while others will choose much
higher list prices. The net result is an increase in joint surplus for drug makers and
PBMs, but consumers are worse off and markets become less efficient.
    Our framework may have implications for efforts to reform and regulate the U.S.
market for prescription drugs. Some reform proposals focus on altering who receives
rebates from drug makers or propose eliminating them entirely.20 Our analysis sug-
gests that such an approach may prove disappointing. In our baseline model, passing
rebates through to payers or consumers, for example, would not improve the efficiency
of formularies or alter the distribution of economic benefits. This is because payers
would respond to such a transfer by raising their premiums and PBMs would respond
to payers' higher premiums by increasing the reimbursement prices they charge pay-
ers. A richer model that allows for more consumer heterogeneity may produce a less
stark distributional result, but our findings are sufficient to suggest caution about
the ultimate distributional effects of altering which party in this complex market gets
rebates.
    Efforts to eliminate rebates altogether are similarly likely to have negative effects
because the all-pay contest that reduces the net price of pharmaceuticals cannot
operate without rebates or their equivalent. Some observers have noted that the
secrecy surrounding net prices puts payers and consumers at a disadvantage relative
to PBMs and should, therefore, be eliminated (Feldman, 2020). Our analysis suggests
a slightly different approach. A well functioning formulary requires that the rebates
offered on any given drug be kept secret--otherwise the competition driving the
desirable consequences of the all-pay contest would stop. There is, however, no
  20
    The Trump Administration in Fall 2020 finalized an administrative rule that would require
rebates paid to PBMs by branded drug makers to be passed through to consumers (Department of
Health and Human Services, 2020).



                                             39
equivalent economic rationale for keeping the total rebates received by the PBM
across all drugs and drug makers a secret.
    Other approaches to reform are motivated by the enormous market power ac-
cumulated by large PBMs and recommend creating greater competition between a
larger number of smaller PBMs (Garthwaite and Scott Morton, 2017). Our analysis
does not explicitly model competition between PBMs, but it suggests that some pro-
competitive reforms will be more effective than others. Breaking up PBMs without
eliminating the contracting externality resulting from most favored nation arrange-
ments may directly reduce market efficiency and increase drug prices. Eliminating
most favored nation arrangements, however, will reduce the efficiency advantages
enjoyed by large PBMs and so make the PBM market more competitive in a way
that benefits consumers.
    The mergers of large PBMs and large payers also raise questions for competition
policy. Our analysis suggests that under common agency, vertical integration cre-
ates value because it can mitigate contracting and coordination problems between a
PBM and payers. It is, of course, also possible that vertical integration between large
PBMs and large payers has anti-competitive effects that lie outside of our model. Un-
derstanding any potentially anti-competitive consequences of vertical integration and
how these may interact with the efficiency enhancing consequences is an important
area for future research.


References
Norman R. Augustine, Guru Madhavan, and Sharyl J. Nass. Making medicines af-
  fordable: A national imperative, 2018. A Consensus Study Report of The National
  Academies of Sciences, Engineering, Medicine.

B. Douglas Bernheim and Michael D. Whinston. Common agency. Econometrica,
  54(4):923­942, 1986.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.  September 2020 Medicaid &
  CHIP enrollment data highlights, 2020. URL (https://www.medicaid.gov/

                                          40
  medicaid/program-information/medicaid-and-chip-enrollment-data/
  report-highlights/index.html.

Antonio Ciaccia. Uncovering U.S. drug pricing distortions, 2020. URL https://www.
 legis.state.pa.us/WU01/LI/TR/Transcripts/2020_0024_0001_TSTMNY.pdf.

Congressional Budget Office. The rebate Medicaid receives on brand-name prescrip-
  tion drugs, 2005.

Rena M. Conti, Sayeh S. Nikpay, and Melinda B. Buntin. Revenues and profits from
  medicare patients in hospitals participating in the 340b drug discount program,
  2013-2016. JAMA Network Open, 2, 2019.

CVS Health. 2018 formulary strategy, 2017.

CVS Health.         CVS health completes acquisition of Aetna, mark-
 ing the start of transforming the consumer health experience, 2018.
 URL            https://cvshealth.com/news-and-insights/press-releases/
 cvs-health-completes-acquisition-of-aetna-marking-the-start-of.
 retrieved from the World Wide Web December 28, 2020.

Department of Health and Human Services.              Fact sheet:  Trump
  administration finalizes proposal to lower drug costs by target-
  ing backdoor rebates and encouraging direct discounts to pa-
  tients,  2020.       URL https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2020/11/20/
  fact-sheet-trump-administration-finalizes-proposal-to-lower-drug-costs.
  html. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services News Release.

Rachel Dolan. Understanding the Medicaid prescription drug rebate program, 2019.
  Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief.

Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Yunan Ji, and Neale Mahoney. Randomized trial
  shows healthcare payment reform has equal-sized spillover effects on patients not
  targeted by reform. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(32):
  18939­18947, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424.

                                        41
Keith Marzilli Ericson and Justin R Sydnor. Liquidity constraints and the value of
  insurance. Working Paper 24993, National Bureau of Economic Research, Septem-
  ber 2018. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w24993.

Adam J. Fein. Dir fees, rebates, pharmacy economics, and the future of medi-
 care part d (rerun), 2017. URL https://www.drugchannels.net/2017/05/
 dir-fees-rebates-pharmacy-economics-and.html. Drug Channnels Institute.

Adam J. Fein.    CVS, Express Scripts, and the evolution of the PBM
 business model, 2019.    URL https://www.drugchannels.net/2019/05/
 cvs-express-scripts-and-evolution-of.html. Drug Channels Institute.

Adam J. Fein. The gross-to-net bubble hit $175 billion in 2019: Why patients
 need rebate reform, 2020. URL https://www.drugchannels.net/2020/08/
 the-gross-to-net-bubble-hit-175-billion.html. Drug Channnels Institute.

Robin Feldman. Drugs, Money, and Secret Handshakes: The Unstoppable Growth
  of Prescription Drug Prices. Cambridge University Press, 2019. doi: 10.1017/
  9781108687676.

Robin Feldman. Perverse incentives: Why everyone prefers high drug prices­except
  for those who pay the bills. Harvard Journal on Legislation, 57(2):303­376, 2020.

Robin Feldman and Evan Frondorf. Drug Wars: How Big Pharma Raises Prices and
  Keeps Generics off the Market. Cambridge University Press, 2017. doi: 10.1017/
  9781316717424.

Brigham Frandsen, Michael Powell, and James B. Rebitzer. Sticking points:
  common-agency problems and contracting in the us healthcare system. The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 50(2):251­285, 2019.

Craig Garthwaite and Fiona Scott Morton. Perverse market incentives encourage
  high prescription drug prices, 2017. URL https://promarket.org/2017/11/01/
  perverse-market-incentives-encourage-high-prescription-drug-prices/.


                                        42
  posted on ProMarket, the publication of the Stigler Center at the University of
  Chicago Booth School of Business.

Martin Gaynor. Is vertical integration anticompetitive?: Definitely maybe (but
 that's not final). Journal of Health Economics, 25(1):175 ­ 180, 2006. ISSN
 0167-6296. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2005.10.004. URL http:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167629605001050.

Jacob Glazer and Thomas G. McGuire. Setting health plan premiums to ensure
  efficient quality in health care: minimum variance optimal risk adjustment. Journal
  of Public Economics, 84(2):153­173, 2002.

Government Accountability Office. Medicare part B drugs: Action needed to reduce
 financial incentives to prescribe 340B drugs at participating hospitals, 2015. Report
 to Congressional Requesters.

Government Accountability Office. Medicare part D: Use of pharmacy benefit man-
 agers and efforts to manage drug expenditures and utilization, 2019. Report to
 Congressional Requesters.

Henry G. Grabowski and John M. Vernon. Brand loyalty, entry, and price competi-
  tion in pharmaceuticals after the 1984 drug act. The Journal of Law & Economics,
  35(2):331­350, 1992.

Charles E. Grassley and Ron Wyden. Insulin: Examining the factors driving the
 rising cost of a century old drug, 2021. United States Senate Finance Committee
 Staff Report.

IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. Medicine use and spending in the u.s.: A
  review of 2017 and outlook to 2022, 2018. Parsippany, NJ, p. 14.

IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. Medicine use and spending in the u.s.:
  Understanding patients' costs for medicines, 2020.




                                         43
Kaiser Family   Foundation.      Medicaid   pharmacy   benefits state
 fact   sheets,  2020.         URL    https://www.kff.org/statedata/
 medicaid-pharmacy-benefits-state-fact-sheets/.

Michael Kremer. Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation*. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4):1137­1167, 11 1998.

Thomas G. McGuire. Physician agency. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, editors,
 Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1, chapter 09, pages 461­536. Elsevier, 1
 edition, 2000.

Mark V. Pauly. Insurance reimbursement. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse,
 editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1, chapter 10, pages 537­560.
 Elsevier, 1 edition, 2000.

Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz. Equilibrium in competitive insurance mar-
 kets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 90(4):629­649, 1976. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/
 RePEc:oup:qjecon:v:90:y:1976:i:4:p:629-649.

Trevor J. Royce, Sheetal Kircher, and Rena M. Conti. Pharmacy benefit manager
  reform: Lessons from Ohio. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2019.

F. M. Scherer. Pricing, profits, and technological progress in the pharmaceutical
  industry. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(3):97­115, September 1993.

F.M. Scherer. The pharmaceutical industry. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse,
  editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1, chapter 25, pages 1297­1336.
  Elsevier, 1 edition, 2000.

Fiona Scott Morton. The strategic response by pharmaceutical firms to the medicaid
  most-favored-customer rules. Working Paper 5717, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, August 1996.




                                       44
Fiona M. Scott Morton. Entry decisions in the generic pharmaceutical industry.
  The RAND Journal of Economics, 30(3):421­440, 1999. ISSN 07416261. URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2556056.

Fiona M. Scott Morton. Barriers to entry, brand advertising, and generic entry in
  the us pharmaceutical industry. International Journal of Industrial Organization,
  18(7):1085 ­ 1104, 2000.

Ilya Segal. Contracting with Externalities. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114
   (2):337­388, 05 1999.

Ron Siegel. All-pay contests. Econometrica, 77(1):71­92, 2009.

Dave Yost. Ohio's Medicaid managed care pharmacy services, 2018. Ohio Auditor
  of State Report.

Richard Zeckhauser. Medical insurance: A case study of the tradeoff between risk
  spreading and appropriate incentives. Journal of Economic Theory, 2(1):10­26,
  1970.




                                        45
Figure 1: PBM as Intermediary Between Drug Makers, Payers and Consumers




                                  46
                               Total Surplus, Consumer Surplus, Drug Maker Profit (one payer)

                                                                total surplus
                                                                consumer surplus + drug maker profit
        surplus, profit (dollars)




                                                                payer profit




                                                         low copay

Figure 2: Total surplus and combined consumer surplus and drug maker profit as a
function of the copay in the preferred tier. High copay set at the list price, p
                                                                               ¯.




                                                           47
                                      Total Surplus, Consumer Surplus, Profit
                                    (Two Payers With A Contracting Externality)

                                                            total surplus
                                                            consumer surplus + drug maker profit
                                                            consumer surplus + drug maker profit
                                                            + other payer's profit
        surplus, profit (dollars)




                                                            own profit



                                                     other payer's profit




                                                  own low copay

Figure 3: Total surplus and combined consumer surplus, drug maker profit, and other
payer's profit as a function of one payer's own copay in the preferred tier. Copay
in the non-preferred tier set at the list price, p
                                                 ¯, and other payer's copay set at the
equilibrium value.




                                                       48
Figure 4: Best response function for one drug maker's list price as a function of the
other drug maker's list price.




                                         49
