                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   REALLOCATING LIQUIDITY TO RESOLVE A CRISIS:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE PANIC OF 1873

                                       Haelim Anderson
                                     Kinda Cheryl Hachem
                                        Simpson Zhang

                                      Working Paper 28870
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28870


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We thank Jason Allen, Allen Berger, Mark Carlson (discussant), David Martinez-Miera, Ellis
Tallman, and participants at various seminars and conferences for comments. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any federal agency and do not establish supervisory policy,
requirements, or expectations. The authors are responsible for any errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Haelim Anderson, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Simpson Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reallocating Liquidity to Resolve a Crisis: Evidence from the Panic of 1873
Haelim Anderson, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Simpson Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28870
May 2021
JEL No. D53,D62,E42,E50,G01,N21

                                         ABSTRACT

We study financial stability with constraints on central bank intervention. We show that a forced
reallocation of liquidity across banks can achieve fewer bank failures than a decentralized market
for interbank loans, reflecting a pecuniary externality in the decentralized equilibrium.
Importantly, this reallocation can be implemented through the issuance of clearinghouse loan
certificates, such as those issued in New York City during the Panic of 1873. With a new dataset
constructed from archival records, we demonstrate that the New York Clearinghouse issued loan
certificates to member banks in the way our model suggests would have helped resolve the panic.


Haelim Anderson                                 Simpson Zhang
Center for Financial Research                   Office of the Comptroller of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation           Currency (OCC) - Treasury
550 17th St NW                                  400 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20429                            Washington, DC 20219
handerson@fdic.gov                              Simpson.Zhang@occ.treas.gov

Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu
1        Introduction

While the advent of deposit insurance has dramatically reduced runs on banks in the traditional

sector, shadow banks engaging in maturity transformation remain highly vulnerable. The preser-

vation of the banking system during an aggregate liquidity crunch then requires either suspensions

of convertibility or monetary injections by the central bank. Suspensions can undermine investor

confidence and cause market disruptions, making them a nuclear option. The 2007-09 financial

crisis, widely characterized as a run on the shadow banking system, was instead resolved with a

massive expansion of the monetary base. However, weary of the implications for bailout expecta-

tions and bank risk-taking, lawmakers have since imposed restrictions on how central banks can

respond to future financial crises.1 This paper investigates the scope for mitigating bank failures

without resorting to suspension or monetary injections. If such policies exist, they would make the

restrictions on central banks credible and provide a powerful tool against bailout expectations.

        The setting for our analysis is the Panic of 1873. This was the first major financial crisis of the

U.S. National Banking Era and its magnitude necessitated a strong response in order to contain the

damage. Since the Federal Reserve did not yet exist, the banking system had to resolve financial

crises without central bank intervention. The New York Clearinghouse (NYCH) took the lead in

New York City, the center of the financial system. The Panic of 1873 led to the first, large-scale

use of a novel instrument devised by the NYCH: the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates to

member banks. These certificates were collateralized notes that members of the clearinghouse could

use instead of cash to settle payment obligations with each other, then driven principally by check

clearing. Members paid in loan certificates were entitled to cash at a later date. The certificates

did not increase the total amount of cash in the system nor did they circulate as money in the

general public. Instead, clearinghouse loan certificates provided a mechanism for reallocating cash

across banks and their activities. Our paper studies this reallocation, its value-added relative to a

decentralized interbank market, and its role in resolving the Panic of 1873. The lessons transcend

the historical episode as regulations mandating the central clearing of credit derivatives after the
    1
    Regulations were passed after the financial crisis to restrict the scope of central bank lending. In the U.S., for
example, the Dodd-Frank Act imposes restrictions on the Fed's powers to lend to non-bank financial institutions.
The Treasury Secretary must approve Fed loans to non-banks, and banks are limited from using discount window
loans to channel funds to non-bank affiliates. In 2017, lawmakers attempted to further restrict lending to non-banks
in the Financial CHOICE Act, though the act did not ultimately pass. The latest battle over the Fed's emergency
lending authority occurred in December 2020 during negotiations for the Consolidated Appropriations Act.


                                                          2
2007-09 financial crisis have led to a revival of clearinghouses in modern financial systems.

   We start by constructing a new dataset from archival records of the NYCH to shed light on the

usage of clearinghouse loan certificates. These records include the daily clearing and settlement

payments of all member banks through the NYCH, the amount of loan certificates applied for

and received by banks, and the interest payments among banks. With this information, we can

characterize the magnitude of liquidity shortages and the amount of liquidity transfers across banks.

   We document that banks experiencing the most pressure on cash reserves (specie and legal

tender) because of check settlement received the most loan certificates from the NYCH. Recipient

banks were also experiencing much larger deposit outflows than non-recipient banks during the

crisis, so, in the absence of loan certificates, they would not have had enough cash to honor both

clearing obligations and deposit withdrawals without liquidating large amounts of assets, most likely

call loans. The call loan market was a critical source of funding for stock-brokers, thus liquidations

of call loans by banks in need of cash would have had potentially deleterious effects on stock prices.

We also document that both recipient and non-recipient banks emerged from the Panic of 1873

with cash-to-deposit ratios that were similar to the ratios they had before the crisis began, despite

experiencing differential deposit outflows during the panic. Liquidity thus appears to have been

successfully redistributed across the members of the NYCH.

   The empirical findings raise an important theoretical question: were clearinghouse loan certifi-

cates simply substituting for a decentralized interbank market, which by all accounts did not exist

in New York in 1873, or do loan certificates improve outcomes over and above what such markets

can achieve? We develop a model to answer this question. The NYCH provides a blueprint for

the design and rollout of clearinghouse loan certificates, so, if such certificates also correct market

failures, then we have identified an alternative policy tool that can be used to manage liquidity

crises with less central bank intervention.

   Banks in the model borrow short and lend long, subjecting themselves to runs by patient

depositors (i.e., those who do not need to withdraw early but may choose to do so). Whether

an otherwise patient depositor runs on his bank depends on whether the bank can withstand a

run by all of its depositors by liquidating assets or borrowing from other banks. We begin with

a benchmark where banks can borrow cash from each other in a Walrasian interbank market at

an endogenous market clearing interest rate. We then introduce clearinghouse loan certificates to

                                                  3
study whether there exists a centralized reallocation of liquidity that improves social welfare.

   When the total amount of cash in the system exceeds the withdrawal needs of impatient de-

positors (i.e., those who experience liquidity shocks and have no choice but to withdraw early), the

Walrasian market efficiently redistributes liquidity across banks and achieves an equilibrium with

no bank runs. In contrast, when total cash is lower than the amount that needs to be withdrawn by

impatient depositors, an equilibrium with no runs cannot be achieved. We show that the measure

of banks that fails in an equilibrium with runs is increasing in the interbank rate. This introduces a

pecuniary externality because individual banks do not internalize the effect of their net borrowing

on the interest rate in the interbank market. The higher the interbank rate, the more expensive it

is to obtain additional cash. The marginal bank that was preventing a run by borrowing on the

interbank market can no longer do so profitably; the amount it needs to borrow is simply too high

to be fully repaid at the higher interest rate. The minimum level of cash reserves that a bank must

have in order to be run-proof thus rises, as does the measure of banks that fails.

   Next, we explore whether a social planner can use clearinghouse loan certificates to achieve

a better outcome. We model specifically the certificates designed by the NYCH, which built on

an existing network of bilateral exposures between banks. In 1873, these exposures were payment

obligations stemming from check-clearing activity, but the same logic would apply to obligations

stemming from derivatives trading. We show that loan certificates reduce bank failures and improve

social welfare relative to a decentralized interbank market if (i) most of the cross-sectional variation

in cash holdings of banks comes from variation in their bilateral exposures and (ii) the average

exposure is high. Then, the clearinghouse should allocate to banks above a cash threshold enough

loan certificates to cover the payment obligations stemming from their exposures, e.g., checks owed

to other banks. Banks below this threshold receive no loan certificates and must use cash to pay

checks owed, while receiving less overall cash from other banks as payment for checks owing. This

constitutes a forced reallocation of liquidity from failing banks (and their depositors) to the rest

of the system. In turn, the interest rate on loan certificates can be set below the borrowing rate

that prevails in the decentralized equilibrium, allowing more banks to fend off runs. The measure

of failed banks falls and total welfare rises.

   Among surviving banks, the welfare-improving allocation issues more loan certificates to banks

that owe more checks. This is consistent with the empirical patterns we documented using the

                                                   4
archival records of the NYCH. We conclude from our theoretical model that there exists an al-

location of loan certificates that improves welfare and that this allocation is roughly in line with

the allocation implemented by the NYCH during the Panic of 1873. Calibrating the model to

historical data, we find that social welfare with loan certificates is 2% higher than the welfare with

a decentralized interbank market. A welfare improvement of 2% is notable since it fills almost half

of the gap between the decentralized equilibrium and the first best. Our calibration also reveals

that the total amount of cash in the banking system at the onset of the panic was too low for

any reallocation mechanism to have completely eliminated bank failures. Since none of the mem-

bers of the NYCH failed during the Panic of 1873, other policies must have been responsible for

driving bank failures down to zero. We attribute the lack of bank failures to partial suspension of

convertibility rather than the suppression of bank-level information. Suspension entailed a welfare

loss to individual depositors and for plausible parameters reduced aggregate welfare relative to a

system of only loan certificates despite eliminating bank failures. However, information suppression

without suspension would have been disastrous for a banking system at the calibrated parameters,

triggering a system-wide run due to the paucity of cash.


Related Literature This paper contributes to the literature on interbank markets and liquidity

provision. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) present the classical model of bank runs driven by coor-

dination issues among depositors. Allen and Gale (2000) show that interbank markets can help

mitigate bank runs if the banking system is sufficiently liquid. With excess demand for liquidity,

however, the interbank market can breed contagion. Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet (2000) show that

a central bank can act as a coordinating device to solve liquidity shortages in payment networks.2

See also Allen, Carletti, and Gale (2009) who show that interbank markets feature excessive price

volatility without a central bank, Bluhm (2018) who shows that interbank markets increase total

lending but act as channels for financial contagion, and Hachem and Song (2021) who show that

interbank market power subverts the effectiveness of liquidity regulation.
   2
     In Freixas, Martin, and Skeie (2011), the central bank provides a different form of coordination, setting state-
contingent interest rates that select the best equilibrium from a continuum of Pareto-ranked ex ante equilibria. In the
case where the aggregate state always requires interbank trade, the interest rate that incentivizes ex ante liquidity
holdings is too high to achieve optimal deposit contracts (see also Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009)). This
externality differs from ours; it does not operate through the marginal bank that prevents a run by borrowing on the
interbank market. Robatto (2019) studies central bank interventions when pecuniary externalities affect liquidity-
constrained banks, but the mechanism does not involve run-proofing or operate through an interbank market.



                                                          5
    Several papers have also documented how interbank markets became frozen or highly stressed

during the 2007-09 financial crisis (e.g., Afonso, Kovner, and Schoar (2011), Cornett, McNutt,

Strahan, and Tehranian (2011), Acharya and Merrouche (2012), di Patti and Sette (2016)). We

analyze the scope for interbank lending during the Panic of 1873 and conclude that shortfalls in

aggregate liquidity would have prevented a decentralized interbank market from effectively resolv-

ing the panic. Clearinghouse loan certificates provided an alternative mechanism to redistribute

liquidity across banks and would have functioned better than a decentralized market had the latter

existed, especially in the absence of a partial suspension of convertibility. Given the paucity of cash

reserves relative to the demands of impatient depositors, however, the measure of bank failures

could not have been driven down to zero without a partial suspension.

    We also contribute to the literature on banking panics during the National Banking Era and the

actions of the NYCH to fight these crises. Tallman and Moen (2012), Gorton and Tallman (2016a),

and Gorton and Tallman (2016b) provide overviews of the banking panics. Anderson, Paddrik, and

Wang (2016) analyze financial network structures after the passage of the National Banking Act in

the 1860s and the vulnerability of the banking system to financial shocks. Anderson and Bluedorn

(2017) and Calomiris and Carlson (2017) highlight the importance of network effects and financial

spillovers from New York City banks during the Panics of 1884 and 1893, respectively. Our paper

represents the first analysis of the Panic of 1873 using detailed loan certificate data, as well as the

first rigorous theoretical modeling of crisis responses by the New York Clearinghouse.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the historical background,

describes our data, and presents empirical evidence on the impact of clearinghouse loan certificates.

Section 3 presents our theoretical model and derives predictions about the ability of loan certificates

to improve on a decentralized interbank market. Section 4 estimates the welfare gains from loan

certificates using our historical data. Section 5 compares loan certificates with other interventions

used by the New York Clearinghouse. Section 6 concludes. All proofs are collected in Appendix A.



2    Empirical Evidence

Before the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913, the New York Clearinghouse (NYCH)

was the main authority in place for responding to banking panics in New York City. We first provide


                                                  6
some background on the Clearinghouse and its response to the Panic of 1873. We then discuss our

new archival record dataset and use it to study the effectiveness of the NYCH's innovative response:

the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates.


2.1      Historical Background

2.1.1      The NYCH during the Panic of 1873

The New York Clearinghouse was an association of all of the major banks in New York City.

Clearinghouses emerged in various cities during the 1850s to facilitate the exchange of checks. In

normal times, the function of the clearinghouse was to net interbank payments between parties so

that they would not need to be settled bilaterally. Meeting in a single place and settling balances

with only one other party (the clearinghouse) dramatically simplified the check-clearing process.3

       During banking crises, member banks within each clearinghouse tended to act cooperatively

and the clearinghouse became the de facto leader in liquidity management for its city. The Panic

of 1873 was the first major banking crisis of the National Banking Era. It originated from failures

of major financial institutions, such as Jay Cooke & Co., that had made bad investments into

the massive railroad construction bubble. These failures sent stocks tumbling on September 18th

and caused pandemonium throughout Wall Street. In the following days, many more institutions

failed and banks experienced runs by depositors. The magnitude of the crisis necessitated a strong

response by the NYCH in order to contain the damage.

       On September 20th, following the closure of the stock market, the NYCH committee met and

authorized the issuance of $10 million in clearinghouse loan certificates, which we describe in more

detail below. An additional $10 million in clearinghouse loan certificates was authorized a few

days later (September 22nd).4 The NYCH also implemented a reserve pooling arrangement on

September 20th. Under the arrangement, the reserves of the member banks were mutualized into

one pool. If the reserves of a bank fell dangerously low, those of the other members were assessed

and reserves were directly provided to the troubled bank from the pool. Unlike loan certificates,
   3
      Clearinghouses also helped mitigate counterparty risks involved in check clearing. If a bank is unable to settle
its obligations, then the banks it owes might also be unable to settle what they owe to other banks, etc. The netting
of positions that occurs when a clearinghouse is the counterparty to all trades helps prevent such contagion. Similar
arguments were used to move credit derivatives into central clearing after the 2007-09 financial crisis.
    4
      Such decisions required unanimous approval. Due to the extent of the crisis in 1873, cooperation was not an
issue. However, disagreements among banks did arise in later crises which hindered recovery efforts.



                                                          7
which continued to be used in later crises, the reserve pooling arrangement was abandoned in 1873.

We will return to this point in Section 4.2.

   Two other measures were taken by the NYCH in response to the Panic of 1873. First, the clear-

inghouse began suppressing bank-specific balance sheet information on September 20th, publishing

instead only the aggregate balance sheet across all members in order to avoid revealing the weakest

banks. Second, on September 22nd, the NYCH decided to partly suspend the convertibility of

deposits into cash to limit the drain of cash reserves. Country banks holding deposits at NYCH

members could continue to withdraw, but individual depositors could not.

   In total, the NYCH responded to 5 banking crises during the National Banking Era. It issued

clearinghouse loan certificates and suspended convertibility to at least some degree during the major

crises (1873, 1893, 1907) and was able to avoid suspension during the minor ones (1884 and 1890).

Of all the actions taken by the NYCH over the course of these crises, loan certificates and their

role in crisis resolution are the least studied and the least well understood and hence the focus

of our paper. We revisit the other actions (reserve pooling, information suppression, and partial

suspension of convertibility) later in the paper.


2.1.2   Clearinghouse Loan Certificates

Clearinghouse loan certificates were collateralized notes that members of the NYCH could use

instead of cash reserves (specie and legal tender) to settle obligations with each other during the

check-clearing process. To obtain loan certificates, a member bank had to apply to the clearinghouse

loan committee, submitting some of its loans and bonds for examination as collateral. Upon

accepting the collateral, the clearinghouse would issue loan certificates to the applicant amounting

to no more than 75% of the assessed value of the collateral. The applicant also agreed to pay an

interest rate on any loan certificates that it used during check clearing. The NYCH set an interest

rate of 7% when it introduced loan certificates during the Panic of 1873. This interest rate was high

enough that banks would want to pay off their loan certificates quickly after the crisis terminated,

but not so high that it was unaffordable.

   For all intents and purposes, clearinghouse loan certificates functioned as forced loans during

the check-clearing process. When receiving payment in the form of loan certificates, the accepting

bank was effectively lending the value of those certificates to the paying bank. The difference from

                                                    8
ordinary loans was that banks could not refuse to accept loan certificates in lieu of cash reserves

during check clearing.5

    By reducing the pressure on banks' cash reserves, loan certificates also helped maintain the call

loan market, which was a critical source of liquidity for the stock exchange. Stock-brokers used

call loans for margin purchases and for the daily settlement of transactions on the exchange. The

member banks of the NYCH were the primary funding source for the call loan market during the

National Banking Era.6 Call loans, as the name suggests, were callable on demand by the lender.

This was rare in normal times, as most call loans were rolled over daily. However, during a banking

crisis, banks with insufficient cash would be forced to call in their loans, with potentially deleterious

effects on stock prices.


2.2    Data and Summary Statistics

We use various sources, including archival materials from the New York Clearinghouse, to study

how clearinghouse loan certificates helped with bank liquidity management.

    We obtain information about clearinghouse loan certificates from the minutes of the NYCH

committee. When the Panic of 1873 started, the NYCH appointed a subcommittee of member

bank officers to oversee the issuance of loan certificates. The minutes of this committee include the

identities of banks who applied for loan certificates, the amount of loan certificates requested, the

dates of certificate issues, and the dates of cancellation (repayment) of the certificates. The NYCH

also separately tabulated the amount of interest paid and received by each bank in relation to loan

certificates on November 1st, December 1st, and January 1st. None of this information was made

public during the panic.

    Two additional archival materials from the NYCH are useful for our analysis. First, an internal

document compiled by the NYCH summarizes the deposits at each member bank on October 21st,

1873. This date falls within the period where bank-specific information was being withheld from

the public, providing us with a unique snapshot of the conditions of member banks. Second, we
   5
     In transactions where loan certificates were used, the NYCH acted only as a guarantor of the final repayment of
the certificates. If member banks were exposed to losses arising from unpaid loan certificates, the members of the
NYCH would share these losses based on their relative capital.
   6
     New York City banks used the call loan market to invest deposits from interior banks into other parts of the
country. Call loans enabled New York City banks to profit from the typically positive spread between the call loan
interest rate and the interest paid on deposits. The interest on these loans and their perceived safety and liquidity
during normal times made them attractive investments for New York City banks.


                                                         9
obtained daily ledgers of the New York Clearinghouse. These ledger books feature daily records of

payments between major banks that were cleared through the NYCH. In 1873 the NYCH cleared

checks twice a day, and we have information for both the morning and afternoon clearings.

   Finally, we collected balance sheet information for the member banks of the NYCH to examine

their conditions prior to the Panic of 1873. For national banks, this information comes from national

bank examination records and the September 1873 call reports. The call reports provide balance

sheet information for all national banks on the same date, whereas the examination reports were

filed at various dates by OCC bank examiners who visited each bank once or twice a year. That

being said, the examination reports are still useful because they contain more detailed information

about bank loan books than the call reports (e.g., the amount of unsecured loans, the amount of

loans payable on demand, and the amount of loans secured by real estate). For state banks, we

collected balance sheet information from the Annual Report of the Superintendent of the Banking

Department of the State of New York. The state banking department made quarterly calls to

investigate the conditions of state banks and published this information in its annual report.

   Table 1 reports summary statistics separately for banks that received loan certificates and banks

that did not. The last column reports the same statistics for all banks together. The statistics are

based on the September call report right before the crisis. Of the 61 member banks in the NYCH,

our data sources recover balance sheet information for all but two of them.

   On the whole, the member banks of the NYCH were liquid and solvent. On average, they held

10% of their total assets as cash reserves, specifically specie (i.e., gold and silver recognized as

lawful money) and legal tender notes. These reserves amounted to 16% of total deposits, where

we define total deposits to include retail deposits as well as institutional deposits recorded as "due

tos." The banks in the sample also held about 25% of their loan book in the form of call loans.

Moreover, they held a large amount of equity, almost 30% of their total assets.

   Comparing banks that received loan certificates to banks that did not, three differences are

statistically significant at the 5% level. First, recipient banks tended to be less liquid. On average,

their ratio of cash reserves to total assets was 2.66 percentage points lower than non-recipient banks.

Recipient banks also tended to be less well capitalized. On average, their capital ratio was 9.43

percentage points lower than non-recipient banks. Lastly, recipient banks tended to take in more

deposits from outside banks, as measured by due-tos. Institutional deposits are generally flightier

                                                  10
than retail deposits, so a higher incidence of due-tos among recipient banks may have made them

more susceptible to runs in the absence of crisis mitigation policies by the NYCH.


2.3      Liquidity Reallocation During the Panic of 1873

This section provides empirical evidence that clearinghouse loan certificates helped stabilize the

banking sector by reallocating liquidity across banks.

       We first examine the relationship between balances due to the clearinghouse (i.e., balances

owed by banks as part of the check-clearing process) and the daily issuance of clearinghouse loan

certificates to individual members. We look at the period from September 22nd to September 30th,

since this is when most loan certificates were issued.7 Table 2 presents the results. Issuance of loan

certificates is highly correlated with balances due to the clearinghouse; the correlation coefficient

is 0.8 and statistically significant. In other words, banks that were experiencing the most pressure

on cash reserves because of check settlement received the most loan certificates from the NYCH.

       The allocation of loan certificates to these banks would have freed up their cash in the event of

large depositor withdrawals. Banks were vulnerable to cash drains arising from both check-clearing

activities and depositor withdrawals. By allowing recipient banks to settle their clearing balances

without using specie or legal tender, loan certificates would have helped economize on cash reserves.

       Table 3 presents average deposit growth for recipient and non-recipient banks during the Panic

of 1873, which lasted from September 20th to December 6th. We use the NYCH's internal summary

of deposits on October 21st to divide the panic into two periods. From September 20th to October

21st, the currency premium defined in Gorton and Tallman (2018) was positive. From October

21st to December 6th, the currency premium was effectively zero.8 The most intense part of

the panic thus occurred in the first month. While the entire banking system experienced large

deposit outflows during this month, the first column of Table 3 shows that banks that received

loan certificates were experiencing much greater deposit outflows than non-recipient banks.9 The

ability of loan certificates to free up the cash reserves of recipient banks would have therefore been

particularly helpful at the beginning of the panic.
   7
     Following their introduction on September 20th, 30% of loan certificates were issued by the clearinghouse on
September 22nd. Total issuance peaked on October 2nd, after which very few new loan certificates were issued.
   8
     The currency premium became zero on October 24th (Gorton and Tallman (2018)).
   9
     The difference is statistically significant at the 1% level, in contrast to the difference later in the panic (second
column of Table 3) which is not statistically significant at standard levels.


                                                           11
         Implicit in our discussion is the assumption that recipient banks actually used (circulated) the

loan certificates they were granted. Studying the policies of the NYCH in 1884, Goehring, Tallman,

and Van Horn (2019) argue that this assumption can be verified by examining the interest paid

and received by each bank in relation to loan certificates. Interest was only paid on circulated

loan certificates, so the interest data make it possible to compute the amount of loan certificates in

actual circulation. Table 4 summarizes average interest payments to and from the NYCH during

and immediately following the Panic of 1873. A payment to the clearinghouse means that the

bank making the payment used loan certificates to clear checks. A payment from the clearinghouse

means that the bank receiving the payment accepted loan certificates while clearing checks. As

a benchmark against which to compare actual interest payments, Goehring, Tallman, and Van

Horn (2019) propose computing the interest payments that should have been observed had all

loan certificates circulated. We find these payments to be exactly equal to the actual payments,

indicating that recipient banks used all of their loan certificates in 1873.

         Finally, we compare the liquidity positions of recipient and non-recipient banks at the onset and

conclusion of the panic. Table 5 reports the ratio of cash reserves to deposits on September 20th

and December 6th. Although recipient banks experienced much larger deposit outflows in between

these dates (Table 3), both recipient and non-recipient banks emerged from the Panic of 1873 with

cash-to-deposit ratios that were similar to the ratios they had before the crisis began.10 Liquidity

thus appears to have been successfully redistributed across the members of the NYCH.



3         Theoretical Model

In this section, we develop a theoretical model of liquidity reallocation among banks that allows

us to analyze the effectiveness of the NYCH's policies during the Panic of 1873. We first present a

decentralized model of interbank lending with no clearinghouse to establish a benchmark against

which clearinghouse intervention can be compared. We then introduce loan certificates of the

type issued by the NYCH to study whether there exists a centralized reallocation of liquidity that

improves social welfare. To the best of our knowledge, there was no formal, decentralized interbank

market in New York in 1873, hence any welfare improvements predicted by our model are likely a
    10
    Formally, there is no statistically significant difference between the first and second columns in Table 5 for each
group of banks.


                                                          12
conservative estimate of the impact of the NYCH's intervention.


3.1    Decentralized Interbank Market

We consider an economy with three dates, t = 0, 1, 2, and a continuum of banks, i  [0, 1]. Each

                                                              ~ at t = 0. Loans pay x  (0, 1) per
bank i is endowed with cash holdings ci and loans outstanding z

unit if liquidated at t = 1 and (1 + rz ) per unit if held until t = 2. Naturally, rz > 0 so a bank i

only liquidates loans if it needs more cash than ci at t = 1.

    Cash is used to pay short-term liabilities at t = 1, namely depositors who want to withdraw

funds before loans have matured. Cash can also be used to make additional loans (i.e., if bank i

needs less cash than ci at t = 1). To increase its loans by an amount zi at t = 1, bank i must pay
                                                             1  2 , due at the end of t = 2. Note
zi units of cash upfront plus an additional adjustment cost, 2 zi

that banks that liquidate loans will not make additional loans since x < 1. Thus:


                                                 zi li = 0


where li  [0, z
              ~] denotes the amount of loans liquidated by bank i at t = 1. The total amount of

                                             z - li + zi ).
loans held by bank i at the end of t = 1 is (~

    Each bank i serves a unique set of depositors of measure one. The set of depositors in bank

i  [0, 1] is denoted by {ij }j [0,1] . Each depositor in the set {ij }j [0,1] has 1 unit of deposits in bank

                                                                 ~ - 1, where ci + z
i at t = 0. Bank i's equity at t = 0 can then be defined as ci + z                 ~  1. A depositor

is entitled to 1 unit if he withdraws his funds at t = 1 and (1 + r) units if he waits until t = 2,

where r  [0, rz ). A fraction   (0, 1) of depositors at each bank will experience a liquidity shock

that forces them to withdraw at t = 1. The remaining depositors can choose whether to withdraw

at t = 1 or t = 2. The action of depositor ij  [0, 1] × [0, 1] is represented by the date at which he

withdraws, i.e., aij  {1, 2}. Without loss of generality, depositors can be ordered so that aij = 1

for ij  [0, 1] × [0, ] and aij  {1, 2} for ij  [0, 1] × [, 1]. Bank i experiences a run if aij = 1 for

all depositors in the set {ij }j [,1] .

    At t = 1, after observing depositor withdrawal decisions, banks borrow and lend cash among

each other on a Walrasian interbank market. The interest rate charged on interbank loans, rb , is

determined in equilibrium via market clearing. Denote by i the net borrowing of bank i on the


                                                    13
interbank market. If i < 0, then bank i is a net lender on the interbank market. Market clearing

requires:
                                                         1
                                                             i di = 0                                              (1)
                                                     0

so that there is no excess demand or excess supply of interbank loans.

       Interbank loans are repaid at the end of t = 2. There is no uncertainty in the model after the

realization of depositor liquidity shocks. Therefore, when a bank borrows on the interbank market,

it knows whether or not it will be able to repay the loan. We assume banks can only take out loans

that they know they can repay alongside withdrawals at t = 2.11

       The timing of events in the model can be summarized as follows:

       · Date t = 0: Each bank i begins with endowments of cash ci and loans z
                                                                             ~.

       · Date t = 1: Depositors learn their liquidity shocks and decide whether or not to withdraw

         from their banks, with full information about the bank's portfolio (more on this below). After

         observing the decisions of its depositors, each bank i chooses liquidations li , additional loans

         zi , and net interbank borrowing i . Banks with insufficient cash to pay depositors after these

         choices fail.

       · Date t = 2: Solvent banks obtain returns from unliquidated loans and repay any interbank

         loans they borrowed or receive payment for any interbank loans they lent. They also repay

         depositors who did not withdraw at t = 1.


3.2      Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a set of actions for the banks {li , zi , i }i[0,1] that maximizes each bank i's profit,

a set of actions for the depositors {aij }ij [0,1]×[0,1] that maximizes each depositor ij 's profit, and

an interest rate rb such that the interbank market clears (Eq. (1)).

       Since depositors act simultaneously and before each bank i chooses {li , zi , i }, each depositor

ij  [0, 1] × [, 1] must have beliefs about the actions of banks and other depositors when choosing

aij . As is common in bank-run models, there could be multiple equilibria based on depositor
  11
    We thus abstract away from additional adverse selection issues which could reduce the efficiency of the decentral-
ized interbank market. Recall our goal here is a benchmark against which to compare loan certificates, so abstracting
away from ingredients that reduce efficiency of the interbank market will make it harder, not easier, to find a welfare
improvement from loan certificates.


                                                              14
beliefs. In choosing among different equilibria, we assume that depositors are conservative and

decide whether or not to withdraw at t = 1 based on the worst case scenario that all other

depositors in their bank withdraw at t = 1. Formally:

Definition 1. A conservative equilibrium is an equilibrium such that, for each bank i  [0, 1],

fixing {li , zi , i }i=i and {aij }i=i , depositor i j  [0, 1] × [, 1] withdraws at t = 1 if and only if he

prefers to withdraw at t = 1 when ai j = 1 for all i j = i j .

   We now characterize the conservative equilibria of our model:

                                       ~  1 + r for all i.
Proposition 1. Consider ci + (1 + rz ) z

           1
  1. If   0 ci di    , then there exists a conservative equilibrium where aij = 2 for all depositors

      ij  [0, 1] × [, 1].

           1
  2. If   0 ci di   < , then a conservative equilibrium will involve runs on a positive measure of

      banks, namely any bank i with cash endowment


                                                                (1 + rz ) z
                                                                          ~
                                          ci < c (rb )1-                                                 (2)
                                                                  1 + rb

                                 solves
      where the interbank rate rb


                                                           ( - ci ) di = 0                               (3)
                                           {i|ci c(rb
                                                    
                                                      )}

                                                                                     r , 1+rz - 1 .
      and existence of the conservative equilibrium requires parameters such that rb  z   x


   Proposition 1 shows that there exists a conservative equilibrium without runs if and only if
                                              1
the total amount of cash in the system,      0 ci di,   is at least as large as the fraction  of depositors
                                                                                         1
who experience liquidity shocks at t = 1 (i.e., impatient depositors). When             0 ci di   is below ,

there is not enough cash in the system to pay off all the impatient depositors. Since the interbank

market only redistributes liquidity instead of creating it, there must be some banks that cannot

meet the needs of their impatient depositors. The patient depositors of these banks realize that

their bank will be insolvent and thus all choose to run at t = 1. In contrast, when total cash

exceeds , the interbank market is effective at redistributing liquidity across banks and there is a

                                                    15
conservative equilibrium where no banks face runs. The scope for welfare-improving interventions
                                              1
will therefore be highest when               0 ci di      < . We analyze the potential improvement in social welfare

at low liquidity levels next.


3.3      Social Welfare

We consider a social welfare function that puts equal weight on all agents. We model the recipients

of bank loans as firms who engage in production. This can include stock-brokers who intermediate

                                                                         z - + z ) at t = 1 is
between banks and producers of goods and services. A firm who has loans (~

                           z - + z ) at t = 2, where f (·) > 0 with f (0) = 0 and f (~
able to generate output f (~                                                         z )  (1 + rz ) z
                                                                                                    ~.
            1
    If     0 ci di     as in the first part of Proposition 1, no banks fail and an additional amount of
                                            1
loans za is made, with za =                0 ci di      -  if the adjustment cost parameter  is not too high. Social

welfare in the benchmark model with a decentralized interbank market is then:

                                                                 1
                                                 (1)                                       2
                                               Wb        =                      z + za ) - z a
                                                                     ci di + f (~                                (4)
                                                             0                            2

                       1                                                                                    )
Now consider          0 ci di   <  as in the second part of Proposition 1. Banks with initial cash ci < c (rb
                                                                          ) do not experience
experience runs and liquidate all loans. Banks with initial cash ci  c (rb

runs and do not liquidate, but even the most liquid among these banks do not make additional

loans because the scarcity of aggregate cash bids up the interbank rate and makes lending on the
                                          > r . Social welfare is therefore:
interbank market more profitable, i.e., rb   z


                                                    1
                                     (2)
                                   Wb      =                             z ) - xz
                                                                 ~ + [f (~
                                                        ci di + xz              ~]                      di       (5)
                                                0                                       {i|ci c(rb
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                   )}

                   ) as defined in Eq. (2), clearly highlights that social welfare is decreasing in the
Eq. (5), with c (rb
                                . Therefore, a mechanism which successfully lowers the interbank
market-clearing interest rate rb

rate could improve social welfare.

    The intuition is as follows. An individual bank does not internalize the effect of its net borrowing

on the interest rate in the interbank market. This imposes a pecuniary externality because the

measure of banks that fails in a conservative equilibrium is increasing in the interbank rate when
  1
 0 ci di   <  (see Proposition 1). The higher the interbank rate, the more expensive it is to get



                                                                         16
additional cash to pay depositors at t = 1. The marginal bank that was preventing a run by

borrowing on the interbank market can no longer do so profitably; the amount it needs to borrow

given its endowed cash holdings is simply too high to be fully repaid at the higher interest rate.

The minimum level of endowed cash that a bank must have in order to be run-proof thus rises, as

does the measure of banks that fails. The lower the interbank rate, the lower the measure of banks

that fails. Such an externality opens the door for centralized intervention, which we consider in

Section 3.4.
                                                                                                                         1
          For comparison, it will be useful to define the maximum level of welfare when                                 0 ci di   < ,

assuming surviving banks do not liquidate loans.12 Social welfare in Eq. (5) is maximized when

the measure of banks that survives is maximized. The highest possible measure of surviving banks
          1
          0 ci di               1
is                  when       0 ci di   <  and surviving banks do not liquidate, leading to a maximum welfare

level of
                                                          1                                 1
                                              (2)                                          0 ci di
                                             Wmax =           ci di + xz       z ) - xz
                                                                       ~ + [f (~      ~]                                           (6)
                                                      0                                      

Eq. (6) abstracts from the feasibility of so many banks surviving when depositors behave as in

Definition 1, i.e., not running if and only if their bank can survive a run by all of its depositors. If
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                      0 ci di
(i)   1 - xz
           ~ and (ii) ci =  for all i  S , where S  [0, 1] and |S | =                                           , and ci = 0 for all
                           (2)
i/ S , then Wmax is also feasible as a conservative equilibrium; each bank i  S could liquidate

enough loans to survive a run, in which case runs and liquidations do not occur for those banks.

An immediate implication is that a social planner could improve on the decentralized equilibrium

by reallocating cash so that each bank has cash holdings of either 0 or . If  < 1 - xz
                                                                                     ~, then the

planner would also specify a set of (off-equilibrium) transfers that eliminate runs. We present the

formal planning problem in Appendix B. It corresponds to the use of reserve pooling, wherein the

cash reserves of banks are pooled and redistributed.


3.4            Loan Certificates

We now explore whether a social planner can use loan certificates to achieve a better outcome than
                                                                  1
the decentralized interbank market when                          0 ci di   < . The model is similar to Section 3.1, except
     12                    1                                                                    (1)
    The case of 0 ci di >  is innocuous; a social planner cannot do better than Wb as in Eq. (4), and, for  not too
                                                               1
high, he will also choose the same za . We therefore focus on 0 ci di < . The assumption on loan liquidations is an
outcome in the decentralized equilibrium, which we impose here to obtain a conservative benchmark for comparison.
This benchmark may differ from the second-best level of welfare, which is discussed separately in Appendix B.


                                                                       17
that loan certificates are introduced as an alternative to the interbank market. Specifically, the

planner allocates a maximum amount of loan certificates ki to bank i at t = 0, which bank i can

use at t = 1 to meet certain obligations with other banks. Loan certificates incur an interest rate

rk if used, and both principal and interest must be repaid by solvent banks at t = 2.13 The planner

sets the allocation of loan certificates {ki }i[0,1] and the interest rate rk , understanding the best

responses of banks and their depositors.

    As discussed in Section 2, the loan certificates issued by the NYCH during the Panic of 1873 were

connected to the check-clearing process. They could only be used in the settlement of obligations

that involved the transfer of cash from one bank to another, not obligations that involved the

withdrawal of cash out of the banking system. To model this constraint on loan certificates, we

introduce the notation i for check-clearing obligations and decompose bank i's cash holdings at

the beginning of t = 1 into three components:


                                                 ci  ci - i + 


where ci is cash reserves (specie and legal tender), i is cash outflows associated with checks owed

to other banks, and  is cash inflows associated with checks owing from other banks. To simplify

the exposition, we assume that bank i owes the same amount of checks i to each bank i = i.

The aggregate amount owed by bank i to all other banks is                 i =i i di   , which is also equal to i .

The total amount owed to bank i from all other banks is                      i di . Checks are cleared before

any depositor withdraws at t = 1. In the model of Section 3.1, only cash could be used to settle

checks, hence ci was the amount of cash brought by bank i into t = 1. Now, loan certificates exist

as an alternative to cash for check settlement. In particular, loan certificates can be used to pay

i and must be accepted in lieu of  , helping banks to preserve cash reserves ci for depositors who

withdraw from the system at t = 1. The preservation occurs because the loan certificate defers the

final settlement (in cash and at the interest rate rk ) to t = 2, after depositor withdrawal decisions

have been made. For simplicity, when a bank uses a loan certificate, we assume the loan certificate

is given in equal proportions to all other banks.

    The amount of loan certificates used by bank i to pay i before depositor withdrawals at the
  13
     Loan certificates must be repaid by solvent banks, regardless of whether the bank that accepted them survives
to t = 2. In the historical setting, we can think of payments to failed banks as going to the clearinghouse instead.


                                                        18
beginning of t = 1 is denoted by ki , where


                                             ki  0, min i , ki + k                                               (7)


and k        ki di denotes the amount of loan certificates used by other banks to pay bank i the

obligations  . As loan certificates can be recirculated during the check-clearing process, receiving

more loan certificates from others allows a bank to utilize loan certificates beyond its initial allo-

cation ki . The k thus represents an equilibrium of the loan certificate exchange process, whereby

the loan certificates received by a bank can affect the amount of loan certificates it distributes to

other banks.14

    In addition to choosing the initial allocation of loan certificates and the interest rate rk , the

planner can impose restrictions on the recirculation of loan certificates, i.e., the upper bound on ki

in (7) can be made stricter for some banks. The following proposition shows that loan certificates

can achieve a better outcome than the decentralized equilibrium in Proposition 1 when total cash

in the system is low:

                                                                                    1
Proposition 2. Consider ci = c for all i  [0, 1] and hence                         0 ci di   = c. If  >  - c, then
                                                 
there exists an allocation of loan certificates ki                                              that achieves higher
                                                                         and an interest rate rk
                                                                i[0,1]
welfare than the decentralized equilibrium when  > c. This allocation involves:
                                                  
                                                   0
                                                  
                                                           if              )
                                                                  ci < c (rk
                                            
                                           ki =                                                                  (8)
                                                   i if
                                                                          )
                                                                  ci  c (rk

      solving:
and rk

                                           ( - ci ) di =                     min{k, ci }di > 0                   (9)
                           {i|ci c(rk
                                    
                                      )}                    {i|ci <c(rk
                                                                      
                                                                        )}
                          ) experiences a run. However, r  < r  so there are fewer runs than in
Any bank i with ci < c (rk                               k    b

Proposition 1. The welfare-improving allocation implements i = 0 for all i and imposes that any
                    ) uses cash before recirculated loan certificates during check-clearing.
bank with ci < c (rk
  14
     Our concept of a payment equilibrium is analogous to the payment equilibrium concept presented in the system
of payments literature, for instance in Eisenberg and Noe (2001). This literature shows that there exists a unique
payment equilibrium and that this payment equilibrium can be derived as the limit of a repeated series of payment
transaction steps among the banks.




                                                           19
   The condition ci = c at the beginning of Proposition 2 captures an environment where most of

the variation in initial cash holdings across banks comes from variation in check-clearing obligations.

Then, as long as there is enough aggregate check-clearing activity, i.e.,  >  - c, Proposition 2 says

that the planner can reduce bank failures and improve social welfare by allocating to banks above
                        ) enough loan certificates to cover their checks owed to other banks. Banks
the cash threshold c (rk

below this threshold receive no loan certificates from the clearinghouse and must use cash reserves

before loan certificates received from other banks to pay checks owed. The result is a reallocation

of cash reserves away from failing banks (and their depositors) towards the rest of the system. In

turn, the interest rate on loan certificates can be set below the borrowing rate that prevails in the

decentralized equilibrium, allowing more banks to fend off runs. The measure of failed banks falls

and total welfare rises.

   Next, we compare the social welfare generated by the loan certificates in Proposition 2 to the

welfare from reserve pooling in Eq. (6):

Lemma 1. Consider  >  - c > 0 as in Proposition 2.


   · Case 1 (Unconstrained): If c (rk
                                     )   + c - , then loan certificates will transfer all the cash


      of failing banks to run-proof banks, achieving the same level of welfare as reserve pooling.

   · Case 2 (Constrained): If c (rk
                                   ) >  + c - , then some cash will remain with failing banks under


      the loan certificate arrangement in Proposition 2, making the welfare improvement over the

      decentralized equilibrium smaller than the welfare improvement achieved by reserve pooling.

               to Eq. (9) is increasing in , so the unconstrained case applies for  not too large
The solution rk

above c. Alternatively, fix any value of  > c and consider an increase in check-clearing obligations

from i to i +  at all banks i, where  > 0. The unconstrained case will apply at higher .

                                                                          ) which is stricter
   The unconstrained case in Lemma 1 introduces a condition    - c + c (rk

than the condition  >  - c in Proposition 2. The condition in Proposition 2 determines whether

loan certificates can provide higher social welfare than the interbank market, while the condition in

Lemma 1 determines whether the loan certificates can achieve the same welfare as reserve pooling.

Overall, Lemma 1 highlights that loan certificates are as capable as reserve pooling when all banks



                                                  20
are highly involved in check-clearing activity. The intuition follows from the fact that loan certifi-

cates are connected to the check-clearing process. With more checks owed, failing banks have to

transfer more cash towards run-proof banks without receiving more cash in return for checks owing.

This achieves the same outcome as reserve pooling when the volume of check-clearing activity is

high enough that failing banks have to transfer all of their cash.



4     Quantitative Analysis

We now use historical data to parameterize the model developed in Section 3. We then obtain some

plausible estimates of the welfare gains from loan certificates during the Panic of 1873 relative to

a hypothetical interbank market with decentralized trade.


4.1   Parameterization

We consider a range of 0.068 to cmax for the cash levels of the NYCH member banks, where the 1873

level of cmax is 0.311. Our model normalizes deposits at each bank to 1 so the range of cash levels

captures that the least liquid banks in the NYCH held 6.8% of their deposits as cash reserves while

the most liquid banks held 31.1%. These ratios trim the sample at the 7th and 93rd percentiles to
                                                                                                    1
exclude outliers. We use a uniform distribution for simplicity, with density f (ci ) =         cmax -0.068   at

each cash level ci  [0.068, cmax ]. The average cash ratio (which is also the aggregate cash level)

implied by the uniform distribution at cmax = 0.311 is c = 0.189. For the decomposition of cash

holdings, ci  c - i +  , we assume cmax = c +  , i.e., the most liquid banks owe no checks.
                               cmax -0.068              0.068+cmax
Then, i = cmax - ci and  =          2        with c =        2     .   Notice that a higher (lower) value of

cmax would capture a system with more (less) total cash. We will vary cmax from its 1873 level in

counterfactual computations and quantify the effect on welfare.

    During the period we study, depositors were paid an average of 2% on their deposits, so we

set r = 0.02 for the deposit interest rate. The average call loan rate in the fall of 1873 was 10%,

with call loans accounting for 25% of bank lending. We assume that the interest rate on other

loans was roughly equal to the deposit rate after chargeoffs are taken into account. The average

interest rate on bank loans is then rz = 0.04. We set the output function for recipients of bank

loans to f (z ) = (1 + rz ) z . The loan liquidation value is set to x = 0.75, which is to say 75% of


                                                   21
the face value of bank loans could be recovered on demand. This is consistent with full recovery

on call loans (by definition of being callable) and a recovery rate of two-thirds for other types

of lending. We consider    for the loan adjustment cost to capture the difficulty of finding

additional profitable lending opportunities during a financial crisis. We then set loans outstanding

   ~ = 1 - 0.068 = 0.932, which ensures ci + z
to z                                         ~  1 for all i and reflects the fact that the total

amount of investments was roughly equal to the total amount of deposits among the banks.

   A key parameter for our analysis is the fraction of early deposit withdrawals . The NYCH
                                                                                       = 0.07 from
set an interest rate of 7% on outstanding loan certificates, so we calibrate  to get rk

Proposition 2. This gives  = 0.212. While there is no direct data on , the calibrated value is

reasonable given the composition of bank deposits. Around 64% of total deposits in the NYCH

members in 1873 were individual checking deposits. Assuming a withdrawal rate of 0.2 for individual

depositors based on the typical withdrawals in 1872, the calibrated  implies a withdrawal rate of

0.23 by institutional depositors, i.e., country banks, which is consistent with greater withdrawal

pressures from banks in the interior of the country during the crisis.


4.2   Welfare Gains from Loan Certificates

Figure 1(a) compares the welfare with loan certificates to the welfare under reserve pooling and

the welfare that could have been achieved with a decentralized interbank market. We also plot the

"first best" level of welfare, measured as c + f (~
                                                  z ).

   In the baseline parameterization of Section 4.1 with cmax = 0.311, loan certificates are able to

achieve the same welfare as reserve pooling, i.e., the unconstrained case in Lemma 1 applies. This

suggests that it was redundant for the NYCH to explicitly adopt reserve pooling in 1873, providing

a new perspective on the subsequent abandonment of the reserve pooling arrangement. Social

welfare with loan certificates is 2% higher than the welfare with a decentralized interbank market
                                                                                        = 0.094,
in the baseline parameterization, reflecting that the market clearing interbank rate, rb

would have exceeded the 7% interest rate on loan certificates. A welfare improvement of 2% is

notable since it fills almost half of the gap between the decentralized market and the first best.

   Notice that the average cash ratio c is below the calibrated  when cmax = 0.311. Thus, the

banking system during the Panic of 1873 was in the range of parameters where loan certificates

alone would not have been able to completely prevent bank failures (recall Proposition 2, where

                                                   22
                     ) experience a run when c < ).15 When total cash in the system is below ,
banks with ci < c (rk

there is simply no redistribution of cash across banks that allows them all to become run-proof. An

important difference between the analysis in Proposition 2 and the historical episode is that none of

the members of the NYCH actually failed during the Panic of 1873. This suggests that additional

policies pursued by the NYCH helped drive failures down to zero, despite possibly introducing

costs of their own. We consider these policies in Section 5. Among surviving banks, however, the

welfare-improving allocation in Proposition 2 issues more loan certificates to banks that owe more

checks. This is consistent with Table 2, where we found that banks with higher amounts due to the

NYCH received more loan certificates. Our model thus shows that there is an allocation of loan

certificates that improves welfare over a decentralized market and that, on the intensive margin,

this allocation is in line with the allocation implemented by the NYCH during the Panic of 1873.

         The horizontal axis in Figure 1(a) varies cmax to analyze the welfare effect of loan certificates

under different liquidity scenarios for the banking system. We keep all other parameters as in

Section 4.1, including  = 0.212, and use Proposition 2 to solve for rk at each value of cmax .

The welfare gains from loan certificates relative to the interbank market are largest at low cmax

(and hence low c) even though at these values the constrained case in Lemma 1 applies and loan

certificates do not achieve the same welfare as reserve pooling. As cmax increases to bring c equal

to or above , all mechanisms for redistributing cash (interbank market, loan certificates, reserve

pooling) are able to achieve the first best level of welfare.



5         Other Interventions by the NYCH

We now consider the additional policies introduced by the NYCH during the Panic of 1873 ­

information suppression and partial suspension ­ and assess their potential welfare effects.


5.1        Information Suppression

Starting on September 20th, the NYCH stopped publishing weekly balance sheet information about

individual banks, reporting instead the aggregate across its members. The NYCH made this deci-
    15
    As a robustness check, we shifted the cash distribution rightward, from ci to ci + 0.05 for each i, to consider a
somewhat broader definition of liquid assets than cash reserves. The gap between the new c and the recalibrated
                                                                                                            
 widens, i.e., the latter increases more than one-for-one with the former to justify the same solution rk    = 0.07,
bolstering the welfare gain from loan certificates relative to a decentralized interbank market.


                                                         23
sion on behalf of all member banks. Had the decision to suppress bank-level information been left

up to each bank individually, the lack of a coordination mechanism could have caused information

suppression to unravel.

   To characterize the effect of information suppression on welfare independently of loan certifi-

cates, consider an environment where (i) banks trade in a decentralized interbank market as in

Section 3.1 and (ii) depositors know the distribution from which the cash endowments ci are drawn

but not the value of ci for any bank i. The following proposition shows that information suppression

alone, even if coordinated by an entity like the NYCH, cannot reduce bank failures when total cash

in the system is low:

Proposition 3. Consider a decentralized interbank market with c < .


  1. For a fixed interbank rate, there are (weakly) fewer bank failures if information is suppressed

     than if it is not.

  2. If there exists an equilibrium with information suppression where patient depositors do not

     run (i.e., aij = 2 for all ij  [0, 1] × [, 1]), then the measure of banks that fails is exactly the

     same as in Proposition 1 but social welfare may be higher.


   The first part of Proposition 3 compares bank failures with and without information suppression

for the same interbank rate. With information suppression, depositors cannot distinguish strong

(i.e., run-proof) banks from weak ones. Instead, all banks appear the same to patient depositors,

hence patient depositors at all banks make the same decision. Ex post, patient depositors would

only want to have run on weak banks, so, if there are enough strong banks in the system, depositors

may prefer not to run ex ante. This sort of cross-subsidization of weak banks by strong ones is what

would permit information suppression to achieve fewer bank failures for a fixed interbank rate.

   Importantly though, the interbank rate is not fixed. The second part of Proposition 3 establishes

that the interbank interest rate will adjust in equilibrium to deliver exactly the same measure of

bank failures as in Proposition 1. Intuitively, there would be more banks with low cash participating

in the interbank market if information suppression decreased the threshold level of cash below which

banks fail. This would imply an increase in loan demand on the interbank market, pushing up the

interbank rate and increasing the threshold. Unlike loan certificates, information suppression offers


                                                  24
no mechanism by which to extract cash from failing banks for use by the rest of the system. As

a result, information suppression does not allow fewer banks to fail when the interbank rate is

endogenously determined in a decentralized market.

   Even though information suppression does not reduce the measure of bank failures, the second

part of Proposition 3 reveals that welfare may still increase relative to the decentralized market

without information suppression. The welfare gains come from fewer loans being liquidated at

t = 1. The key to this result is that information suppression defers some bank failures until t = 2

if there are enough strong banks in the system to convince patient depositors to wait until t = 2
                                                       )) now only need to liquidate a fraction of
to withdraw. Specifically, banks with ci  ( - xz, c (rb

their loans at t = 1 to repay impatient depositors. The unliquidated fraction then earns the interest

rate rz , which can be used to partly repay the patient depositors at t = 2. These depositors are

not fully repaid (i.e., they do not get 1 + r at t = 2), but they do get more than if they ran at t = 1

and forced the bank to liquidate all of its loans z .

   Figure 1(b) plots welfare under information suppression for different values of cmax . There is

a value of cmax , call it c                                                              
                           max , at which welfare jumps discontinuously. For any cmax < cmax , there

does not exist an equilibrium with information suppression where patient depositors do not run.

The cash distribution is not strong enough to convince patient depositors that the average bank in

the system can withstand a run, hence all depositors withdraw from all banks at t = 1. This leads

to much lower welfare than without information suppression where banks towards the top of the

same cash distribution did not experience runs.

   For any cmax > cmax , there exists an equilibrium with information suppression where patient

depositors do not run; Figure 1(b) plots the welfare in that equilibrium. As cmax is increased above

cmax , a decentralized interbank market achieves higher welfare with information suppression than

without. Suppressing information also achieves higher welfare than replacing the decentralized

market with loan certificates. The welfare gains reflect fewer liquidations at t = 1, as discussed

above in relation to Proposition 3. As cmax is increased further, the system moves to c   and the

first best level of welfare is attained in all the models we consider.

   The important lesson from Figure 1(b) is that the 1873 level of cmax was well below cmax . Thus,

information suppression alone would have been disastrous for the banking system. The system-

wide run induced by information suppression at low cmax renders any mechanism for redistributing

                                                   25
cash across banks moot. No bank can lend without liquidating the principal of the interbank loan

from z and no amount of interbank lending changes the run probability for the recipient bank; the

recipient's liquidations just decrease by the amount that the lender liquidates to fund the interbank

loan. While the mechanism through which cash is redistributed (decentralized market versus loan

certificates) can affect the value of cmax , the 1873 level of cmax is low enough that it does not

matter which mechanism we consider alongside information suppression to conclude that another

policy was responsible for the lack of bank failures during the Panic of 1873. The final policy of

the NYCH, partial suspension of convertibility, is discussed next.


5.2    Suspension of Convertibility

On September 22nd, the NYCH partially suspended the convertibility of deposits, preventing indi-

vidual depositors in New York City from withdrawing while still allowing withdrawals from country

banks. We inferred a withdrawal rate of 0.23 for country banks at the end of Section 4.1, with

country banks accounting for around 36% of total deposits in the NYCH members. All else constant

then, the suspension policy of the NYCH would have decreased the fraction of early withdrawals

to  = 0.36 × 0.23 = 0.083, putting the banking system in a situation where the average cash ratio

c = 0.189 was high enough to achieve a conservative equilibrium without any bank failures as long

as there existed a mechanism to redistribute liquidity across banks. Loan certificates provided this

mechanism in the absence of a formal, decentralized interbank market. No banks fail under par-

tial suspension, and banks with less cash receive more loan certificates, in line with the summary

statistics in Section 2.

   The NYCH's suspension policy differs from the one that achieves the first best in Diamond

and Dybvig (1983) when the fraction of impatient depositors is known. In particular, the NYCH

was restricting withdrawals below the true fraction of impatient depositors, imposing a cost on

individual depositors who really needed access to their funds at t = 1. Denote by  the welfare

loss incurred by impatient depositors per dollar of deposits that they cannot withdraw at t = 1.

The NYCH's suspension policy would have improved aggregate welfare relative to loan certificates

alone if and only if  < 0.225. That is, the average individual depositor in New York City who

needed to withdraw deposits early but could not would have had to incur a welfare loss of no more

than 22.5% of the value of those deposits.

                                                 26
    The currency premium in New York City reached 5% by September 29th, meaning that some

depositors were getting cash from brokers at this much of a discount against their deposits. At

face value, this motivates  = 0.05, in which case the combination of partial suspension and loan

certificates brings welfare just shy of its first best level and constitutes a 2% improvement relative to

just loan certificates. However, the currency premium is a lower bound for  in our model. It would

suffice for 20% of individual depositors to not have had access to cash brokers to bring the weighted

average  above 0.225. Sprague (1910, p. 57) also notes that "there were wide differences both in

supply and demand from hour to hour, and especially high rates were regularly paid for currency in

quantity." It is therefore possible that partial suspension of convertibility reduced aggregate welfare

despite eliminating bank failures.

    Had there existed a formal, decentralized interbank market in New York City in 1873 and loan

certificates not been implemented, the suspension policy would have improved aggregate welfare if

and only if  < 0.393. Since a decentralized equilibrium would have involved more bank failures

than loan certificates in the absence of suspension, the welfare gain from suspension is higher when

the mechanism for redistributing liquidity is a decentralized interbank market. The welfare cost

can then also be higher before the suspension policy becomes overall welfare-reducing.



6    Conclusion

In the aftermath of the 2007-09 financial crisis, lawmakers began curtailing the ability of central

banks to create new, stigma-free lending facilities that inject emergency liquidity, especially when

it comes to shadow banks. At the same time, regulations mandating the central clearing of credit

derivatives have led to a revival of clearinghouses in modern financial systems.

    This paper has studied how financial stability can be achieved in the absence of monetary

injections by a central bank. We showed theoretically that a forced reallocation of liquidity across

banks can achieve fewer bank failures than a decentralized market for interbank loans due to a

pecuniary externality in the decentralized equilibrium. We also showed that a forced reallocation

of liquidity can be implemented through the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates, such as

those issued by the New York Clearinghouse during the Panic of 1873.

    We created an extensive, hand-collected dataset from a variety of archival sources to study this


                                                   27
novel feature of the NYCH's response. We demonstrated that the NYCH issued loan certificates

to member banks in the way our model suggests it should have, helping to resolve the panic.

Our findings bring to light a role for clearinghouse loan certificates in the management of future

liquidity crises. The optimal design of these certificates, especially in environments with multiple

clearinghouses, is a promising avenue for future work.




                                                28
References

Acharya, V. and O. Merrouche. 2012. "Precautionary Hoarding of Liquidity and Interbank Markets:

  Evidence from the Subprime Crisis." Review of Finance, 17(1), pp. 107-160.

Afonso, G., A. Kovner, and A. Schoar. 2011. "Stressed, Not Frozen: The Federal Funds Market in

  the Financial Crisis." Journal of Finance, 66(4), pp. 1109-1139.

Allen, F., E. Carletti, and D. Gale. 2009. "Interbank Market Liquidity and Central Bank Interven-

  tion." Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), pp. 639-652.

Allen, F. and D. Gale. 2000. "Financial Contagion." Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), pp. 1-33.

Anderson, H. and J. Bluedorn. 2017. "Stopping Contagion with Bailouts: Micro-Evidence from

  Pennsylvania Bank Networks During the Panic of 1884." Journal of Banking and Finance, 76,

  pp. 139-149.

Anderson, H., M. Paddrik, and J. Wang. 2016. "Bank Networks and Systemic Risk: Evidence from

  the National Banking Acts." American Economic Review, 109(9), pp. 3125-3161.

Bluhm, M. 2018. "Persistent Liquidity Shocks and Interbank Funding." Journal of Financial Sta-

  bility, 36, pp. 246-262.

Calomiris, C. and M. Carlson. 2017. "Interbank Networks in the National Banking Era: Their

  Purpose and Their Role in the Panic of 1893." Journal of Financial Economics, 125(3), pp.

  434-453.

Cornett, M., J. McNutt, P. Strahan, and H. Tehranian. 2011. "Liquidity Risk Management and

  Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis." Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), pp. 297-312.

di Patti, E. and E. Sette. 2016. "Did the Securitization Market Freeze Affect Bank Lending During

  the Financial Crisis? Evidence from a Credit Register." Journal of Financial Intermediation, 25,

  pp. 54-76.

Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig. 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity." Journal of

  Political Economy, 91(3), pp. 401-419.


                                                29
Eisenberg, L. and T. Noe. 2001. "Systemic Risk in Financial Systems." Management Science, 47(2),

  pp. 236-249.

Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski. 2009. "A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of Financial

  Intermediation." Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), pp. 973-992.

Freixas, X., A. Martin, and D. Skeie. 2011. "Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and Monetary

  Policy." Review of Financial Studies, 24(8), pp. 2656-2692.

Freixas, X., B. Parigi, and J.C. Rochet. 2000. "Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations, and Liquidity

  Provision by the Central Bank." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32(3), pp. 611-638.

Goehring, G., E. Tallman, and P. Van Horn. 2019. "New York Clearing House Last Resort Lending

  in 1884: Orderly Resolution or Too Big to Fail?" Working Paper.

Gorton, G. and E. Tallman. 2016a. "How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?" NBER Working

  Paper No. 22036.

Gorton, G. and E. Tallman. 2016b. "Too Big to Fail Before the Fed." American Economic Review,

  106(5), pp. 528-532.

Gorton, G. and E. Tallman. 2018. Fighting Financial Crises: Learning from the Past. University

  of Chicago Press.

Hachem, K. and Z. Song. 2021. "Liquidity Rules and Credit Booms." Forthcoming in Journal of

  Political Economy.

Robatto, R. 2019. "Liquidity Requirements and Central Bank Interventions during Banking Crises."

  Working Paper.

Sprague, O. 1910. History of Crises Under the National Banking System. U.S. Government Printing

  Office.

Tallman, E. and J. Moen. 2012. "Liquidity Creation without a Central Bank: Clearing House Loan

  Certificates in the Banking Panic of 1907." Journal of Financial Stability, 8(4), pp. 277-291.




                                                30
                                                 Table 1:
                                    Summary Statistics, NYCH Members

                                                               Non-Recipient       Recipient          All
                                                                   Banks             Banks           Banks
       Cash / Total Assets                                         11.18              8.52            9.70
                                                                   (4.88)            (3.29)          (4.25)
       Cash / Total Deposits                                       20.08             12.43           15.80
                                                                   (8.87)            (4.78)          (7.82)
       Call Loans / Total Loans                                    26.07             23.69           24.74
                                                                  (23.19)           (18.90)         (20.74)
       Investment / Total Assets                                   66.68             62.13           64.13
                                                                   (5.50)           (11.40)          (9.48)
       Equity / Total Liabilities                                  34.53             25.10           29.26
                                                                   (7.07)            (8.58)          (9.19)
       Due From Banks / Total Assets                                4.46              5.27            4.91
                                                                   (2.54)            (3.52)          (3.13)
       Due To Banks / Total Liabilities                             5.67             19.23           13.25
                                                                   (6.12)           (19.77)         (16.67)
       Loan Certificate Volume / Total Deposits                       0              13.09            7.32
                                                                     (0)             (7.67)          (8.68)
       Total Assets                                             $6,164,669        $8,870,033      $7,677,838
                                                                (5,824,123)       (8,345,285)     (7,408,112)
       Obs.                                                          26                33              59

Notes: Recipient refers to whether or not the bank received clearinghouse loan certificates during the panic. Data
are averages over the indicated NYCH members just before the panic. All ratios are expressed as percentages. Cash
refers to cash reserves (i.e., specie and legal tender). Call loans are loans to stock-brokers. Investment is the sum of
loans, bonds, and stocks. "Due froms" are interbank deposits due from other banks. "Due tos" are interbank deposits
due to other banks. Loan certificate volume is the aggregate value of loan certificates taken out during the Panic of
1873. Total assets is the average value of total assets. Total deposits are the sum of retail deposits and institutional
deposits (due-tos). Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sources: Office of the Comptroller of Currency, Annual
Report of the Superintendent of the Banking Department of the State of New York, and authors' calculations.




                                                Table 2:
                            Check Clearing and Loan Certificates, Correlations

                                                  Due to CH       Due from CH
                                    Issuance       0.799***          -0.138
                                                    (0.00)          (0.235)
                                    Obs.              76               76

Notes: This table computes Pearson correlations between the volume of clearinghouse loan certificates and the volume
of debit and credit payments with the clearinghouse from September 22nd to September 30th. Among 61 banks in
the clearinghouse, 33 banks received loan certificates. Loan certificates were issued 76 times because some banks
received loan certificates multiple times in this window. p-values are in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.
Sources: NYCH minutes and authors' calculations.


                                                          31
                                            Table 3:
               Deposit Growth During the Panic, Recipient and Non-Recipient Banks

                                                          9/20-10/21       10/21-12/6
                              Non-Recipient Banks            -13.92           22.34
                                                            (16.12)          (34.48)
                              Recipient Banks                -32.76           13.24
                                                            (29.07)          (25.69)

Notes: This table provides information on deposit growth for banks that received clearinghouse loan certificates and
banks that did not during the periods 9/20/1873 to 10/21/1873 and 10/21/1873 to 12/6/1873. The deposit infor-
mation for 10/21/1873 was not made public. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sources: Deposit information
for Sept 20th and Dec 6th comes from the Commercial and Financial Chronicles; Deposit information for Oct 21st
comes from the NYCH Loan Certificate Committee minutes.




                                               Table 4:
                    Average Interest Payments, Recipient and Non-Recipient Banks

                   Non-Recipient Banks                                     Recipient Banks
         Paid to the CH Received from the CH                   Paid to the CH Received from the CH
                0                $5,240.17                        $8,877.30            $4,748.47
               (0)              (5,754.94)                       (11,448.72)          (3,301.75)

Notes: Average value of interest payments made to and received from the clearinghouse. Data presented separately
for banks that received clearinghouse loan certificates and banks that did not receive clearinghouse loan certificates.
Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sources: NYCH minutes and authors' calculations.




                                              Table 5:
               Ratio of Cash Reserves to Deposits, Recipient and Non-Recipient Banks

                                                           9/20/1873       12/6/1873
                               Non-Recipient Banks           0.332           0.339
                                                            (0.137)         (0.192)
                               Recipient Banks               0.263           0.278
                                                            (0.083)         (0.107)

Notes: Ratio of cash reserves (specie and legal tender) to deposits, reported separately for banks that received
clearinghouse loan certificates and banks that did not receive clearinghouse loan certificates. Standard deviations are
in parentheses. Sources: Commercial and Financial Chronicles, authors' calculations.




                                                          32
                           Figure 1:
              Welfare Relative to Reserve Pooling

                      (a) Loan
                    welfare        Certificates
                            relative to reserve pooling


                                                      first best
                                                      loan certificates


1.05
                                                      interbank market

1.00
0.95




       0.25              0.30                0.35                   0.40

                                   cmax



                  (b) Information
                    welfare relative toSuppression
                                       reserve pooling


                                              first best
1.05




                                              loan certificates
                                              interbank market
                                              interbank w/ info suppress.
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80




       0.25              0.30                0.35                   0.40

                                   cmax


Notes: The dashed vertical line indicates the 1873 level of cmax .



                                 33
Appendix A ­ Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

Let i denote the fraction of depositors that withdraw from bank i at t = 1. Fixing i , the

optimization problem of bank i is given by:
                                                                                                     
                                      ci + x i - zi + i - i - 1 z 2
                                                                                                     
                                                              2 i
              Vi (i )  max
                          i ,zi ,i
                                                   z-
                                      + (1 + rz ) (~            + zi ) - (1 + rb ) i - (1 + r) (1 - i ) 
                                                                                                        
                                                            i


                                                                s.t.

                                                 ci + x i - zi + i  i


The Lagrangian (with multiplier i  0 on the constraint) is:

                                                   1 2
                        L = ci + x i - zi + i - i - zi
                                                   2
                                             z-
                                + (1 + rz ) (~       i   + zi ) - (1 + rb ) i - (1 + r) (1 - i )

                                +i [ci + x i - zi + i - i ]


   F.O.C. wrt      i:
                                               L
                                                  = x (1 + i ) - (1 + rz )
                                                i

   F.O.C. wrt zi :
                                                   L
                                                      = rz - i - zi
                                                   zi

   F.O.C. wrt i :
                                                     L
                                                        = i - rb
                                                      i

Consider the various cases for           i:


                                       1+rz
  1. If   i    (0, z
                   ~), then i =         x     - 1 > 0, where the inequality follows from the assumptions of

     rz > 0 and x  (0, 1) in the main text. Subbing i into the F.O.C. for zi :

                                              L                        1
                                                 = - (1 + rz )           - 1 - zi < 0
                                              zi                       x


                                                                34
   Therefore zi = 0. Now sub i into the F.O.C. for i :

                                                     L    1 + rz
                                                        =        - (1 + rb )
                                                      i     x

        · If 1 + rb >      1+rz
                            x ,   then the bank sets i as low as possible (i.e., lend as much as possible

            on the interbank market). With i > 0, complementary slackness requires


                                                           i = i - ci - x          i                  (A.1)


            so i is minimized by setting              i   =z
                                                           ~, which contradicts        i    (0, z
                                                                                                ~).

        · If 1 + rb <        1+rz
                              x ,   then the bank sets i as high as possible (i.e., borrow as much as

            possible on the interbank market). From Eq. (A.1), i is maximized by setting              i   = 0,

            which contradicts         i    (0, z
                                               ~).

        · If 1 + rb =      1+rz
                            x ,   then i is indeterminate. Rearranging Eq. (A.1):

                                                                      i - ci - i
                                                             i   =
                                                                          x

            We thus need

                                                      i  (i - ci - xz
                                                                    ~, i - ci )

            for   i    (0, z
                           ~) to be satisfied.

                               1+rz
2. If   i   = 0, then i <       x     - 1.

        · If i > rz , then zi = 0 and i > 0 so


                                                                 i = i - ci


            The above satisfies the F.O.C. for i if (and only if) i = rb , so this case requires

            rb  rz , 1+ rz
                      x -1 .

        · If i < rz , then consider an interior solution for zi :

                                                                        rz - i
                                                                 zi =
                                                                           

                                                                 35
                                                     1+rz
            Note that i < rz is stricter than i <     x     - 1. There are two subcases:

             ­ If i > rb , then the bank sets i as high as possible. Moreover, the constraint in

                the optimization problem holds with equality:


                                               i = rz -  (i + ci - i )


                The highest possible i is the one that delivers i = rb , so

                                                                    rz - rb
                                                 i = i - ci +
                                                                       

                                                               rz - rb
                                                        zi =
                                                                  

                This case requires rb < rz .

             ­ If i < rb , then the bank sets i as low as possible, where

                                                                    rz - i
                                                i  i - ci +
                                                                       

                Note that this case requires i < min {rb , rz }. The lowest possible i is the one

                that makes the above hold with equality at i = min {rb , rz }, namely

                                                               rz - min {rb , rz }
                                            i = i - ci +
                                                                      

                If rb < rz , then i = rb and we get the results of the previous bullet. If rb > rz ,

                then i = rz and we get i = i - ci with zi = 0.

                           1+rz
3. If   i   =z
             ~, then i >    x     - 1. Note that this implies i > rz so zi = 0. Moreover, with i > 0,

   the constraint in the optimization problem holds with equality. We can thus write


                                               i = i - ci - xz
                                                             ~


                                                                                                  1+rz
   The above satisfies the F.O.C. for i if (and only if) i = rb , so this case requires 1+ rb >    x .


Putting things together:

                                                   36
1. If rb < rz , then

                                                      i   =0

                                                          rz - rb
                                                  zi =
                                                             
                                                                 rz - rb
                                            i = i - ci +
                                                                    

                                                                         (rz - rb )2
              Vi (i ) = (rz - rb ) z                   ~ - 1) +
                                   ~ + (1 + rb ) (ci + z                             + (rb - r) (1 - i )
                                                                             2

   If rb  r, then Vi is (weakly) decreasing in i . In the worst-case scenario of i = 1,

                                                                                (rz - rb )2
                        Vi (1) = (rz - rb ) z                   ~ - 1) +
                                            ~ + (1 + rb ) (ci + z                           >0
                                                                                    2

   so the bank is run-proof and thus i = , i.e., only depositors that really need to withdraw

   money out of the banking system at t = 1 do. If instead rb < r, then Vi is increasing in i ,

   i.e., it is less costly for the bank to cover a run by borrowing on the interbank market and

   repaying the interest rate rb than it is to pay patient depositors the interest rate r if they do

   not run. We therefore need Vi ()  0, or equivalently,

                                                                     (rz - rb )2              ?
                                                ~ - (1 + r) +
                       (1 + rb ) ci + (1 + rz ) z                                + (r - rb )   0
                                                                         2

                                                      ~  1 + r for all i. Under this condition, i = 
   a sufficient condition for which is ci + (1 + rz ) z

   regardless of the sign of rb - r. This is true for all banks so the interbank market clearing

   condition pins down
                                                                 1
                                    rb = max rz -                    ci di -  , 0
                                                             0

                                                             1
   The case rb < rz is thus valid if and only if            0 ci di     >  (i.e., aggregate cash holdings are

   sufficient to cover all depositors that really need to withdraw at t = 1).

2. If rb  rz , 1+ rz
                x - 1 , then

                                                      i   =0

                                                     zi = 0




                                                    37
                                                          i = i - ci

                           Vi (i ) = (rz - rb ) z                   ~ - 1) + (rb - r) (1 - i )
                                                ~ + (1 + rb ) (ci + z


      In the worst-case scenario of i = 1,


                                        Vi (1) = (rz - rb ) z                   ~ - 1)
                                                            ~ + (1 + rb ) (ci + z


      The bank is run-proof if and only if ci  c (rb ), where c (·) is as defined in Eq. (2). If

      ci  c (rb ), then i =  with           i,   zi , and i as above. If ci < c (rb ), then the bank experiences

      a run at t = 1 (i.e., i = 1) and fails with             i       = 1, zi = 0, and i = 0. The interbank market

      clearing condition is given by Eq. (3). The equilibrium value of rb is pinned down by Eq.

      (3), with c (·) is as defined in Eq. (2). More on this below.

                 1+rz
   3. If rb >     x     - 1, then

                                                                  i   =z
                                                                       ~

                                                              zi = 0

                                                       i = i - ci - xz
                                                                     ~

                                                               ~ - 1) + (rb - r) (1 - i )
                                    Vi (i ) = (1 + rb ) (ci + xz

      In the worst-case scenario of i = 1,


                                                                            ~ - 1)
                                                 Vi (i ) = (1 + rb ) (ci + xz


                                                 ~  1, in which case all run-proof banks have
      The bank is run-proof if and only if ci + xz

      i =  - (ci + xz
                    ~) < 0. In words, all run-proof banks are net lenders on the interbank market,
                                                                                                        1+rz
      which violates the market clearing condition. Therefore, we can rule out rb >                      x     - 1.

                                                                                              1
    To summarize, there exists a conservative equilibrium with no runs if                    0 ci di   > . If instead
  1
 0 ci di   < , then a conservative equilibrium, if it exists, involves runs on some banks. To determine

existence in this case, return to Eq. (3), with c (·) is as defined in Eq. (2). This pins down the



                                                             38
                             as the solution to
equilibrium interbank rate rb


                                                                    ( - ci ) di = 0                              (A.2)
                                                        (1+rz )~
                                                               z
                                              i|ci 1-    1+r 
                                                             b



                                                                      r , 1+rz - 1 are necessary
Parameter conditions such that the solution to Eq. (A.2) satisfies rb  z   x
                                                                                       1
and sufficient for the existence of a conservative equilibrium when                   0 ci di   < . By way of example,

consider ci uniformly distributed over the unit interval. Then Eq. (A.2) implies


                                                           (1 + rz ) z
                                                                     ~
                                                    rb =               -1                                        (A.3)
                                                           2 (1 - )

                               z
                               ~        1                      1        1
so existence requires       2(1-)    1, x , where  >           2   =   0 ci di.



Proof of Proposition 2

The optimization problem of bank i in the model with loan certificates is:
                                                                                                                   
                           c - (i - ki ) +  - k + x i - zi + i - i - 1 z 2
                                                                                                                   
                                                                     2 i
Vi (i )     max
           i ,zi ,i ,ki
                                        z-
                           + (1 + rz ) (~           + zi ) - (1 + rb ) i - (1 + r) (1 - i ) - (1 + rk ) ki - k 
                                                                                                               
                                                i


                                                              s.t.

                                    c - (i - ki ) +  - k + x i - zi + i  i
                                                                 max
                                                        ki  [0, ki   ]


       max  min  , k + k . The Lagrangian (with multipliers   0, µ0  0, and µ1  0 on
where ki        i i                                         i     i          i

the constraints) is:

                                                      1 2
         L = c - (i - ki ) +  - k + x i - zi + i - i - zi
                                                      2
                                 z-
                    + (1 + rz ) (~      i   + zi ) - (1 + rb ) i - (1 + r) (1 - i ) - (1 + rk ) ki - k

                    +i c - (i - ki ) +  - k + x i - zi + i - i + µ0       1 max
                                                                  i ki + µi [ki - ki ]


   F.O.C. wrt      i:
                                              L
                                                 = x (1 + i ) - (1 + rz )
                                               i


                                                               39
     F.O.C. wrt zi :
                                           L
                                              = rz - i - zi
                                           zi

     F.O.C. wrt i :
                                             L
                                                = i - rb
                                              i

     F.O.C. wrt ki :
                                        L
                                           = µ0    1
                                              i - µi + i - rk
                                        ki

     We restrict attention to combinations of rk and ki               that implement i = 0 for all i (i.e.,
                                                             i[0,1]
all interbank trade is conducted through loan certificates) in equilibrium. We then show that there

exists such a combination where welfare is higher than in the decentralized equilibrium.

     Notice that i = 0 satisfies the F.O.C. for i  R if (and only if) i = rb . The remaining

conditions are:
                                        L sign          1 + rz
                                           = rb -              -1
                                        i                 x

                                           L sign rz - rb
                                              =           - zi
                                          zi         
                                        L
                                           = µ0    1
                                              i - µi + rb - rk
                                        ki

In the equilibrium we are considering, no one transacts at the interest rate rb . However, a value

of rb must still be specified in case a bank were to deviate and use the interbank market off

equilibrium, e.g., in the evaluation of run-proofness. Specifying a latent value of rb effectively

selects an equilibrium from a continuum of possible equilibria.

     We set the latent interbank rate at rb = rk and conjecture rk  rz , 1+ rz
                                                                          x - 1 , in which case

i   = 0 and zi = 0. Moreover, c - (i - ki ) +  - k + i = i by complementary slackness with

i = rb > 0. Bank i's maximized value is then


                                       ~ + (1 + rk ) (c - i +  ) - (1 + r) - (rk - r) i
                   Vi (i ) = (1 + rz ) z


where we recall

                                             ci  c - i +                                             (A.4)




                                                   40
The bank is run-proof if and only if Vi (1)  0, or equivalently ci  c (rk ), where c (·) is as defined

in Eq. (2). Thus, we focus on i = 0 and


                                                      c - (i - ki ) +  - k =                                           (A.5)


for all i such that ci  c (rk ). Banks that are not run-proof fail at t = 1 and are precluded from

interbank borrowing, i.e., they also have i = 0.
                                                              max ] so we proceed with k = k max .16
    With rb = rk , bank i is indifferent between any ki  [0, ki                         i   i

Consider ki = 0 if ci < c (rk ) and
                                                 
                                                  max k - ci , 0
                                                 
                                                                              if       ci < c (rk )
                                        max
                                       ki   =
                                                  min i , ki + k
                                                                              if       ci  c (rk )


where we note

                                                      k - ci  i - c +  - k

from Eq. (A.4). In words, any bank i with ci < c (rk ) receives no initial allocation of loan certificates

and must use its available cash, c +  - k , to cover its check-clearing obligations i before it is

allowed to use any recirculated loan certificates k . Then,

                        1
             k              ki di =                     max k - ci , 0 di +                        min i , ki + k di   (A.6)
                    0                  {i|ci <c(rk )}                              {i|ci c(rk )}


where Eq. (A.5) implies

                                                  min i , ki + k =  + k - ci                                           (A.7)

for all i such that ci  c (rk ). Subbing Eq. (A.7) into (A.6) delivers


                                                      ( - ci ) di =                    min ci , k di                   (A.8)
                                      {i|ci c(rk )}                   {i|ci <c(rk )}


which pins down rk conditional on the initial allocations ki for ci  c (rk ).
  16
     Alternatively, we could have set rb = rk + , with > 0 arbitrarily small, in which case the cutoff for run-proofness
                                                                                max
would be arbitrarily close to c (rk ) and the F.O.C. for ki would deliver ki = ki   without indifference. Setting instead
                                                                                                
rb = rk - would deliver ki = 0 for all i, i.e., the environment in Proposition 1 with rb = rb     , and will be ruled out
            
with rk < rb as derived below.



                                                                  41
                                                                            , where r  solves (3).
   Social welfare takes the same form as Eq. (5), but with rk in place of rb         b

The right-hand side of Eq. (A.8) is strictly positive if loan certificates are issued, i.e., if k > 0, in

which case Eqs. (3) and (A.8) imply


                                                   ( - ci ) di >                     ( - ci ) di                 (A.9)
                                   {i|ci c(rk )}                     {i|ci c(rb
                                                                              
                                                                                )}

                                            from (A.9) and it follows immediately from Eq. (5)
Recall c (·) > 0 from Eq. (2). Then, rk < rb

that welfare is higher than in the decentralized equilibrium. Also recall from Proposition 1 that
  <    1+rz             1
rb      x     - 1 if   0 ci di   < , provided a conservative equilibrium exists. Thus, Eq. (A.8) delivers
       1+rz
rk <    x      - 1 for any parameters where a conservative equilibrium exists, verifying our initial
                                                                                          1
conjecture about rk . Verification of rk > rz follows trivially from                     0 ci di   < .

   It only remains to find initial allocations ki for ci  c (rk ) such that k > 0. Use Eq. (A.4) to

rewrite Eq. (A.7) as

                                      min i , ki + k =  + k -  - c + i                                         (A.10)

The planner can satisfy Eq. (A.10) for all ci  c (rk ) by setting an initial allocation of loan

certificates                                          
                                                       0
                                                      
                                                               if    ci < c (rk )
                                              ki =                                                             (A.11)
                                                       i if          ci  c (rk )
                                                      

and an interest rate rk such that

                                                        k =+c-                                                 (A.12)

Notice that k > 0 will require  >  - c. Subbing Eqs. (A.11) and (A.12) into the definition of k

in Eq. (A.6) delivers

                                                             min {i , } di =  - c                              (A.13)
                                            {i|ci <c(rk )}

The left-hand side of Eq. (A.13) is positive, strictly increasing in rk , and ranges from 0 to at most

 . Therefore, with  >  - c > 0, there is a unique solution for rk .

   We have thus found a combination of rk and                        ki            that implements i = 0 for all i and
                                                                          i[0,1]
                                                                                                                1
achieves higher welfare than the decentralized equilibrium. By way of example, consider c =                     2   and




                                                                42
i uniformly distributed over the unit interval, with  > 1
                                                        2 . Then,  =
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                  2   and Eq. (A.13) implies

                                          
                                                                                          1  1
                                                       ~ - 1 if
                                           2 (1 + rz ) z
                                                                                          2, 2
                                   rk =
                                           (1+
                                            rz )~
                                                z
                                                  -1                         if           1
                                                                                             ,1
                                                21-                                        2


                          in Eq. (A.3) in the  >
which is lower than the rb                                              1
                                                                            region.
                                                                        2



Proof of Lemma 1

Recall Eq. (A.13), which pins down rk under the loan certificate arrangement in Proposition 2:17


                                                            min {i , } di =  - c
                                           {i|ci <c(rk )}


Suppose the parameters are such that the solution to Eq. (A.13) satisfies c (rk )   + c - . Then,

using Eq. (A.4), the solution must also satisfy c (rk )  ci + i -  for all i. This implies i >  for

any i with ci < c (rk ), simplifying Eq. (A.13) to

                                                                                  c
                                                                        di =
                                                        {i|ci c(rk )}             

                                                                                  ) then simplifies to
The social welfare with loan certificates (given by Eq. (5) with rk in place of rb

                                                 1
                                                                                      c
                                                     ci di + xz       z ) - xz
                                                              ~ + [f (~      ~]
                                             0                                        

which is exactly the welfare in Eq. (6) when ci is determined by Eq. (A.4).

       Using Eq. (A.12), c (rk )   + c -  can also be expressed as c (rk )  k . Any bank i with

ci < c (rk ) thus has

                                           i - c +  - k                      k - ci > 0

which is to say it uses all of its cash and then some recirculated loan certificates to cover its check-

clearing obligations. We call this the "unconstrained case" because check-clearing obligations are

such that all of the cash holdings of failing banks can be transferred towards run-proof banks.
  17
       Recall that Eq. (A.13) is equivalent to Eq. (9) with ci as per Eq. (A.4) and k as per Eq. (A.12).




                                                                43
     If instead c (rk ) >  + c - , then c (rk ) > k and any bank i with ci  k, c (rk ) has


                                      i - c +  - k          k - ci < 0


which is to say it covers all of its check-clearing obligations with cash and still has some cash left

over, i.e., it does not use any recirculated loan certificates. We call this the "constrained case"

because check-clearing obligations are such that not all of the cash holdings of failing banks can be

transferred towards run-proof banks.

     Both sides of Eq. (A.13) are increasing in , with the right-hand side increasing one-for-one

and the left-hand side increasing less than one-for-one. The left-hand side is also increasing in rk ,

thus Eq. (A.13) defines rk increasing in . The unconstrained case, c (rk )   + c - , will therefore

require  not too high. For the example considered at the end of the proof of Proposition 2, that is,
     1
c=   2   <  and i uniformly distributed over the unit interval, the unconstrained case corresponds
           1  1
to         2, 2   .

     Alternatively, consider an increase in check-clearing obligations from i to i +  at all banks i,

where  > 0. From Eq. (A.4), ci is unchanged. The left-hand side of Eq. (A.13) is then increasing

in , which means the solution rk is decreasing in . The condition for the unconstrained case,

c (rk )   + c - , is therefore easier to satisfy for higher .


Proof of Proposition 3

Consider the model with a decentralized interbank market and no loan certificates.

     If rb  rz , 1+ rz
                  x - 1 , then:



                      Vi (i ) = (rz - rb ) z + (1 + rb ) (ci + z - 1) + (rb - r) (1 - i )


from the proof of Proposition 1. This is the maximized value of bank i at t = 2 if it honors

withdrawals i at t = 1.

     With information suppression, i =  for all i  [0, 1], where   [, 1] is to be determined in

equilibrium. If   (, 1), then patient depositors are playing a mixed strategy where they withdraw
                             -
at t = 1 with probability    1-    (0, 1).



                                                      44
     Bank i survives beyond t = 1 if and only if Vi ()  0, or equivalently:

                                                                              (rb - r) (1 - )
                                                ci  c (rb )  c (rb ) -                                                         (A.14)
                                                                                   1 + rb

where c (·) is as defined in Eq. (2). We can see from Eq. (A.14) that c (rb )  c (rb ) for the same

interest rate rb , with strict inequality if and only if  < 1.
          s denote the equilibrium interbank rate with information suppression. Market clearing
     Let rb
           s as the solution to:
pins down rb


                                                                         ( - ci ) di = 0                                       (A.15)
                                                        {i|ci c(rb
                                                                 s
                                                                   )}

Suppose there exists an equilibrium with  = . Comparing Eq. (3) and (A.15), it must be the case
         s ) = c (r  ), where r  is the equilibrium interbank rate without information suppression.
that c (rb         b           b
                                                   s ) > c (r  ) and r s > r  .
Comparing Eq. (2) and (A.14), we then conclude c (rb         b        b     b

     Next, define:

                                                                c   - xz

                                   s ) is:
A sufficient condition for c < c (rb

                                                                  (1 - x) (1 + rz ) z
                                                       <1-
                                                                        1+r

                                                                             s )) only have to liquidate
Suppose this sufficient condition is satisfied. Then, banks with ci  (c, c (rb
         -ci
 i   =   x     < z to satisfy depositor withdrawals at t = 1. Social welfare is then:

                                            1
                       (2)
                      Ws   =                    ci di + xz + [f (z ) - xz ]                         di
                                        0                                           {i|ci c(rb
                                                                                             s
                                                                                               )}
                                                (1 - ) (1 + rz )
                                       +                         -1                                  (ci + xz - ) di
                                                      x                        {i|ci (c,c(rb
                                                                                           s
                                                                                             ))}
                                                                   x
                                                 positive iff <1- 1+ r                positive by definition of c
                                                                        z



                                                                              (2)                   (2)
If there exists an equilibrium with  = , then Ws                                    exceeds Wb            as defined in Eq. (5) if  <
                x             (1-x)(1+rz )z
min 1 -        1+rz , 1   -       1+r            .




                                                                         45
Appendix B ­ Welfare Under Reserve Pooling
               1
Consider      0 ci di   < . Some loans will have to be liquidated to repay depositors who receive liquidity

shocks, so it follows immediately that zi = 0 for all i, i.e., it cannot be optimal for the planner to

make additional loans. Social welfare is then

                                               1
                                                   ci di + xz       z ) - xz
                                                            ~ + [f (~      ~] × |S |
                                           0


where S is the set of run-proof banks. We constrain the planner to not liquidate loans among

run-proof banks, as noted in Section 3.3. The best he can do is then

                                                                    1
                                                                   0 ci di
                                                         |S | =
                                                                       

It remains to show that this is achievable given depositor behavior.

      Consider the allocation ci =  for all i  S and ci = 0 for all i / S . As in the proof of

Proposition 1, let i denote the fraction of depositors that withdraw from bank i at t = 1. Suppose

i =  for all i  S then consider a deviation to i = 1 for one bank i  S . Bank i is run-proof,

that is, this deviation can be ruled out, if


                                                          z-
                                               (1 + rz ) (~        i   ) - T3i  0


                                                      +x      i   + T1i = 1

where T1i and T3i are transfers between bank i and other banks i  S .18 Transfers must satisfy

                                                             1
                                                            0 ci di
                                                   T1i +               × T1i = 0
                                                              

                                                             1
                                                            0 ci di
                                                   T3i +               × T3i = 0
                                                              

with

                                              z - i ) - T3i - (1 + r) (1 - )  0
                                   (1 + rz ) (~
 18
      These transfers (and any liquidations) are all off equilibrium if the deviation is ultimately ruled out.




                                                                  46
                                                       x i + T1i = 0

The program reduces to finding values of               i   and T3i that satisfy


                                                  T3i  (1 + rz ) (~
                                                                  z-             i   )

                                                                        1
                                                                       0 ci di            1 + rz
                   T3i  [(1 + r) (1 - ) - (1 + rz ) z
                                                    ~]                               +           (1 -  - x i )
                                                                                            x
                                                                    1-
                                                           i    
                                                                     x
                                                                             1
                                                   1                        0 ci di
                                              i            1 -  - xz
                                                                   ~
                                                   x                          

The first inequality is the solvency condition for i and the second inequality is the solvency condition

for each i  S (where i = i ) after the final transfers. The third and fourth inequalities are the

conditions   i    0 and   i   z
                              ~, respectively.

   The bounds on T3i define a non-empty set if and only if
                                                                          
                                                                    x(1+r)
                                                               1-    1+rz 
                                             ~  1 -
                                            xz                               (1      - )                                         (B.1)
                                                               1+     1
                                                                     0 ic di


which is also sufficient for the bounds on             i       to define a non-empty set with                    i    [0, z
                                                                                                                          ~]. Thus, for

parameters satisfying (B.1), which is a weaker condition than   1 - xz
                                                                     ~, there is a reserve pooling

arrangement that achieves the welfare in Eq. (6).

   Now return to the restriction that loans are not liquidated among run-proof banks in Eq. (6).

We derive a sufficient condition for this to be efficient. Consider an allocation ci =  - x for all
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         0 ci di
i  S and ci = 0 for all i / S , where S  [0, 1] and S =                                  -x        with    0. Social welfare is at

most
                                        1                                                            1
                                                                                                    0 ci di
                              W=            ci di + xz       z - ) - x (~
                                                     ~ + [f (~          z - )]
                                    0                                                              -x

where
                                                                                                               1
                    W          x                                                                              0 ci di
                      =               z - ) - x (~
                                  [f (~          z - )] - f (~
                                                             z- )-x
                               -x                                                                             -x




                                                                 47
and
                                                                 1
                              2W   2x  W             ci di
                               2
                                 =            z- ) 0
                                         + f (~
                                   -x             -x
                                                     W
Therefore,   = 0 is indeed optimal if f (·)  0 and       =0
                                                               0, i.e.,

                                                     f (~
                                                        z)
                                      z )  xz
                                   f (~     ~+             -1                                 (B.2)
                                                       x

For any parameterization satisfying both (B.1) and (B.2), the welfare in Eq. (6) is also the second-

best level of welfare.




                                                48
