                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PRUDENTIAL POLICY WITH DISTORTED BELIEFS

                                         Eduardo Dávila
                                         Ansgar Walther

                                      Working Paper 28879
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28879


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We would like to thank our discussants Vladimir Asriyan and Javier Bianchi, as well as Manuel
Amador, Dean Corbae, Xavier Gabaix, Patrick Kehoe, Todd Keister, Anton Korinek, Guido
Lorenzoni, Alessandro Pavan, Adriano Rampini, Rafael Repullo, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek,
Javier Suarez, Harald Uhlig, and Wei Xiong for useful discussions and conversations, and the
audiences at various conferences and seminars for their comments. Ansgar Walther gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Central Bank's Lamfalussy Fellowship. Jack
Kelly, Flint O'Neil, and Brian Zhu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eduardo Dávila and Ansgar Walther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Prudential Policy with Distorted Beliefs
Eduardo Dávila and Ansgar Walther
NBER Working Paper No. 28879
June 2021
JEL No. E52,E61,G21,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies leverage regulation and monetary policy when equity investors and/or
creditors have distorted beliefs relative to a planner. We characterize how the optimal leverage
regulation responds to arbitrary changes in investors' and creditors' beliefs and relate our results
to practical scenarios. We show that the optimal regulation depends on the type and magnitude of
such changes. Optimism by investors calls for looser leverage regulation, while optimism by
creditors, or jointly by both investors and creditors, calls for tighter leverage regulation. Monetary
policy should be tightened (loosened) in response to either investors' or creditors' optimism
(pessimism).


Eduardo Dávila
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 304
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
eduardo.davila@yale.edu

Ansgar Walther
Imperial College Business School Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ, UK
ansgar.walther@gmail.com
1        Introduction
Financial markets have experienced recurrent booms and busts throughout their history. A
growing literature identifies alternative rationales for welfare-improving prudential policy
in these scenarios. For instance, investors may borrow or invest too much if they do
not internalize the full social cost of future fire sales or aggregate demand shortfalls (e.g.,
Lorenzoni, 2008; Dávila and Korinek, 2018; Korinek and Simsek, 2016; Farhi and Werning,
2016), or if they expect government support in a downturn (e.g., Farhi and Tirole, 2012;
Bianchi, 2016). In practice, policy responses involve regulating leverage decisions and
managing monetary policy.
        In this paper, we characterize optimal policy responses when investors and creditors
have distorted beliefs, relative to those of a planner, about the returns to investment.
The role played by individual beliefs in determining financial and real decisions has drawn
increased attention since the global financial crisis of 2008, connecting with earlier work
by Kindleberger (1972) and Minsky (1986). A widespread view is that exuberant beliefs
about house prices helped to fuel the boom in subprime lending that preceded the crisis,
and that it would have been valuable to combat such exuberance by decreasing leverage,
perhaps by imposing a leverage cap on financial institutions or households.1 However,
there is little formal analysis on the form of the optimal policy in exuberant times.
        Moreover, different forms of belief exuberance may call for different policy responses.
For example, the car rental company Hertz filed for bankruptcy in May 2020, which
made its stock effectively worthless. Nevertheless, retail investors seemed willing to buy
Hertz stock at rising prices. The SEC counteracted this apparently distorted valuation
by banning Hertz from selling additional shares. In other words, the regulator prevented
Hertz from decreasing its leverage, which is the opposite of setting a leverage cap.2
        We present a tractable model in which equilibrium leverage and investment are
endogenously determined as a function of the beliefs of equity investors and creditors
over future states of nature. Investors fund investment in risky capital with a mixture of
their own equity and debt from creditors. Three forces determine the trade-off between
debt and equity finance. First, creditors are more patient than investors, which encourages
investors to borrow. Second, the deadweight losses associated with investors defaulting
on their debt make borrowing costly. Third, the differences in beliefs between investors
and creditors determine how each group values cash flows, which affects leverage choices
    1
     For empirical evidence that analyzes the role played by beliefs, see for example: Cheng, Raina and
Xiong (2014); Greenwood and Hanson (2013); Lopez-Salido, Stein and Zakrajsek (2017); Baron and Xiong
(2017).
   2
     See Page 26 for further details on this case. As we explain there, our framework can be used to justify
the SEC response in that scenario.



                                                     2
non-trivially, as we explain below. Initially, we characterize the optimal policy for a social
planner who can only impose a leverage cap. Subsequently, we explore the role of monetary
policy.
       Two key objects fully characterize the equilibrium of our model. First, investment is
determined by a levered version of Tobin's q , which measures the joint market value of
equity and debt per unit of investment. Second, the (private) marginal value of leverage
plays a dual and critical role in our analysis. When the leverage cap does not bind,
the marginal value of leverage optimally trades off the three forces described above to
determine equilibrium leverage. When the leverage cap binds, the marginal value of
leverage determines the sensitivity of investment to changes in the leverage limit, which
proves to be a critical input for our normative results.
       Using tools from variational calculus, we characterize the response of both objects
to arbitrary changes in investors' and/or creditors' beliefs.               This method is a useful
contribution in its own right, since we obtain interpretable equations that can describe
the consequences of flexible changes in beliefs, which may include many heuristics and
biases that have been considered in behavioral economics.3 Our results reveal nuanced
effects, whereby both the type and extent of belief changes affect equilibrium behavior. For
instance, changes in creditors' beliefs near the default boundary are particularly important
when distress costs are large, while changes in investors' beliefs about downside (default)
states are not relevant for market valuations.4
       Our characterization of the equilibrium reveals a fundamental asymmetry whereby
optimism (in a hazard-rate sense) among equity investors decreases the marginal value of
leverage, while optimism among creditors increases it. That is, when leverage regulation
does not bind, optimism among investors reduces leverage in equilibrium, while optimism
among creditors increases leverage in equilibrium. This result also implies that investment
becomes less sensitive to binding leverage limits when equity investors are exuberant,
but more sensitive when creditors investors are exuberant.5 Perhaps surprisingly, when
considering an identical change in investors' and creditors' beliefs, the changes in leverage
and investment are qualitatively the same as in the case in which only creditors' beliefs
   3
     See Xiong (2013) and Simsek (2021) for recent surveys on beliefs and speculation. Variational calculus
is used widely in economics, primarily to solve optimal control problems, including in the analysis of
optimal taxation (e.g., Golosov, Tsyvinski and Werquin, 2014). To our knowledge, we are the first to
employ these methods to explore the impact of arbitrary changes in beliefs on equilibrium outcomes and
welfare.
   4
     The upside/downside distinction is related to the analysis of Simsek (2013a), but not identical. We
explicitly relate our positive results to his in Section E.5 of the Online Appendix.
   5
     The positive implications of our model go some way towards reconciling the mixed empirical evidence
on the relationship between risk-taking and leverage in the banking sector: bank capital is effective in
curbing risk-taking incentives on average (e.g., Jiménez et al., 2014), but not to smooth out the largest
booms and busts (e.g., Jorda et al., 2021).


                                                    3
change. This result is driven by the fact that creditors, by virtue of being more patient,
attach a higher value to future payoffs, making their beliefs more important at the margin.
   We then present our normative results, which are the central contribution of this
paper. Formally, we study the second-best problem of a utilitarian social planner who can
impose a leverage cap but cannot control the level of investment. The planner computes
investors' and creditors' welfare using beliefs for each group that are potentially different
from the beliefs that these agents use to make decisions. One interpretation of our results
is that investors and creditors have distorted beliefs and that the planner's beliefs are
correct. Following this logic, our results can be interpreted as characterizing an optimal
paternalistic policy, although we also consider alternative interpretations.
   The marginal welfare effect of increasing the leverage cap is the sum of two components.
The first is the inframarginal effect of more leverage on existing units of investment. This
component captures how varying the leverage cap modifies the planner's valuation of
pre-existing investment at the margin. The second is the incentive effect, which arises
because varying the leverage cap impacts investment in equilibrium. For example, a
tighter leverage cap reduces equilibrium investment, which is perceived to improve welfare
for the planner when the value of investment perceived by investors and creditors is higher
than the value perceived by the planner. The incentive effect hinges on the sensitivity of
the investment to leverage policy.
   Our central normative result determines the desirability of tightening or relaxing
leverage caps in response to changes in beliefs. We show that the same objects that
determine leverage and investment in equilibrium -- the value of investment and the
marginal value of leverage -- also determine the normative implications of changes in
beliefs. First, the inframarginal welfare effect of more leverage is proportional to the
change in the value of investment. This effect implies tighter optimal leverage limits in
response to a change in beliefs if (i) equilibrium investment increases, and (ii) the private
marginal benefit of leverage is higher than the marginal benefit perceived by the planner.
Second, the incentive effect is proportional to the sensitivity of investment to leverage
regulation, which is linked to the marginal value of leverage. This effect implies tighter
optimal leverage limits in response to a change in beliefs if (i) the sensitivity of investment
to leverage regulation increases, and (ii) the private value of investment is higher than the
value perceived by the planner. The overall economics are subtle. For example, the same
belief distortions can motivate tighter leverage regulation via the inframarginal effect, but
more relaxed regulation via the incentive effect. Indeed, a core insight from our analysis is
to show that, in a second-best world, the motivation for "leaning against the wind" when
policymakers suspect over-optimism is not clear-cut. Nevertheless, our model provides



                                              4
sharp policy prescriptions in three relevant scenarios.
       First, in an "equity exuberance" scenario, in which only equity investors become
optimistic relative to creditors and the planner (in a hazard-rate sense), it is never optimal
to impose a binding leverage limit.6 This is the result of two forces. First, the planner
wishes to push investors towards issuing more debt and less equity against inframarginal
units of investment, because optimistic equity investors (wrongly) consider debt to be
undervalued. Second, equity optimism means that leverage limits become a blunt tool for
the purpose of disciplining excessive investment. The second relevant scenario is one of
"debt exuberance". In this scenario, in which only creditors become optimistic relative
to investors and the planner, optimal leverage limits are always binding and decreasing
in the extent of creditors' optimism. This is because optimism among creditors leads to
an overvaluation of debt, and increases the sensitivity of investment to leverage policy.
Finally, as discussed above, changes in creditors' beliefs dominate marginal valuations in
a "joint exuberance" scenario, again leading to tighter optimal regulation.
       We consider three extensions to our baseline model. The first extension introduces
the possibility that the government provides ex-post bailouts without commitment. This
friction provides an additional rationale for government intervention. We derive several
new insights from this extension that are particularly useful in the context of leverage
regulation in banking. First, we show that when bailouts are a convex and decreasing
function of realized investment returns, belief distortions in good states of the world
become especially important for policy. Second, we show that bailouts can generate new
normative implications in an equity exuberance scenario. Intuitively, the planner now has
a stronger incentive to prevent increases in leverage on inframarginal units of investment,
which would raise the deadweight fiscal costs of bailouts. In this context, the type of
equity distortion becomes crucial, as we demonstrate in the classic case where investors
are "too big to fail." If equity exuberance mainly overstates large upside returns in solvent
states of the world, as opposed to neglecting downside risk, then the inframarginal effect
dominates and it becomes optimal to impose tighter leverage caps. By contrast, if equity
exuberance focuses on downside risk, then the incentive effect dominates. Since leverage
policy becomes a blunt tool for investment incentives when equity investors are optimistic,
the optimal policy response in this case is to relax leverage caps.
       In the second extension, we suppose that the government has the ability to affect the
risk-free interest rate via monetary policy. Investment remains sensitive to a monetary
tightening (an increase in interest rates) because this policy raises the cost of leverage
   6
    Indeed, this scenario generates a case for leverage floors or, conversely, limits on equity issuance. Our
results can be used to rationalize recent policy interventions that limit equity issuance, as in the case of
Hertz mentioned above.



                                                     5
and reduces the private value of investment.        We show that when investors and/or
creditors become optimistic (pessimistic) it is optimal to increase (lower) interest rates,
which improves welfare by reducing (increasing) investment. This insight is especially
relevant in an equity exuberance scenario, in which leverage regulation cannot be used to
improve welfare. These results connect our paper to the literature on monetary policy as
a prudential tool. Monetary policy has been advocated for in situations where traditional
financial regulation cannot reach the "shadow banking" sector, or is otherwise constrained
(e.g., Stein, 2013; Caballero and Simsek, 2019). Even in a model without such constraints,
we show that monetary policy can be useful by affecting investment, and is particularly
effective in cases where capital regulation is endogenously constrained by distorted beliefs.
   Our final set of extensions explores the role played by the beliefs used by the planner
to compute welfare. First, we show how our model can be used to give a positive -- as
opposed to normative -- interpretation to changes in the planner's beliefs. Formally, we
characterize how the optimal policy responds to changes in the beliefs used by the planner
to compute welfare. The results are ambiguous when the planner is subject to equity
exuberance, leading to excessively tight leverage limits only when the inframarginal effect
dominates incentive considerations at the margin. By contrast, debt or joint exuberance
on behalf of the planner always implies excessively lenient leverage regulation. Second,
we relax the assumption that the planner observes investors' and creditors' beliefs. Here
we assume instead that the planner must choose the optimal policy before observing the
realization of a "sentiment" indicator that drives the beliefs of investors and creditors. In
this setting, the optimal leverage regulation depends on the covariance (across realizations
of sentiment) of the desirability and effectiveness of policy. We show that this effect favors
more lenient policy in response to equity investors' sentiments, but more stringent policy
in response to creditors' sentiments.

Related Literature       Our paper is related to several literatures.         Our approach
to computing welfare is related to a growing literature that explores the normative
implications of belief heterogeneity. Bianchi, Boz and Mendoza (2012) study paternalistic
and non-paternalistic macroprudential policies in an environment with pecuniary
externalities caused by collateral constraints. Brunnermeier, Simsek and Xiong (2014)
develop a criterion to detect speculation under heterogeneous beliefs, which is also used
in Simsek (2013b), Heimer and Simsek (2019), and Caballero and Simsek (2020) to
provide normative assessments of financial innovation, leverage restrictions on trading,
and stabilization policy, respectively. Gilboa, Samuelson and Schmeidler (2014) propose
an alternative criterion to detect speculation. Dávila (2014) characterizes the optimal
financial transaction tax for a given planner's belief in an environment with heterogeneous

                                              6
beliefs. Campbell (2016), Farhi and Gabaix (2020), and Exler et al. (2019) also explore
paternalistic policies in a household context, while Haddad, Ho and Loualiche (2020) do
so in the context of technological innovations.
    Another relevant strand of work studies the relationship between beliefs and leverage,
including the contributions of Geanakoplos (1997, 2003, 2009), Fostel and Geanakoplos
(2008, 2012, 2015, 2016), Simsek (2013a), and Bailey et al. (2019). Methodologically, we
provide, to our knowledge, the first use of variational (Gateaux) derivatives to explore the
impact of changes in beliefs on equilibrium outcomes and welfare. Several of our findings
are connected to the well-developed literature on government bailouts, which includes the
contributions of Farhi and Tirole (2012), Bianchi (2016), Chari and Kehoe (2016), Keister
(2016), Gourinchas and Martin (2017), Cordella, Dell'Ariccia and Marquez (2018), Dávila
and Walther (2020), and Dovis and Kirpalani (2020), among others. We provide a novel
analysis of how bailouts and belief distortions interact, and how they jointly shape the
optimal regulatory policy. The recent work of Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) and Maxted
(2020) quantitatively explores the role of beliefs on shaping business cycles in environments
with financial frictions. In contrast to these two papers, our main contribution is normative
and our model emphasizes the differences between investors' and creditors' beliefs.
    Finally, our results also contribute to the literature that explores the interaction
between monetary and regulatory policy. The recent work of Caballero and Simsek (2019)
is the closest to this part of our analysis. While they study the design of macroprudential
and monetary policy in a model with nominal rigidities and aggregate demand effects,
we instead consider optimal policies in a model of risky credit with a rich specification
of beliefs. Farhi and Werning (2020) also explore the role of monetary policy in an
environment with nominal rigidities and belief distortions.

Outline The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces our baseline
model, characterizes its equilibrium, and describes some key positive properties of the
model. Section 3 presents the central welfare effects that determine the optimal leverage
regulation. Section 4 extends our results to an environment with government bailouts,
while Section 5 considers the role of monetary policy. Section 6 explores the role of the
planner's beliefs and Section 7 concludes. All proofs and derivations are in the Appendix.


2    Baseline Model
We initially study how beliefs affect leverage regulation, abstracting from government
bailouts and monetary policy. In Sections 4 and 5, we extend our model to incorporate
both.

                                             7
2.1    Environment
Agents, preferences and endowments.                     There are two dates t  {0, 1} and a single
consumption good (dollar), which serves as numeraire. There are two types of agents: a
unit measure of investors, indexed by I , and a unit measure of creditors, indexed by C .
There is also a social planner/regulator/government, who sets leverage regulation. We
denote the possible states of nature at date 1 by s  [s, s], where s  0. As described
below, s corresponds to the realization of the returns to investors' technology.
    Both investors and creditors are risk-neutral. The lifetime utility of investors is

                                          cI   I I I
                                           0 +  E c1 (s) ,                                             (1)

where cI      I                                              I
       0 and c1 (s) denote the consumption of investors and E [·] denotes the expectation
under the investors' beliefs, whose determination is described below. The lifetime utility
of creditors is
                                         cC  C C
                                          0 + E  cC
                                                  1 (s) ,                                              (2)

where cC      C                                              C
       0 and c1 (s) denote the consumption of creditors and E [·] denotes the expectation
under the creditors' beliefs. We assume that 0 <  I <  C  1, so that investors are less
patient than creditors.
    The endowments of the consumption good of investors and creditors at dates 0 and
1 are respectively given by          nI    I
                                      0 , n1 (s)   and     nC    C
                                                            0 , n1 (s) .    Creditors' and investors'
endowments are such that their consumption is never              negative.7

Investment technology.             Investors can invest at date 0 to create k  0 units of
productive capital. This investment in capital yields sk dollars in state s at date 1,
so that s also denotes the gross return on capital investment. As in canonical "Tobin's q "
models of investment, creating k units of capital at date 0 requires k +  (k ) dollars, where
 (k ) is a convex adjustment cost that satisfies  (0) = 0, limk0  (k ) = 0,  (k )  0,
and  (k ) > 0. The combination of an investment technology that scales linearly with
capital and a convex adjustment cost allows investors to separate their financing decisions
from their investment decisions, as shown in Lemma 1 below.

Financial contracts. Investors finance their investment by issuing bonds with face
value b and price Q (b) per unit of investment. Therefore, the total face value of debt issued
is bk , the total amount raised via borrowing at date 0 is Q (b) k , and an investor's leverage
    7
      In Section E.5 of the Online Appendix, we study an alternative scenario in which the non-negativity
constraint of investors' consumption at date 0 binds. In that case, the equity contribution of investors is
effectively capped and our positive results can be mapped to those in Simsek (2013a).


                                                    8
ratio is simply b. Any remaining financing is obtained with an equity contribution from
the investor's endowment.8 Note that we assume a form of market segmentation/limited
participation, in the sense that creditors cannot fund investors using equity.9
       At date 1, after the state s is realized, investors decide whether to default. If investors
default, creditors seize all of the investors' productive capital and receive s per unit of
investment, where 0    1. The remainder (1 - ) s measures the deadweight loss or
cost of distress associated with default.
       The difference in discount factors  C -  I > 0 between creditors and investors
translates into a benefit from issuing debt or, equivalently, into a cost of equity issuance.10
This difference guarantees that investors always borrow in equilibrium. As explained in
Section E.1 of the Online Appendix, with additional regularity conditions, our results
extend to environments in which belief differences are the single rationale for investors to
borrow.

Budget constraints. In this environment, the budget constraint of investors at date 0
is given by
                                    cI                I
                                     0 + k +  (k ) = n0 + Q (b) k,                                      (3)

where Q (b) denotes the price of debt per unit of investment, which is determined by
creditors. Similarly, the budget constraint of investors at date 1 in state s is given by

                                  cI        I
                                   1 (s) = n1 (s) + max {s - b, 0} k.                                   (4)

This equation already reflects the fact that investors exercise their option to default
whenever s < b. In that case, creditors seize all capital and its returns, and investors
consume only their endowments nI
                               1 (s).


Beliefs. We adopt a flexible approach to model the perceptions of investors and creditors
over future states of nature. Formally, we assume that investors perceive the cumulative
distribution over future states to be F I (s), while creditors perceive it to be F C (s). The
distributions F I (s) and F C (s) can differ from each other and from the true distribution,
   8
      In Section E.6.1 of the Online Appendix, we explain how to introduce inside equity in our model.
   9
      An objective of part of the literature that studies belief disagreements is to endogenously determine
from assumptions on beliefs which agents are borrowers and lenders in equilibrium. By segmenting equity
investors from creditors at the onset, we implicitly allow for other rationales that motivate some agents to
borrow or lend in equilibrium, and then consider the impact of changes in beliefs.
   10
      There are readily available theories that make issuing debt beneficial/issuing equity costly. For
example, a demand for "money-like" claims (Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990; Stein, 2012; DeAngelo and
Stulz, 2015) or safe claims (Caballero and Farhi, 2018; Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas, 2017), or the
market discipline brought by debt (Diamond and Rajan, 2001).



                                                     9
which we do not have to specify to derive the majority of our results.
       The advantage of this flexible approach is that it allows us to analyze the consequences
of different belief configurations without taking a stance on the exact process of belief
formation.       We assume that these distributions are continuously differentiable, with
densities   fI   (s) > 0 and f C (s) > 0 defined on s  [s, s].11

Leverage regulation. The planner is able to impose a leverage cap on investors at date
0. This cap is the central object of study in this paper. Formally, the planner requires
that investors set b  b, where 1 - b is the minimal permitted ratio of equity contribution
to risky investment. This constraint imposes a leverage cap, or equivalently, a minimal
equity contribution per unit of investment. In Section 3, we discuss in detail the role of
the beliefs over future states s that the planner uses to evaluate welfare.
       Note that the planner cannot directly control the scale k of investment. We therefore
focus on a second-best policy problem, in which k remains a free choice variable for
investors.12 It is possible to justify this assumption, for example, because the private sector
has superior information about investment opportunities (e.g., Walther, 2015). Perhaps
for this reason, all relevant regulatory constraints in practice (e.g., capital requirements,
leverage limits, liquidity coverage ratios, and net stable funding requirements in Basel III)
focus on ratios of financial institutions' assets to liabilities. Similarly, household finance
regulations are based on loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. All of these regulatory
tools leave the scale of investment unconstrained, as in our model.

Equilibrium definition. Given a leverage limit b, an equilibrium in this economy is
defined by an investment decision, k  0, a leverage decision, b  b, and a default decision
rule such that i) investors maximize expected utility subject to their budget constraints
while taking into account that any debt issued is valued by creditors, and ii) creditors
value investors' debt breaking even in expectation.
       Our notion of equilibrium, in which borrowers internalize that their borrowing decisions
change the payoff of lenders in equilibrium, is standard in models of default (e.g., Aguiar
and Amador, 2013; Livshits, 2015). In the body of the paper, we proceed as if the
environment considered here is well-behaved in the sense that optimal leverage choices
are finite. We discuss the necessary regularity conditions in Section E.1 of the Online
  11
     We assume continuous and strictly positive densities to simplify the exposition of our analysis of belief
perturbations (see Section 2.3). Our results go through, with some additional technical conditions, if we
impose weaker assumptions, such as absolute continuity of the relevant distributions.
  12
     In Section E.3 of the Online Appendix, we describe the form of the first-best policy, in which the
planner can also control investment directly. Dávila and Walther (2021) provide a systematic study of
second-best regulation in general environments.



                                                     10
Appendix.

2.2    Equilibrium characterization
In the Appendix -- see Equations (23) through (28) -- we include a detailed formulation
of the investors' problem. Here, we introduce Lemma 1, which presents a reformulation
of the investors' problem whose solution directly characterizes equilibrium leverage and
investment.

Lemma 1. [Investors' problem] Equilibrium leverage and investment are given by the
solution to the following reformulation of the problem faced by investors:

                                             max [M (b) - 1] k -  (k )                                        (5)
                                              b,k

                                             s.t.   b  b,                                                     (6)

where M (b) is given by
                          ^    s                                 ^   s                  ^   b
            M (b) =  I             (s - b) dF I (s) +  C                 bdF C (s) +            sdF C (s) .   (7)
                           b                                     b                      s
                                    equity                                      debt

    Intuitively, it is possible to fully characterize the equilibrium of the model by
incorporating the default decision of investors at date 1 and the pricing of debt by creditors
into the investors' date 0 problem. First, notice that investors optimally default at date 1
whenever s < b, and repay when s  b.13 Therefore, M (b) can be interpreted as the sum
of the market value of equity and debt per unit of investment net of adjustment costs,
expressed as a function of leverage b.
    The first component of M (b) in Equation (7) corresponds to the present value of
the equity payoffs, as perceived by investors. Since equity investors are only paid in the
non-default states, this integral is over states in which s  b. The second component of
M (b) in Equation (7) corresponds to the present value of the debt payoffs, as perceived
by creditors. Since creditors are paid in both non-default and default states, this second
component of M (b) accounts for both scenarios. When investors do not default (s  b),
creditors receive the promised b per unit of investment k . When investors default (s < b),
creditors receive s per unit of investment k , which accounts for the deadweight losses of
default. Importantly, while debt payoffs are valued using the creditors' discount factor  C
  13
     Our analysis extends to settings with more nuanced optimal default decisions, for example, when
investors receive government assistance in states in which they would otherwise default (see Section 4), or
when creditors have recourse to the market value of collateral (see Section E.6.2 of the Online Appendix).


                                                            11
and beliefs F C (s), equity payoffs are valued using the investors' discount factor  I and
beliefs F I (s).
       Lemma 1 clearly highlights that the leverage decision of investors is independent of
their investment decision. That is, first, investors choose the level of b that maximizes
M (b). Next, given the optimal choice of b, investors choose k to maximize Equation (5).
In Proposition 1, we formalize how the solution to the investors' problem characterizes
equilibrium leverage and investment.

Proposition 1. [Equilibrium leverage and investment] Equilibrium leverage b                                       and
equilibrium investment k are respectively given by the solution to

                                                   dM (b )
                                                           =µ                                                      (8)
                                                     db
                                                    M (b ) = 1 +  (k ) ,                                           (9)

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint, which we have expressed as
bk  bk . When the investors' leverage constraint doesn't bind, b < b and µ = 0. When
the investors' leverage constraint binds, b = b and µ  0.

       Equation (8) equates the marginal value of leverage per unit of investment and the
Lagrange multiplier µ associated with the leverage constraint.14 Two forces determine the
                                                                            dM (b)
marginal value of leverage per unit of investment,                           db ,    characterized in Equation (10):
                                   ^       s                    ^   s
               dM (b)
                      = C                          C
                                               dF (s) -     I
                                                                        dF I (s) - (1 - )  C bf C (b) .           (10)
                 db                    b                        b
                                                                                  marginal cost of leverage
                                       marginal benefit of leverage                      (distress)
                                          (valuation difference)


The first force arises due to the differences in valuation between investors and creditors.
By increasing the leverage ratio b, an investor is able to raise in present value terms
   ´s
 C b dF C (s) dollars per unit invested, whose repayment cost in present value terms
                  ´s
corresponds to  I b dF I (s). When investors have common beliefs, this first force is
proportional to the difference in discount factors  C -  I > 0. When investors have
  14
     Note that M (b) can be expressed in terms of i) a Modigliani-Miller valuation term, which is
independent of the leverage choice, ii) a term that captures the marginal benefit of leverage, due to
differences in discount factors or beliefs, and iii) a term that captures the marginal cost of leverage, due
to the cost of distress associated with default:
                     ^ s             ^ s                                               ^ b
        M (b) =  C       sdF C (s) -     (s - b)  C dF C (s) -  I dF I (s) - (1 - )  C     sdF C (s) .
                       s                       b                                                        s

                   Modigliani-Miller                    benefit of leverage                    cost of distress
                     valuation                         (valuation difference)




                                                                12
                               dM (b)
 M (b)                          db      =µ
                                                                                                   1 +  (k )




                                             M (b)




         0       b            bu                     b        0                      k  (b)   ku        k



                      Figure 1: Sensitivity of investment to leverage limit
Note: Figure 1 illustrates the joint determination of equilibrium leverage (left panel) and investment
(right panel), formalized in Proposition 1. Figure 1, which is designed to illustrate Lemma 2, should be
read from left to right. Changes in the leverage limit b around the laissez-faire optimum, denoted here
by bu -- with the superscript u standing for unregulated -- are associated with no changes in the level
of investment, since dM  (b)
                        db   b=bu
                                  = 0 in that case. As shown in Lemma 2, changes in the leverage limit b
away from the laissez-faire optimum induce changes in the level of investment that are increasing in the
slope of dMdb
             (b)
                 b=b
                     and decreasing in the value of  (k), which determines the slope of 1 +  (k) in the
right panel.


common discount factors, this first force is proportional to the difference in the probability
                                                   ´s             ´s
of repayment between creditors and investors b dF C (s) - b dF I (s). In this case,
investors find it attractive to increase leverage when they perceive non-default states to be
relatively less likely than creditors, since the amount of funds they can raise from creditors,
´s     C
                                                        ´s    I
 b dF (s), is higher than the perceived repayment, b dF (s).
       The second force corresponds to the marginal increase in deadweight losses associated
with defaulting more frequently after increasing leverage. These two forces guarantee that
equilibrium leverage is strictly positive and finite, with 0 < b < , even in a laissez-faire
scenario in which the leverage constraint is not binding.15
       Equation (9), which is a levered version of Tobin's marginal q , characterizes the optimal
investment choice k . Its left-hand side, M (b ), captures the marginal benefit to investors
associated with a marginal increase in investment given an optimal leverage choice. Its
right-hand side, 1 +  (k ), simply corresponds to the marginal cost of such an increase,
  15
     To see this, note that dM  (b)
                               db   b=0
                                        =  C -  I > 0, so that b > 0 is always optimal. Moreover, in Section
E.1 of the Online Appendix, we show that finite leverage is guaranteed whenever the costs of distress are
sufficiently large relative to the returns on investment.



                                                         13
which captures the direct cost of investing and the adjustment cost.
                                         dM (b)
   Proposition 1 highlights that          db      and M (b) are the key objects that determine
the equilibrium of our model. Interestingly, the marginal value of leverage per unit of
              dM (b)
investment,    db ,    plays a dual role, depending on whether the leverage constraint binds.
                                                                              dM (b )
If the leverage constraint does not bind, then the solution to                  db      = 0 determines
equilibrium leverage. If the leverage constraint binds, then the marginal value of leverage
                          dM (b)
per unit of investment, db , determines the sensitivity of equilibrium investment to
                                  dk
changes in the leverage limit,     db
                                        , as formalized in Lemma 2.

Lemma 2. [Sensitivity of investment to leverage limit] If the leverage constraint binds,
then the sensitivity of investors' investment to the leverage limit b is given by

                                   dk     1   dM b
                                       =            0.                                            (11)
                                    db    (k ) db

   Hence, loosening (tightening) the leverage constraint increases (decreases) investment
in proportion to the marginal value of leverage per unit of investment. Figure 1 illustrates
                                                  dk
these effects. Lemma 2 is helpful because          db
                                                        will be an important input for our normative
results.
   In summary, taken together, Proposition 1 and Lemma 2 imply that understanding
                                dM (b)
the behavior of M (b) and        db      is sufficient to determine i) equilibrium leverage and
investment, and ii) the sensitivity of investment to changes in a binding leverage limit.
                                                              dM (b)
Next, we focus on characterizing how M (b) and                 db      vary in response to changes in
beliefs. These comparative statics provide the main ingredients for our normative analysis
below.

2.3      Comparative statics and positive implications
Our ultimate goal is to understand how equilibrium outcomes (e.g., leverage and
investment) and welfare vary in response to changes in beliefs, which are infinite-
dimensional objects.       Since we have specified flexible distributions of investors' and
creditors' beliefs, we will characterize the responses of leverage and investment -- and
later of welfare -- to changes in beliefs using variational (Gateaux) derivatives. Formally,
we consider perturbations of beliefs of the form

                                          F j (s) + Gj (s) ,

where F j (s) denotes the original cumulative distribution function of s for agents in group
j  {I, C }, the variation Gj (s) represents the direction of the perturbation of beliefs, and

                                                    14
 1                                                            1

                                       F j (s)
                                                                             F j (s)




                                                                                       F j (s) + Gj (s)


      F j (s) + Gj (s)




 0                                                   s        0                                               s
         s                                       s
                              Gj (s)

                                                                                         Gj (s)




     Figure 2: Beliefs' perturbations/variations (arbitrary and hazard-rate dominant)
Note: The left panel of Figure 2 illustrates an arbitrary perturbation/variation of beliefs, starting from
the distribution of beliefs with cdf F j (s) in the direction of Gj (s). Note that Gj (s) is continuously
differentiable and satisfies Gj (s) = Gj (s) = 0. The right panel of Figure 2 illustrates a hazard-rate
dominant perturbation, such as those considered, for instance, in Propositions 3 and 6 below. Hazard-rate
dominance is formally defined on Page 17. Note that an increase in the mean of a normal distribution,
for a fixed variance, generates a hazard-rate dominant perturbation. Note also that hazard-rate dominant
perturbations also satisfy first-order stochastic dominance, but the converse is not true. As explained in
the text, note that Gj (s) < 0 can be understood as local optimism at state s.


  0 is a scalar. When Gj (s) < 0, it is natural to say that the perturbed beliefs are
locally more optimistic for state s, since the probability assigned to states equal or lower
than s is now lower. Figure 2 illustrates an arbitrary perturbation of F j (s). We consider
variations Gj (s) that are continuously differentiable and satisfy Gj (s) = Gj (s) = 0.
These conditions ensure that perturbed beliefs are still valid cumulative distribution
functions for small enough values of , as we formally show in Section E.2 of the Online
Appendix.
     A variational (or Gateaux) derivative is defined as follows (e.g., Luenberger, 1997). For
concreteness, consider the market value M b; F j per unit of investment in Equation (7),
where we have made explicit its dependence on the beliefs of group j  {I, C } of agents.
                                                                                                  M
Its variational derivative in the direction of a perturbation Gj (s) is denoted                   F j
                                                                                                        · Gj and
defined as
                         M       j      M b; F j + Gj - M b; F j
                             · G    lim                                           .
                         F j        0               



                                                         15
Intuitively, the variational derivative of M (b) measures the change in the market value
per unit of investment when we perturb the beliefs among j -agents by a small amount in
the direction of Gj . The same definition applies to the change in the marginal value of
                                     ( dM
                                        db )
leverage dM (b)                              j
           db , which we denote by F j · G . Applying a variational implicit function
theorem to the conditions that characterize the equilibrium in Proposition 1, we similarly
obtain the variational derivatives of leverage and investment, as shown in Lemma 3.

Lemma 3. [Sensitivity of leverage and investment to beliefs] The responses of equilibrium
investment to investors' and creditors' beliefs are characterized by the variational
derivatives
                                             M                                               M
                                 k       I   F I
                                                 · GI                            k       C   F C
                                                                                                 · GC
                                     · G   =                       and               · G   =          .
                                 F I          (k )                               F C          (k )

Moreover, if the leverage constraint does not bind, then the responses of equilibrium
leverage satisfy

                                              ( dM
                                                 db )
                                                                                                       ( dM
                                                                                                          db )
                                b             F I
                                                      · GI                       b                     F C
                                                                                                                · GC
                                    · GI =          2              and               · GC =                   2      .
                                F I             - ddbM2
                                                                                 F C                     - ddbM 2



      Lemma 3 shows that the same perturbation of beliefs impacts leverage and investment
through different channels. Investment changes in proportion to the variational derivative
of the total valuation M (b).16 Leverage, if it is not determined by a binding constraint,
                                                                                                                                        dM
changes in proportion to the variational derivative of the marginal value of leverage                                                    db .
This subtle distinction will be a key driver of our normative results. Next, in Proposition
2, we characterize the key variational derivatives.

Proposition 2. a) [Variational derivatives: Market value] The market value per unit of
investment changes in response to variations in investors' and creditors' beliefs according
to
                                                        ^     s
                                   M
                                       · GI = - I                 GI (s) ds                                                            (12)
                                   F I                    b
                                                                                            ^   b
                                  M
                                      · GC = - C (1 - ) bGC (b) +                                   GC (s) ds .                        (13)
                                  F C                                                       s


      b) [Variational derivatives: Marginal value of leverage] The marginal value of leverage
 16
      A first look at Equation (9) may imply that                     k
                                                                      F I
                                                                               · GI also depends on        b
                                                                                                           F I
                                                                                                                 · GI , since   k
                                                                                                                                F I
                                                                                                                                      · GI =
dM b       I                I
          ·G   + M     ·G
 db F I
         (k )
                 F I
                                . However, the term   dM b
                                                       db F I
                                                                  · GI is always 0, either because leverage is optimally chosen
(and   dM
        db
           = 0)    or because the constraint binds (and                  b
                                                                         F I
                                                                               · GI = 0).


                                                                      16
changes in response to variations in investors' and creditors' beliefs according to

                           dM
                            db
                                 · GI =  I GI (b)                                                      (14)
                           F I
                          dM
                           db                                              g C (b)
                                 · GC = - C GC (b) 1 + (1 - ) b                    ,                   (15)
                          F C                                              GC (b)

where g C (b) = GC (b).

       The general characterization in Proposition 2 shows that both the type and the
magnitude of changes in beliefs are critical to understanding the behavior of leverage
and investment. Part a) of Proposition 2 shows that market values M (b) respond to the
variation of investors' beliefs GI (s) in solvent states s  b -- in Equation (12) -- or to the
variation of creditors' beliefs GC (s) in default states s < b -- in Equation (13). Moreover,
there is a special role for creditors' optimism -GC (b) at the default boundary, which
measures the degree to which creditors understate the probability of default.17 Finally,
Equations (12) and (13) show that the response of M (b) to both investors' and creditors'
beliefs inherits the sign of -Gj (s), that is, market values rise with the local optimism of
any agent.
       By contrast, part b) of Proposition 2 points to a fundamental asymmetry between the
responses of leverage to creditors' and investors' beliefs. Equations (14) and (15) imply
                                          dM (b)
that the marginal value of leverage        db      decreases when investors are optimistic about the
probability of default -- since it inherits the sign of GI (b) -- but increases when creditors
are optimistic -- since it inherits the sign of -GC (b). Notice also that the response of the
marginal value of leverage depends only on local belief changes at the default boundary.
       The general characterizations in Proposition 2 -- and their welfare counterparts
in Section 3 -- are valuable because they can be used to explore the impact of
different changes in beliefs, for instance, changes in the perception of volatility or rare
events. In order to provide sharper insights, in Proposition 3 we analyze perturbations
Gj (s) that induce optimism in the sense of hazard-rate dominance.                         Formally, an
absolutely continuous distribution        Fj   (s) becomes more optimistic in the sense of hazard-
                                                           f j (s)
rate dominance if the hazard rate hj (s)                  1-F j (s)
                                                                      decreases for all s (e.g., Shaked
and Shanthikumar, 2007, Chapter 1B). This is a stronger requirement than first-order
stochastic dominance, but a weaker requirement than the monotone likelihood ratio
property.18
  17
     This property of Equation (13) arises because of the costs of distress in our model, which imply that
creditors' payoffs are discontinuous in s at the default boundary whenever  < 1.
  18
     Therefore, in terms of variational derivatives, a perturbation Gj (s) induces optimism in a hazard-rate


                                                     17
   1.35                                                        0
    1.3
                                                             -0.1
   1.25
                                                             -0.2
    1.2
   1.15                                                      -0.3

    1.1                                                      -0.4
          0         0.5             1            1.5                0        0.5             1            1.5



                                                            0.05

    1.2                                                        0
                                                            -0.05

   1.15                                                      -0.1
                                                            -0.15

    1.1                                                      -0.2

          0         0.5             1            1.5                0        0.5             1            1.5



   1.35                                                        0
    1.3                                                     -0.05
   1.25                                                      -0.1
    1.2                                                     -0.15
   1.15                                                      -0.2
    1.1                                                     -0.25
          0         0.5             1            1.5                0        0.5             1            1.5


              Figure 3: Differential impact of investors' and creditors' optimism
Note: Figure 3 illustrates the results of Proposition 3. The left plots in Figure 3 show M (b), the market
value of debt and equity per unit of investment, as a function of leverage b. The right plots in Figure 3
show dM  (b)
        db
             , the marginal value of leverage, as a function of leverage b. We assume that beliefs about s are
normally distributed, with means indexed by µ and standard deviations indexed by  , and that investment
                     k2
costs are given by 2  
                        . The parameters used in all plots are:  I = 0.9,  C = 0.95,  = 0.8,  = 1, and
 =  = 0.4. The baseline beliefs are µI = µC = 1.3. The equity exuberance scenario corresponds to
 I     C

µI = 1.5 and µC = 1.3. The debt exuberance scenario corresponds to µI = 1.3 and µC = 1.5. The joint
exuberance scenario corresponds to µI = 1.5 and µC = 1.5.




                                                       18
Proposition 3. [Differential impact of optimism by investors and creditors] Optimism in
this proposition is defined in the sense of hazard-rate dominance.
    a) Equity exuberance: When investors become more optimistic, the market value of
                                                                             dM (b)
investment M (b) increases but the marginal value of leverage                 db      decreases.
    b) Debt exuberance: When creditors become more optimistic, both the market value of
                                                                 dM (b)
investment M (b) and the marginal value of leverage               db      increase.
    c) Joint exuberance: When investors and creditors have common beliefs and both
become equally more optimistic, both the market value of investment M (b) and the
                                 dM (b)
marginal value of leverage        db      increase.

    Proposition 3 confirms that optimism/exuberance by any agent, in a hazard-rate sense,
increases market values M (b).19 Meanwhile, investor optimism decreases the marginal
                       dM (b)
value of leverage       db ,    while creditor optimism increases it.                 Intuitively, optimism
on the credit-supply side (i.e., by creditors) makes borrowing cheaper and encourages
leverage through a substitution effect. However, optimism on the credit-demand side
leads investors to believe that the likelihood of defaulting is lower and that the borrowing
conditions offered by creditors are unfavorable, encouraging them to increase their equity
contribution.
    The proposition establishes a surprising additional result in a joint exuberance scenario,
in which both investors and creditors become more optimistic starting from a common
belief assessment.       The sentiments of creditors dominate in this scenario, and the
comparative statics are qualitatively the same as for debt exuberance. This result is
driven by the relative patience of creditors, who attach a higher value to future payoffs,
and whose beliefs are therefore more important for overall valuations at the margin.20 We
expect the logic behind this result to apply more broadly. In general, any additional force
that drives creditors to become lenders in equilibrium (e.g., intertemporal substitution)
will also make them value future payoffs more. Figure 3 illustrates these results.
    These subtle distinctions will be key to our analysis of optimal policy below. The
response of the marginal value of leverage to belief variations is especially important
because it also determines the sensitivity of investment to leverage regulation -- see
          j
sense if h F
            (s)
                · Gj  0 for all s. We present a detailed characterization of this property in Section E.4 of
the Online Appendix.
  19
     The results regarding the market value M (b) also hold when exuberance is defined in a first-order
stochastic dominance (FOSD) sense. Hazard-rate dominance is the appropriate stochastic order in our
setting due to the costs of distress, which scale with (1 - ) and are critical for the marginal value of
leverage. Indeed, when  = 1, all our results apply in an FOSD sense.
  20
     For instance, consider the special case where there are no costs of distress ( = 1). In this case, adding
up Equations (14) and (15) with a common variation GC (b) = GI (b) shows that the total marginal change
in dM (b)
     db
          is  C -  I G (b) < 0.



                                                      19
Lemma 2. Moreover, the results so far have interesting positive implications in their
own right. We discuss these briefly before we present the main results of the paper.
    Combining Lemma 3 with Proposition 3, we immediately obtain the following result:

Corollary 1. [Positive implications of optimism by investors and creditors] Assume that
the leverage constraint does not bind. In the equity exuberance scenario in Proposition 3,
equilibrium investment increases but leverage decreases. In the debt and joint exuberance
scenarios, both equilibrium investment and leverage increase.

    Corollary 1 implies that in expansions fueled by equity exuberance, investment
and leverage decouple, and become negatively correlated. It is useful to examine the
relationship between this implication of our model and related results in the existing
literature. In our model, exuberant investors decide to invest more, but consider debt
to be excessively expensive. Hence, they find it optimal to reduce leverage, and to fund
the marginal increase in investment by reducing consumption at date 0. Relatedly, Bailey
et al. (2019) consider a model with fixed investment, and show that investor optimism
is associated with lower leverage, an implication which they confirm empirically for
households' leverage choices. By contrast, in the model of Simsek (2013a), investors have
a fixed amount of equity capital or, equivalently, face a binding non-negativity constraint
on their consumption. In his analysis, investment can be increased only by additional
borrowing, so that the correlation between investment and leverage is always positive, as
we discuss further in Section E.5 of the Online Appendix.


3    Optimal Leverage Regulation
In this section, which contains the core contributions of this paper, we study the problem
of a social planner who can set the leverage limit b. Formally, social welfare for the
planner is given by the sum of utilities of investors and creditors, which are computed
using the planner's probability assessments for each of the agents. That is, the planner
computes investors' welfare assessing the likelihood of events using a distribution F I,P (s).
Similarly, the planner computes creditors' welfare assessing the likelihood of events using
a potentially different distribution F C,P (s).
    This approach allows us to explore a wide range of normative objectives. For instance,
a planner that respects agents' beliefs will set

                       F I,P (s) = F I (s)   and F C,P (s) = F C (s) .

Alternatively, a planner who uses the true/objective distribution of investment returns,


                                              20
which we denote here by F (s), to computes social welfare will set

                                  F C,P (s) = F I,P (s) = F (s) .

Given this approach, we can now characterize the optimal policy, which takes into account
the fact that investors and creditors make decisions under their own beliefs, F I (s) and
F C (s), but evaluates the consequences of these decisions using the planner's beliefs,
F I,P (s) and F C,P (s), which are taken as primitives.
   It will become evident that our conclusions do not depend directly on the true
distribution of s. However, one natural interpretation of our results is that investors
and creditors have distorted beliefs and that the planner's beliefs are correct. Following
this logic, our results can be interpreted as characterizing an optimal paternalistic policy.
While this interpretation is useful to illustrate some of the underlying economics cleanly,
our formal results have multiple interpretations. In particular, in Section 6, we study
the impact of changes in the planner's beliefs on the optimal regulation, which can be
interpreted as describing how the optimal policy changes when the planner's beliefs depart
from the correct beliefs. Moreover, in Section E.7 of the Online Appendix, we consider
an environment in which the planner is uncertain about about the beliefs of investors and
creditors. Both of these extensions illustrate how our results can also be used to explore
the limitations of paternalism.

3.1   Planner's problem
The first step is to formulate the planner's problem. The planner chooses the leverage limit
b, taking into account that leverage and investment decisions react to this policy. Indeed,
the optimality conditions (8) and (9) jointly define equilibrium leverage and investment as
implicit functions b   b and k       b of the policy. Lemma 4 formally characterizes social
welfare from the perspective of the utilitarian planner as a function of the leverage cap b.

Lemma 4. [Planner's problem] The planner's problem can be expressed as

                                    max W b      b ,k    b    ,
                                      b

where social welfare W (b, k ) is given by

                            W (b, k ) = M P (b) - 1 k -  (k ) ,




                                                21
and where M P (b) denotes the present value of payoffs under the planner's beliefs
                          ^   s                             ^   s                ^     b
           M P (b) =  I           (s - b) dF I,P (s) +  C           bdF C,P +              sdF C,P (s) .
                          b                                 b                      s


   Lemma 4 shows that the planner's objective mimics the objective of the reformulated
investors' problem introduced in Lemma 1 after incorporating the planner's beliefs. This
result is intuitive, but not obvious. The welfare of investors and creditors as perceived by
the planner depends on their actual beliefs through the equilibrium choices of investment
and leverage, but the social valuation of investment in M P (b) depends only on the
planner's beliefs.
   There are three observations worth highlighting. First, note that whenever leverage
regulation is binding, social welfare depends on investors' and creditors' beliefs only
through the investment choice k since, in that case, b                     b     = b is directly controlled
by the planner. Second, note that the economy is constrained efficient for a planner that
respects agents' beliefs, since M P (b) = M (b) in that case. This is a useful baseline
scenario that allows us to isolate the role of changes in beliefs. In Section 4, we describe
how to adapt our results when the economy is constrained inefficient for a planner that
respects agents' beliefs. Finally, note that Lemma 4 relies on assigning equal welfare
weights to all agents. While the linearity of preferences makes this criterion natural, we
explain how our results generalize in the Appendix.

3.2   Marginal welfare effects
                                                                                                           dW
Proposition 4 presents the marginal welfare effect of varying the leverage cap,                             db
                                                                                                               ,   which
will be central to our analysis of optimal policy.

Proposition 4. [Marginal welfare effect of varying the leverage cap] The marginal welfare
impact of increasing the leverage cap, whenever the leverage cap is binding, is

                     dW    dM P b                                                dk             b
                         =        k             b + MP b - M b                                      ,               (16)
                      db     db                                                            db
                              Inframarginal Effect              Incentive Effect


where we provide an explicit characterization of each of its elements in the Appendix.

   Proposition 4 shows that knowledge of M P (b), M (b), and k                             b and their derivatives
is sufficient to determine whether it is desirable to increase or decrease the leverage cap.
We refer to the first term in Equation (16) as the inframarginal effect. This term captures
how varying the leverage cap modifies the planner's valuation of pre-existing investment at


                                                     22
the margin. We refer to the second term in Equation (16) as the incentive effect. This term
captures the investment response associated with a change in b. Lemma 2 implies that the
sign of the incentive effect term is determined by the sign of the difference M P b - M b ,
which is negative (positive) when investors and/or creditors are optimistic (pessimistic)
relative to the planner.
   Furthermore, Proposition 4 implies a simple test for whether the marginal welfare
effect of raising the leverage cap is positive:

              dW       d ln M P b   M P (b) - M (b) d ln k b
                  > 0             +                          > 0.                                  (17)
               db           db          M P (b)         db

Equation (17) reveals three sufficient statistics that determine whether leverage regulation
should become tighter or looser. The first corresponds to the marginal social benefit
d ln M P (b)                                         P (b)-M (b)
     db      of leverage. The second is the wedge M M    P (b)   , which measures the
proportional difference between the planner's and the agents' perception of the present
                                                      d ln k(b)
value of investment. The third is the semi-elasticity     db
                                                                of investment to leverage
requirements. While the first sufficient statistic is exclusively a function of the planner's
beliefs, the second one requires a direct assessment of belief differences between the agents'
and the planner's beliefs, while the third one could be directly recovered from a regression
of log investment on exogenous leverage limit changes. If one could measure or infer the
elements of Equation (17), it would be possible to provide explicit quantitative guidance
on the optimal leverage regulation.
   Finally, note that if one starts from the laissez-faire allocation, the incentive effect
             d ln k(b)
vanishes and db = 0, as illustrated in Figure 1 above. In that case, the only sufficient
                                                           d ln M P (b)
statistic that characterizes the marginal effect is             db        evaluated at the laissez-faire
optimum. This is an interesting observation, since it is sufficient for the planner to form
                                     dM P (b)
an assessment over the value of        db     ,   which does not require the planner to know the
beliefs of investors or creditors.
   Proposition 4 illustrates again that the single rationale for regulation is the difference
in beliefs between the planner and the agents in the economy. When the planner and the
agents have the same set of beliefs, the incentive effect vanishes -- since M P b = M b
-- and the inframarginal effect is always positive whenever the constraint binds, so it is
optimal to never set a leverage cap.

3.3   The impact of beliefs on optimal regulation
This subsection introduces the main results of the paper. It characterizes how a change in
beliefs by investors or creditors modifies the form of the optimal leverage regulation. We

                                                    23
                                                                                              dW
begin by analyzing how the marginal effect of leverage regulation on welfare                   db
                                                                                                    responds
to changes in beliefs. Since beliefs are infinite-dimensional objects in our analysis, we
                                            dW
focus on the variational derivative of       db
                                                  with respect to beliefs in Proposition 5. Under
appropriate regularity conditions, one can translate claims about the marginal response
     dW
of    db
            to changes in beliefs into implications for the optimal leverage regulation; see, for
example, Proposition 6 and our discussion in the Appendix.
Proposition 5. [Impact of beliefs on leverage regulation: General characterization] The
change in the marginal welfare effect of varying the leverage cap, whenever the leverage cap
is binding, in response to a change in beliefs by either investors or creditors, j = {I, C },
is given by
                                                                                                    
                                                                                     dk (b)
      dW            dM P b   dM b         k b                                     
       db
             · Gj =        -                  · Gj + M P b - M b                       db
                                                                                              · Gj  .      (18)
     F j              db       db         F j                                        F j

     The characterization of marginal welfare effects in Proposition 5 permits a clearer
assessment of how, and why, the rationale for leverage regulation changes when investors'
and/or creditors' beliefs change. Changes in investors' or creditors' beliefs affect the
marginal welfare effect of leverage regulation through two channels, namely, through the
change in optimal investment k b and the change in the sensitivity of investment to
      dk (b)
policy db . These effects correspond to the inframarginal and incentive effects identified
in Proposition 4. Intuitively, when deciding how to adjust the leverage policy in response
to a change in beliefs, the planner must assess i) the extent to which the change in beliefs
affects investment behavior and the desirability of regulation, and ii) the extent to which
the change in beliefs affects the sensitivity or effectiveness of regulation.
     The comparative statics in Lemma 3 imply that the variational derivatives of k (b) and
dk (b)
  db       are directly related to the variational derivatives of the market value of investment
                                                  dM
M (b) and the marginal value of leverage           db .   Therefore, the effects of investors' beliefs
                                                                               M                     dM
on leverage regulation inherit the nuanced patterns associated with            F j
                                                                                     · Gj and         db
                                                                                                    F j
                                                                                                           · Gj ,
characterized in Section 2. As implied by our detailed discussion of Propositions 2 and 3,
the type of belief variation considered is important. In particular, the magnitude of the
variation at the default boundary, Gj (b), plays a special role, and there is a fundamental
asymmetry between investors and creditors.
   It is particularly instructive to consider the case of quadratic adjustment costs.
                                                                     k2
Therefore, for the remainder of this section, we assume that  (k ) = 2  . In that case,
Equation (18) simplifies to

  dW                    dM P b   dM b        M b                                       dM
   db
           · Gj =  ·           -                 · Gj + M P b - M b                     db
                                                                                           · Gj         . (19)
 F j                      db       db        F j                                      F j


                                                   24
We can now directly rely on the results in Proposition 3 to characterize the effect of belief
changes on the optimal regulation. Following Proposition 3, we consider three scenarios
in Proposition 6.

Proposition 6. [Impact of beliefs on optimal regulation: Specific scenarios]
     a) Equity exuberance: Assume that creditors and the planner share common beliefs
F C (s) = F C,P (s) = F I,P (s), and investors' beliefs are more optimistic than the planner's
                                                                                  dW
beliefs in a hazard-rate sense. Then, increased optimism by investors implies      db
                                                                                 F I
                                                                                        · GI > 0.
Hence, it is never optimal to impose a binding leverage cap.
     b) Debt exuberance: Assume that investors and the planner share common beliefs
FI   (s) = F I,P (s) = F C,P (s), and creditors' beliefs are more optimistic than the planner's
                                                                                  dW
beliefs in a hazard-rate sense. Then, increased optimism by creditors implies     db
                                                                                 F C
                                                                                        · GC < 0.
Hence, the optimal leverage cap is binding and decreasing in optimism.
     c) Joint exuberance: Assume that creditors and investors share common beliefs
FC   (s) = F I (s) = F 0 (s) that is more optimistic than the planner's beliefs F C,P (s) =
F I,P (s) = F P (s) in a hazard-rate sense. Then, as in the debt exuberance scenario,
                                                            dW
increased optimism by investors and creditors implies       db
                                                           F 0
                                                                 · G0 < 0. Hence, the optimal
leverage cap is binding and decreasing in optimism.

     Proposition 6 shows a clear distinction between the effects of equity and debt
exuberance. In the case of equity exuberance, there are two effects. First, investors
consider creditors' beliefs to be excessively pessimistic, which leads them to take too little
leverage (i.e., issue too much equity) from a social perspective. Thus, the inframarginal
effect increases the social benefit of encouraging leverage. Second, the incentive effect
becomes weaker with exuberance due to the reduced sensitivity of investment to leverage.
Both effects imply that equity exuberance increases the marginal benefit of permitting
leverage. Starting from a case with common beliefs, in which there is no rationale for
a binding leverage cap, we therefore find that equity exuberance only serves to make a
binding cap less desirable. We conclude that it is never optimal to impose a binding cap.
Instead, it would be optimal to impose a binding leverage floor, although this is not a
policy we have considered in our analysis.
     In the case of debt exuberance, both the inframarginal and incentive effects are
reversed. First, investors find the borrowing conditions offered by creditors very attractive,
which leads them to take too much leverage from the planner's perspective. Second, the
incentive effect becomes stronger due to the increased sensitivity of investment to leverage.
Both effects work in the same direction, and imply that a tightening of a binding leverage
cap is optimal. Finally, we show that the case of joint exuberance leads to the same


                                               25
qualitative result as the case of debt exuberance. As discussed in the context of Proposition
3, this occurs because creditors are more patient and their valuation of marginal default
states is higher than the valuation of investors. As a result, joint exuberance also supports
a tightening of a binding leverage cap.
       Figure 4 illustrate how the optimal regulation responds to changes in investors' and
creditors' beliefs. It compares equilibrium leverage and investment without regulation
and under the optimal regulation when varying the beliefs of investors, creditors, or
both, while holding fixed the planner's beliefs.           The top row of Figure 4 shows the
levels of leverage and investment without regulation. The bottom row shows leverage
and investment under the optimal leverage regulation. More precisely, as explained in the
note that describes Figure 4, assuming that the beliefs about s are normally distributed,
the horizontal axis represents the perceived expected return on investment by investors
in the equity exuberance scenario, by creditors in the debt exuberance scenarios, and
by both investors and creditors in the joint exuberance scenario. Perhaps surprisingly,
the optimal leverage cap in a joint exuberance scenario is tighter than the cap in a debt
exuberance scenario. This result is driven by the scale of investment: while investment
is lower whenever leverage is regulated, it is still that case that investment in the joint
exuberance scenario is significantly larger than in the debt exuberance scenario. Therefore,
because investment is larger in the joint exuberance case, the inframarginal effect defined
in Equation (16) becomes more important, so reducing leverage becomes highly desirable
for the planner. Intuitively, when investment is large, the same reduction in leverage
generates a larger overall welfare gain since it applies to more units of capital.

Equity, debt, and joint exuberance in practice One can interpret the recent
experience of Hertz and the associated intervention by the SEC as a manifestation of
an equity exuberance scenario.21 In June 2020, there seemed to be retail investors willing
to purchase Hertz's stock even though the company had declared bankruptcy and it was
unlikely that equityholders would receive any funds at all. Hertz's management, seeking
to maximize the firm's value, promptly decided to sell shares in the open market. The
regulator (in this case, the SEC) intervened by vetoing the equity issuance, which can be
interpreted as a cap on equity (a leverage floor), as predicted by Proposition 6. One could
argue that the SEC was only considering the welfare of equity investors, while the planner
  21
     For an account of the equity issuance of Hertz and the response of the SEC, see, for instance,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/hertz-sold-29-million-in-stock-before-sec-stepped-in-11597100128. Similar
concerns about exuberant equity valuations have emerged recently, when retail investors generated
rising demand for stocks such as Gamestop, which have gained popularity via social media. See,
for instance, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-gamestop-stocks/gamestop-to-capitalize-on-stonks-rally-
with-1-billion-stock-sale-plan-idUSKBN2BS0SN.



                                                  26
                                                                                   0.38

 1.2
                                                                                   0.36



 1.1                                                                               0.34


                                                                                   0.32
  1
                                                                                    0.3


 0.9
                                                                                   0.28


                                                                                   0.26
 0.8

                                                                                   0.24

 0.7
                                                                                   0.22


 0.6                                                                                0.2
    1.3   1.32   1.34   1.36   1.38   1.4   1.42   1.44   1.46   1.48   1.5            1.3   1.32   1.34   1.36   1.38   1.4   1.42   1.44   1.46   1.48   1.5




                                                                                   0.38


                                                                                   0.36
 0.7


                                                                                   0.34

0.68
                                                                                   0.32


                                                                                    0.3
0.66


                                                                                   0.28

0.64
                                                                                   0.26


                                                                                   0.24
0.62

                                                                                   0.22

 0.6
                                                                                    0.2
   1.3    1.32   1.34   1.36   1.38   1.4   1.42   1.44   1.46   1.48   1.5            1.3   1.32   1.34   1.36   1.38   1.4   1.42   1.44   1.46   1.48   1.5




                  Figure 4: Impact of beliefs on optimal regulation: comparative statics
Note: Figure 4 compares equilibrium leverage and investment without regulation and under the optimal
regulation when varying the beliefs of investors, creditors, or both, while holding fixed the planner's beliefs.
The top left and top right plots respectively show equilibrium leverage and investment without regulation,
bu and ku , where the superscript u stands for unregulated. The bottom left and bottom right plots
respectively show equilibrium leverage and investment under the optimal regulation, b b and k b . As
shown in Proposition 6, note that b b = bu in the equity exuberance scenario and b b = b in both
the debt exuberance and the joint exuberance scenario. We assume that beliefs about s are normally
distributed, with means indexed by µ and standard deviations indexed by  , and that investment costs
               k2
are given by 2  
                  . The parameters used in all plots are:  I = 0.9,  C = 0.95,  = 0.8,  = 1, and
 I =  C = 0.4. The planner's beliefs are fixed in all plots at µI,P = µC,P = 1.3 and  I,P =  C,P = 0.4.
The baseline beliefs are µI = µC = 1.3. The equity exuberance outcome in each plot varies the expected
return on investment perceived by investors, µI , between 1.3 and 1.5, while keeping µC = 1.3. The debt
exuberance outcome in each plot varies the expected return on investment perceived by creditors, µC ,
between 1.3 and 1.5, while keeping µI = 1.3. The joint exuberance outcome in each plot varies at the same
the expected return investment perceived by both investors and creditors, µI =µC , between 1.3 and 1.5.

                                                                              27
in our model considers the welfare of both equity investors and creditors. As we describe
in the Appendix, the conclusion that a cap on equity is optimal is also valid under that
criterion.22
         Alternatively, one can interpret the boom in subprime lending that preceded the global
financial crisis of 2008 as a debt exuberance or joint exuberance scenario (e.g., Cheng,
Raina and Xiong, 2014). Our results would have provided a clear rationale for limiting
leverage in the years prior to 2007/2008. Note that, in our model, periods with compressed
credit spreads -- which have been shown to forecast negative excess returns (Greenwood
and Hanson, 2013; Lopez-Salido, Stein and Zakrajsek, 2017) -- may be a symptom of
debt exuberance. Interestingly, our illustration in Figure 4 suggests that periods of joint
exuberance, in which leverage and investment would increase simultaneously without
regulation, are those in which the optimal leverage regulation ought to be tighter.23


4         Government Bailouts
In this section, we study an extension of our baseline model featuring government bailouts.
We do so for three reasons. First, bailouts are pervasive and are a common rationale
for ex-ante regulation. Second, since bailouts normally take place in downturns, their
interaction with different types of beliefs is highly nonlinear. Third, the presence of
bailouts determined ex-post under lack of commitment makes our economy constrained
inefficient even with homogeneous beliefs. This fact allows us to provide an illustration of
how changes in beliefs can also impact the optimal leverage regulation in the presence of
an additional wedge between private and social incentives.24
         In practical terms, we show that the equity exuberance result derived in Proposition 6,
which calls for higher/no leverage caps, can change in the presence of bailouts. Intuitively,
the increase in investment associated with optimism on the side of equity investors can
make bailouts so costly that an ex-ante planner who anticipates the possibility of bailouts
ex-post finds it optimal to limit leverage.
    22
      There is a large literature on behavioral corporate finance that explores the roles of beliefs for equity
issuance, see e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2002, 2013). Many findings in this literature can be mapped to the
equity exuberance scenario.
   23
      We should caveat that our illustration of the results in Figure 4 does depend on the assumed
distribution of beliefs -- unlike most of the results in the paper. While we do not include a full quantitative
exploration in the paper, we conjecture that debt exuberance by itself may have stronger quantitative effects
in models in which beliefs feature a thick left tail (e.g., rare disasters).
   24
      There is scope to further study how beliefs interact with other motives for regulation, like pecuniary
externalities or aggregate demand externalities.




                                                      28
4.1   Environment
Starting from the baseline model, we now assume that at date 1, after the state s is
realized, the government makes a transfer t (b, s) to investors. The funds for this transfer
are raised using a tax (1 + ) t (b, s) on creditors, where  > 0 measures the marginal
deadweight loss associated with taxation. Similar results obtain if the tax is paid by
investors. If investors default, creditors seize all of the investors' resources -- including
any government transfer -- receiving s + t (b, s) per unit of investment.
   We assume throughout that the value of banks' assets including the bailout, s + t (b, s),
is increasing in s. This implies the existence of a unique threshold s (b) such that investors
default if s < s (b) and repay otherwise. Making t (b, s) a primitive of the model is without
loss of generality whenever the government has lack of commitment ex-post. We define
the expected fiscal burden perceived by the planner, per unit of investment, as
                                              ^     s
                           (b) = (1 + )  C              t (b, s) dF C,P (s) .
                                                s

As we show below, this burden will exactly determine the additional wedge between private
                                                    t(b,s)                                d (b)
and public incentives. Note that as long as          b        0, it is true that           db      0, as one
would expect.

4.2   Marginal welfare effects and bailouts
In Proposition 7, we characterize the effect of changes in beliefs on leverage regulation
with bailouts by extending Proposition 5.

Proposition 7. [Impact of beliefs on optimal regulation with bailouts] The change in the
marginal welfare effect of varying the leverage cap, whenever the leverage cap is binding,
in response to a change in beliefs by either investors or creditors, j = {I, C }, is given by

                                           bailouts
                                                                    
                                                                               
                 dW         dM P b   d (b) dM b                      k b
                         j
                  db
                       ·G =        -      -                               · Gj                          (20)
                                                                    
                F j                                                   F j
                                                                    
                              db      db     db                     

                                                                
                                                                     dk (b)
                                                                                    
                                               
                          + M P b -  (b) -M b                          db
                                                                                · Gj  ,
                            
                                                                     F j
                                         bailouts


where the adjusted valuation functions M P (b) and M (b) are characterized in the
Appendix.



                                              29
    The first term in Equation (20), reflecting the inframarginal effect of raising the
                                                                                               d (b)
leverage cap, now includes the increase in the fiscal burden                                    db .   The second term,
reflecting the incentive effect, scales with the total wedge between social and private
incentives, which now includes the level of the fiscal burden  (b) per unit of investment.
Therefore, the presence of bailouts provides new rationales for intervention, directly via
d (b)
 db     and  (b), and indirectly via the determination of the model's endogenous variables.
                                                 d (b)
    In particular, the presence of                db     and  (b) in Equation (20), in contrast to the baseline
model, opens the door to binding optimal leverage limits in an equity exuberance scenario.
Proposition 6 in the baseline model shows that equity exuberance always decreases the
incentive to regulate, in part because the inframarginal effect of raising leverage caps is
always positive. In the model with bailouts, by contrast, the inframarginal effect can
                                                                              d (b)
change sign due to the presence of bailouts, because                           db         > 0. We return to this point
below, when we consider a concrete example of the bailout policy t (b, s).
    In Proposition 8, which is the counterpart of Proposition 2, we further explore the
impact of general changes in beliefs when bailouts are present by characterizing the key
variational derivatives.

Proposition 8. a) [Variational derivatives: Market value with bailouts] The market value
per unit of investment changes in response to variations in investors' and creditors' beliefs
according to
                            ^      s
           M                                t (b, s)
               · GI = - I                     1+     GI (s) ds
           F I                    s (b)       s
                                                             ^               s (b)
        M                                                                                     t (b, s)
            · GC = - C                           C
                                   (1 - ) s (b) G (s (b)) +                              +             GC (s) ds .
        F C                                                              s                      s

    b) [Variational derivatives: Marginal value of leverage with bailouts] The marginal
value of leverage changes in response to variations in investors' and creditors' beliefs
according to
           dM                      ^    s                                     ^     s
                                                         t (b, s ) I                     2 t (b, s) I
            db
                 · GI = - I                 dGI (s) +             G (s ) +                         G (s) ds
           F I                      s                       b                   s         bs
           dM
                                                    s (b)           t (b, s (b))               g C (s (b))
            db
                 · GC = - C GC (s (b))                         1+                + (1 - ) s (b) C
           F C                                       b                  s                      G (s (b))
                           ^      s (b)
                                             2 t (b, s) C
                       +                               G (s) ds .
                              0               bs

                                                                                                              t(b,s)
    Proposition 8 conveys several insights. Part a) shows that, if bailouts satisfy                            s        0,
then the presence of bailouts attenuates the sensitivity of the market valuation M (b) to the


                                                               30
                                                                                                           t(b,s)
changes in beliefs GI (s) and GC (s). Moreover, if bailouts are convex in s, so that                        s
is larger in absolute value for low s, then the attenuation effect is skewed towards belief
distortions in bad states. Intuitively, bailouts imply that agents' beliefs about downside
risk become less important for market valuation.
                                                      t(b,s)
    Part b) shows that, if bailouts also satisfy       b        0, then the effect of changes in beliefs
                                                                               dM
over the marginal default state s (b) on the marginal valuation                 db   is attenuated towards
                                                                                             dM
zero by the presence of bailouts. In addition, both variational derivatives of                db   contain a
                          2 t(b,s)
term with the sign of   -  bs      Gj   (s) for j  {I, C }. These terms arise because changes in
beliefs affect investors' strategic incentive to take on leverage in order to increase bailouts.
                             t(b,s)                                                                dM
If the strategic incentive    b       is decreasing in s,25 then optimism increases                 db .    This
effect of bailouts strengthens the negative effect of investors' optimism on the incentives
to take on leverage, but weakens the positive effect of creditors' optimism.
    These results further demonstrate the usefulness of our variational approach to
characterizing changes in beliefs.         For a general specification of bailouts t (b, s), the
marginal value of leverage cannot be ranked in terms of standard stochastic orders such as
hazard-rate dominance. Nevertheless, our characterization yields clear economic insights.

4.3    Too-Big-To-Fail scenario
It is instructive to consider the common special case in which bailouts are perfectly targeted
towards avoiding bankruptcy, so that t (b, s) = max {b - s, 0}. This scenario corresponds
to interpreting investors in our model as an agent that is "too big to fail" (TBTF). It
illustrates clearly that bailouts attenuate the role of creditors' beliefs, and that they can
lead to different normative conclusions in an equity exuberance scenario.

Example. [Too-Big-To-Fail scenario.]                   Assume that bailouts satisfy t (b, s)                   =
max {b - s, 0}. In this case, the market value per unit of investment M (b) reduces to
                                           ^   s
                             M (b) =  I             (s - b) dF I (s) +  C b,
                                            s (b)


where s (b) = b.

    In this limiting case, there is no risk of default, which makes the valuation of debt
fully independent of creditors' beliefs F C (s). We can therefore focus on the impact of
changes in investors' beliefs. We can rely on Propositions 7 and 8 to show that the impact
of optimism by investors on the optimal leverage regulation is now ambiguous.
  25
     Bailouts are often modeled as2 a convex function of the shortfall b - s of asset values from debt
obligations. This directly implies  bs
                                    t(b,s)
                                            0.



                                                     31
         In order to recover the same conclusion as in the equity exuberance scenario described
in Proposition 6, we can simplify Equation (20) to obtain the following necessary condition:

           dW                      GI (b)                  C (1 + ) -  I F I,P (b) +  I F I (b)
            db
                 · GI  0  ´ s                                      ´s                              .       (21)
          F I                             I                (b) +  I s (b) (F I,P (s) - F I (s)) ds
                                s (b) G       (s) ds

                                                                    dW
In the case in which the variational derivative                      db
                                                                   F j
                                                                          · Gj is instead positive, equity
exuberance increases incentives to constrain leverage, in contrast to the result in the
baseline model.         Indeed, perfect bailouts are guaranteed to change the sign of the
inframarginal term in Equation (20), so that the planner always has an additional inherent
incentive to discourage leverage.26 Equation (21) shows that the type of exuberance is
key when determining the strength of this effect. Indeed, the incentive to cap leverage
dominates when the "downside" belief change in marginal bailout states GI (b) is small
                                                                ´s
relative to the overall "upside" belief change in solvent states s (b) GI (s) ds. Intuitively,
the inframarginal term scales with the level of investment k (b), which in this scenario
is determined purely by investors' beliefs about solvent states. Therefore, large upside
optimism generates a strong incentive to constrain leverage. By contrast, changes in
                                                                                      dk (b)
beliefs in marginal states mostly result in a decreased sensitivity                     db     of investment to
leverage regulation. Thus, large downside optimism makes regulation less attractive at
the margin.


5         Monetary Policy
In this section, we return to our baseline model without bailouts and explore the role of
monetary policy, which here operates via an investment channel. Formally, we refer to the
                                                                            1- C
natural interest rate in debt markets in our model as r =                    C
                                                                                 .   We further suppose that
the planner can set an interest rate r = r at a cost. Deviations from the natural rate
incur a deadweight loss given by L (r)  0, which is a convex function of r and satisfies
L (r ) = 0.27
         We focus on the welfare effect of interest rate policy when beliefs are distorted. Lemma
5, which is the counterpart of Lemma 1, presents a reformulation of the investors' problem
whose solution directly characterizes equilibrium leverage and investment.

                                          P
    26
    In the TBTF scenario, we have dM   db
                                           - ddb
                                                 - dM
                                                    db
                                                       = -  C (1 + ) -  I F I,P (b) +  I F I (b) < 0.
    27
    A simple micro-foundation for this deadweight loss is that the government can impose distortionary
taxes or subsidies on a risk-free storage technology that returns r in the absence of taxation (e.g., Farhi
and Tirole, 2012).




                                                          32
Lemma 5. [Investors' problem with active monetary policy] In the model with monetary
policy, equilibrium leverage and investment are given by the solution to the following
reformulation of the problem faced by investors:

                                        max [M (b, r) - 1] k -  (k )
                                             b,k

                                        s.t.       b  b,

where M (b, r) is given by
                          ^    s                                  ^   s                 ^    b
                      I                            I                         C
        M (b, r) =                 (s - b) dF (s) +  (r)                  bdF (s) +              sdF C (s) ,
                           b                                      b                      s
                                    equity                                       debt

                     1
and where  (r)      1+r   is the discount factor used to value debt when the interest rate is r.

   The investors' problem in Lemma 5 is the same as the investors' problem in the baseline
model except for the valuation function M (b, r). The value of debt now depends on
                                                                                                  1
monetary policy, because creditors use the discount factor  (r) =                                1+r   to value debt.
Throughout this section, we focus on the case in which  (r) <                               I ,    so that investors
remain natural borrowers and the equity payoffs are valued using                        I .
   We write b     b, r and k          b, r for the equilibrium choices of leverage and investment as
a function of the leverage cap b and the interest rate r. Lemma 6, which is the counterpart
of Lemma 4, presents the planner's problem in this context.

Lemma 6. [Planner's problem with active monetary policy] The planner's problem can
be expressed as
                                      max W b          b, r , k       b, r , r ,
                                       b,r

where social welfare is given by

                          W (b, k, r) = M P (b) - 1 k -  (k ) - L (r) ,

and where M P (b), as defined in Lemma 4, denotes the present value of payoffs under the
planner's beliefs, which is independent of r.

   There are two differences between this problem and the planner's problem in Lemma 4.
First, the planner realizes that equilibrium leverage b and investment k are driven by both
leverage caps and the interest rate. Second, the welfare function W (b, k, r) is adjusted for
the deadweight cost of monetary distortions. However, the function M P (b) used by the
planner to value the payoff from investments is identical to the one in the baseline model,

                                                           33
and does not depend on monetary policy. This arises because monetary policy operates
by changing the value of debt at date 0, which is a welfare-neutral transfer in our model.
   Relying on the characterizations in Lemmas 5 and 6, we analyze the welfare effect
W (b,r)
 r        of raising interest rates and its dependence on beliefs. We focus on the effects of
beliefs in the equity exuberance and debt exuberance scenarios defined in Proposition 6.
In the Online Appendix, we include a full variational characterization of these effects.

Proposition 9. [Marginal welfare effect of monetary policy/Impact of beliefs on optimal
monetary policy] The marginal welfare effect of increasing the interest rate is given by

                         W b, r                          dk    b, r
                                  = M P (b) - M (b, r)                - L (r) ,            (22)
                            r                                 dr

        dk   (b,r)    1      dM (b,r)
where        dr      =                < 0. In both equity exuberance and debt exuberance
                    (k (b,r)) dr
                         
scenarios, optimism (pessimism) by investors or creditors in a hazard-rate sense calls for
increasing (lowering) interest rates.

   Proposition 9 shows that the welfare effect of monetary policy depends on the difference
between the planner's and investors' valuations of investment, M P (b) - M (b, r), as well
                                                                dk (b,r)
as the derivative of investment with respect to interest rates,    dr    . This derivative is
always negative because an increase in r lowers bond values, thus raising the effective cost
of capital investment. Proposition 9 further describes the role of beliefs in the welfare effect
of monetary policy. Unlike in Proposition 5, there is no inframarginal effect associated
with raising the interest rate in our model because changes in the value of debt are welfare-
neutral transfers. Accordingly, Equation (22) exclusively contains an incentive effect.
   Increased optimism in either a debt or equity exuberance scenario implies that the
incentive effect that we have identified becomes stronger. This is the result of two forces.
First, increased optimism implies that the valuation wedge M P (b) - M (b, r) becomes
more negative (larger in absolute value). Second, increased optimism implies that the
effect of the interest rate r on bond values is stronger when bond values are elevated,
so that investment becomes more sensitive to monetary policy. Both forces increase the
planner's incentive to raise (lower) interest rates in response to optimistic (pessimistic)
beliefs. Consequently, Proposition 9 shows that monetary policy, through an investment
channel, can be used to optimally counteract optimism/pessimism in the economy.
   This result stands in contrast to the more nuanced effect of changes in beliefs on
leverage regulation. A central reason for this difference is that optimistic investors become
more sensitive to contractionary monetary policy, but tend to become less sensitive to
leverage caps. Therefore, monetary policy is a natural substitute when optimism blunts

                                               34
the effectiveness of leverage regulation. These results connect our paper to the literature
on monetary policy as a prudential tool. Monetary policy has been advocated for in
situations where traditional financial regulation cannot reach the "shadow banking" sector,
or is otherwise constrained (e.g., Stein, 2013; Caballero and Simsek, 2019). Even in a
model without such constraints, we show that monetary policy can be useful by affecting
investment, and is particularly effective in cases where capital regulation is endogenously
constrained by distorted beliefs.


6    Planner's Beliefs and Optimal Leverage Regulation
So far, our analysis has focused on characterizing optimal policy as a function of investors'
and creditors' beliefs, holding constant the beliefs under which the planner evaluates
optimal policy. In this section, we characterize the impact of changes in the beliefs F I,P (s)
and F C,P (s) that the planner uses to evaluate the welfare of investors and creditors when
setting the optimal policy.
    This exercise has a dual interpretation.       First, under the paternalistic view that
investors and creditors have distorted beliefs and that the planner's beliefs are correct,
one can view these comparative statics as showing the effect of changes in the planner's
beliefs when she observes new information that is ignored by investors and creditors.
Alternatively, assuming that the planner's beliefs differ from the true/objective beliefs,
one can use the comparative statics below to explore the limits of paternalism, namely
how the optimal policy changes when the planner's beliefs change. We focus on the latter
interpretation in this section.
    In addition, Appendix E.7 considers an extension that allows us to consider the limits
of paternalism from a different perspective. We assume that the planner's beliefs are fixed
and rational, but that the planner has to choose the leverage limit b before observing the
realization of a "sentiment" indicator that drives the beliefs of investors and creditors. We
show that uncertainty can drive the planner towards setting either higher or lower leverage
limits, and characterize how these effects depend on the type of exuberance generated by
sentiments.
    For brevity, we focus here on comparative statics in three scenarios, which are the
analogue to our treatment of investors' and creditors' beliefs in Proposition 6. Under
the same conditions on  (·) used to derive Proposition 6, we provide the following
characterization:

Proposition 10. [Impact of the planner's beliefs on optimal regulation: Specific scenarios]
    a) Planner's equity exuberance: Consider changes in the belief F I,P (s) that the planner


                                              35
uses to evaluate investors' utility, and hold fixed the belief F C,P (s) that the planner uses to
evaluate creditors' utility. Then, increased optimism in a hazard-rate sense by the planner
                           dW                         dW
can imply either            db
                          F I,P
                                  · GI,P > 0 or       db
                                                    F I,P
                                                            · GI,P < 0. Hence, it is ambiguous whether
planner's equity exuberance leads to tighter or looser perceived optimal regulation.
       b) Planner's debt exuberance: Consider changes in the belief F C,P (s) that the planner
uses to evaluate creditors' utility, and hold fixed the belief F I,P (s) that the planner uses
to evaluate investors' utility. Then, increased optimism by the planner in a hazard-rate
                    dW
sense implies        db
                   F C,P
                            · GC,P > 0. Hence, the planner's debt exuberance always leads to more
lenient perceived optimal regulation.
       c) Planner's joint exuberance: Assume that the planner uses a single belief F P (s) =
F I,P (s) = F C,P (s) to evaluate agents' utility. Then, increased optimism by the planner
                                          dW
in a hazard-rate sense implies             db
                                          F P
                                                · GP > 0. Hence, the planner's joint exuberance always
leads to more lenient perceived optimal regulation.

       The economic intuition for this result follows from our characterization of the marginal
                    dW
welfare effect     in Proposition 4. The marginal effect is increasing in the marginal
                     db
                  dM P (b)
value of leverage    db
                           under the planner's beliefs, and also increasing in the planner's
total valuation of investment M P b .28 Both equity and debt exuberance on behalf of
the planner increase the total valuation M P b . However, using a parallel argument
                                                      dM P (b)
to Proposition 3, we can show that the marginal value   db
                                                               is decreasing with debt
exuberance, but increasing with equity exuberance in the planner's beliefs. Hence, the
overall effects of the planner's equity exuberance are ambiguous, while debt exuberance
                                            dW
always leads to an increase in               db
                                                ,   meaning a more lenient perceived optimal policy.
As in our previous analysis, the case of joint exuberance inherits the properties of debt
exuberance, because the beliefs of patient creditors dominate the relevant valuations.
       Note that the results in Propositions 6 and 10 jointly provide a general characterization
of the impact of the planner's beliefs and beliefs of investors and creditors. Hence, we can
extract insights about several scenarios that may arise if the planner is not perfectly
rational. First, consider a scenario where investors and creditors are rational but the
planner's beliefs are distorted. In this case, a laissez-faire policy is clearly optimal, but
the planner might wrongly "over-regulate" by imposing a binding constraint. Proposition
10 shows when over-regulation is possible.                       For example, pessimism in the planner's
beliefs about creditors' payoffs (in the sense of the hazard rates of F C,P (s)) always brings
                                                                          dW
about over-regulation by decreasing the perceived benefit                  db
                                                                                of permitting more leverage.

  28                                                                                                 dk   (b)
       This follows because k      b > 0 and, by investors' first-order condition in Equation (8),               0.
                                                                                                      db




                                                            36
Second, one can imagine a model where private agents agree with the planner's beliefs,
but those beliefs themselves are irrational. In this case, it is optimal to impose a binding
leverage constraint if there is debt exuberance or joint exuberance among private agents
(see Proposition 6). However, since the planner is also exuberant, she continues to regard
a laissez-faire policy as optimal, and will therefore "under-regulate", failing to impose a
constraint. Finally, in a mixed scenario where agents and the planner are irrational but
disagree with one another, either over-regulation or under-regulation becomes possible,
and Proposition 10 delineates both cases.


7    Conclusion
This paper characterizes leverage regulation and monetary policy in environments in which
equity investors' and creditors' beliefs differ from the beliefs of a planner. We show that
the optimal policy response to changes in beliefs depends on the type and the magnitude
of the beliefs held by investors and creditors. We show that optimism by investors is
associated with loosening the optimal leverage cap, while optimism by creditors, or jointly
by both investors and creditors, is associated with a tighter optimal leverage cap. We
explain how our framework can be used to rationalize regulatory policies used in specific
contexts that increase or decrease leverage.
    When belief differences and government bailouts coexist, increased optimism by equity
investors may call for a tighter optimal leverage cap too, depending on whether equity
optimism is concentrated on upside or downside risk.         We also show that monetary
tightening can act as a useful substitute for financial regulation since increased optimism
by either equity investors or creditors is associated with higher incentives to raise interest
rates. Finally, we explore the role of changes in the planner's beliefs for the optimal policy
response.
    There are many fruitful avenues for further research on the design of prudential policies
with distorted beliefs. For instance, exploring many of the effects that we have identified
in this paper in a dynamic quantitative framework that includes multiple rationales for
regulation is one of the most promising ones. Lastly, we hope that the variational approach
that we have introduced here to characterize the impact of general changes in beliefs can
be used in other scenarios.




                                               37
References
Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. 2013. "Sovereign debt." Handbook of International
  Economics, 4.
Bailey, Michael, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. 2019.
  "House Price Beliefs and Mortgage Leverage Choice." The Review of Economic Studies,
  86(6): 2403­2452.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2002. "Market timing and capital structure." The
  Journal of Finance, 57(1): 1­32.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2013. "Behavioral corporate finance: An updated
  survey." 2: 357­424.
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong. 2017. "Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2): 713­764.
Bianchi, Javier. 2016. "Efficient Bailouts?" American Economic Review, 106(12): 3607­3659.
Bianchi, Javier, Emine Boz, and Enrique Gabriel Mendoza. 2012. "Macroprudential Policy
  in a Fisherian Model of Financial Innovation." IMF Economic Review, 60(2): 223­269.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong. 2014. "A Welfare Criterion For
  Models With Distorted Beliefs." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1753­1797.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Alp Simsek. 2019. "Prudential Monetary Policy." NBER Working
  Paper.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Alp Simsek. 2020. "A Risk-centric Model of Demand Recessions and
  Speculation." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(3): 1493­1566.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2018. "The Safety Trap." The Review of Economic
  Studies, 85(1): 223­274.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2017. "The Safe
  Assets Shortage Conundrum." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3): 29­46.
Campbell, John Y. 2016. "Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial
  Regulation." American Economic Review, 106(5): 1­30.
Chari, VV, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2016. "Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal
  Regulation: A Macroeconomic View." American Economic Review, 106(9): 2458­2493.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong. 2014. "Wall Street and the Housing Bubble."
  American Economic Review, 104(9): 2797­2829.
Cordella, Tito, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Robert Marquez. 2018. "Government
  Guarantees, Transparency, and Bank Risk Taking." IMF Economic Review, 66: 116­143.
Dávila, Eduardo. 2014. "Optimal Financial Transaction Taxes." Working Paper.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Ansgar Walther. 2020. "Does Size Matter? Bailouts with Large and
  Small Banks." Journal of Financial Economics, 136(1): 1­22.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Ansgar Walther. 2021. "Corrective Financial Regulation with Imperfect
  Instruments." Working Paper.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek. 2018. "Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with
  Financial Frictions." The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1): 352­395.



                                           38
DeAngelo, Harry, and René M. Stulz. 2015. "Liquid-claim Production, Risk Management,
  and Bank Capital Structure: Why High Leverage is Optimal for Banks." Journal of Financial
  Economics, 116(2): 219­236.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2001. "Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation
  and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking." Journal of Political Economy, 109(2): 287­327.
Dovis, Alessandro, and Rishabh Kirpalani. 2020. "Fiscal Rules, Bailouts, and Reputation in
  Federal Governments." American Economic Review, 110(3): 860­88.
Exler, Florian, Igor Livshits, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2019. "Consumer
  Credit with Over-optimistic Borrowers." Working Paper.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2016. "A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the
  Presence of Nominal Rigidities." Econometrica, 84(5): 1645­1704.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2020. ""Taming a Minsky Cycle"." Working Paper.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2012. "Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and
  Systemic Bailouts." American Economic Review, 102(1): 60­93.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2020. "Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents."
  American Economic Review, 10(1): 298­336.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2008. "Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy."
  American Economic Review, 98(4): 1211­1244.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2012. "Tranching, CDS, and Asset Prices: How Financial
  Innovation Can Cause Bubbles and Crashes." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  4(1): 190­225.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2015. "Leverage and Default in Binomial Economies: a
  Complete Characterization." Econometrica, 83(6): 2191­2229.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2016. "Financial Innovation, Collateral, and Investment."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(1): 242­284.
Geanakoplos, John. 1997. "Promises, Promises." In The Economy as an Evolving Complex
  System II. , ed. W. Brian Arthur, Steven N. Durlauf and David A. Lane, 285­320. CRC Press.
Geanakoplos, John. 2003. "Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in General
  Equilibrium." Working Paper, Yale University.
Geanakoplos, John. 2009. "The Leverage Cycle." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
  Volume 24. , ed. D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford, 1­65. University of Chicago Press.
Gilboa, Itzhak, Larry Samuelson, and David Schmeidler. 2014. "No-Betting-Pareto
  Dominance." Econometrica, 82(4): 1405­1442.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Nicolas Werquin. 2014. "A Variational Approach
  to the Analysis of Tax Systems." NBER Working Paper.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990. "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
  Creation." Journal of Finance, 49­71.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier, and Philippe Martin. 2017. "Economics of Sovereign Debt,
  Bailouts and the Eurozone Crisis." Working Paper.
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel G Hanson. 2013. "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond
  Returns." The Review of Financial Studies, 26(6): 1483­1525.



                                              39
Haddad, Valentin, Paul Ho, and Erik Loualiche. 2020. "Bubbles and the Value of
  Innovation." Working Paper.
Heimer, Rawley, and Alp Simsek. 2019. "Should Retail Investors' Leverage Be Limited?"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 132(3): 1­21.
Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina. 2014.
  "Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-three Million Bank Loans Say about
  the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-taking?" Econometrica, 82(2): 463­505.
Jorda, Oscar, Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2021. "Bank Capital
  Redux: Solvency, Liquidity, and Crisis." NBER Working Paper, 88(1): 260­286.
Keister, Todd. 2016. "Bailouts and Financial Fragility." The Review of Economic Studies,
  83(2): 704­736.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1972. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
  Palgrave Macmillan.
Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek. 2016. "Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage." American
  Economic Review, 106(3): 699­738.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Wenhao Li. 2020. "Dissecting Mechanisms of Financial Crises:
  Intermediation and Sentiment." Working Paper.
Livshits, Igor. 2015. "Recent Developments in Consumer Credit and Default Literature." Journal
  of Economic Surveys, 29(4): 594­613.
Lopez-Salido, David, Jeremy Stein, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2017. "Credit-Market Sentiment
  and the Business Cycle." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3): 1372­1426.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. "Inefficient Credit Booms." The Review of Economic Studies,
  75(3): 809­833.
Luenberger, David G. 1997. Optimization by Vector Space Methods. Professional Series, Wiley.
Maxted, Peter. 2020. "A Macro-Finance Model with Sentiment." Working Paper.
Minsky, Hyman. 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University Press.
Shaked, Moshe, and J. George Shanthikumar. 2007. Stochastic Orders. Springer Science &
  Business Media.
Simsek, Alp. 2013a. "Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints." Econometrica, 81(1): 1­
  53.
Simsek, Alp. 2013b. "Speculation and Risk Sharing with New Financial Assets." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 128(3): 1365­1396.
Simsek, Alp. 2021. "The Macroeconomics of Financial Speculation." NBER Working Paper.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127(1): 57­95.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2013. "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy
  Responses." Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Walther, Ansgar. 2015. "Jointly Optimal Regulation of Bank Capital and Liquidity." Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking, 48(2-3): 415­448.
Xiong, Wei. 2013. "Bubbles, Crises, and Heterogeneous Beliefs." Handbook on Systemic Risk, ,
  ed. Jean-Pierre Fouque and Joseph A. Langsam, 663­713. Cambridge University Press.



                                             40
A     Proofs and Derivations: Section 2
We prove the results in this section, with the exception of Proposition 3, in a general
model that allows for monetary policy and bailouts. Therefore, the proofs presented
here also establish the corresponding results in Sections 4 and 5. The baseline model
is recovered when t (b, s) = 0 and when the discount factor implied by monetary policy
satisfies  (r) =  (r ) =  C .

Proof of Lemma 1 [Investors' problem]

The problem that investors face at date 0, after anticipating their optimal default decision,
can be expressed as follows:
                                                                 ^
                       V b, r =          max        cI
                                                     0   +   I
                                                                         cI       I
                                                                          1 (s) dF (s) ,   (23)
                                   b,k,cI   I
                                        0 ,c1 (s)


subject to budget constraints at date 0 and in each state s at date 1, the creditors' debt-
pricing equation, the non-negativity constraint of consumption at date 0, and the leverage
constraint set by the planner:

         cI                I
          0 + k +  (k ) = n0 + Q (b, r ) k          (0 )                                   (24)
                  cI         I
                    1 (s) = n1 (s) + max {s + t (b, s) - b, 0} k, s                        (25)
                                   ^ s                ^ s (b)
                                            C
                 Q (b, r) =  (r)        bdF (s) +             (s + t (b, s)) dF C (s)      (26)
                                    s (b)                            s

                      cI
                       0 0       (0 )                                                      (27)
                      bk  bk     (µ) .                                                     (28)

Note that the debt-pricing equation Q (b, r) is derived from the behavior of creditors. In
Lagrangian form, this problem can be expressed as follows:
                                         ^   s
                        LI = cI
                              0+
                                 I
                                                  (s + t (b, s) - b) dF I (s) k            (29)
                                          s (b)

                           - 0 cI    I
                                0 - n0 - Q (b, r ) k + k +  (k )

                           + 0 cI
                                0 + µk b - b .


Equations (5) and (6), as well as the results in Lemma 5, follow directly from Equation
(29) when 0 = 0.




                                                    41
Proof of Proposition 1 [Equilibrium leverage and investment]

Equation (8) follows from maximizing Equation (5) subject to Equation (6) (multiplied
by k ). Equations (9) and (10) follow from differentiating Equation (5) with respect to
k and (7) with respect to b. These conditions are necessary for optimality and sufficient
under the regularity conditions described in the Online Appendix. It follows immediately
from Equation (7) that a necessary regularity condition for investment to be positive is
that M (b ) > 1.

Proof of Lemma 2 [Sensitivity of investment to leverage limit]
                                                                            dM
Differentiating Equation (9) with respect to b implies that                  db    (b ) db
                                                                                        db
                                                                                           =  (k ) dk
                                                                                                    db
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                     db
Equation (11) follows immediately by rearranging this expression and noticing that                   db
                                                                                                          =1
                   db
when µ > 0 and     db
                        = 0 when µ = 0.

Proof of Lemma 3 [Sensitivity of leverage and investment to beliefs]
                                                                             dM
Note the first-order condition for leverage can be written as                 db    b ; F I, F C   = 0. An
application of the implicit function theorem implies that

                                                     ( dM
                                                        db )
                                      b              F I
                                                             · GI
                                          · GI =           2      .
                                      F I              - ddbM2



The same approach applies when (variationally) differentiating with respect to F C .
                                                                                     dM
   Similarly, the first-order condition for leverage can be written as                db   b ; F I , F C = 0.
An application of the implicit function theorem implies that

                                     dM    b              M
                        k             db   F I
                                                 · GI +   F I
                                                                · GI       M
                                                                             · GI
                                                                           F I
                            · GI =                                     =          .
                        F I                       (k )                      (k )

                                                            dM
Notice that this derivation exploits the fact that           db =      0. The same approach applies
when (variationally) differentiating with respect         to F C .




                                                   42
Proof of Proposition 2 [Variational derivatives]

For completeness, we include here the counterparts of Equations (7) and (10), making
explicit their dependence on F I (s) and F C (s):
                            ^   s                                                 ^   s              ^   s (b)
 M b; F I , F C =  I                    (s + t (b, s) - b) dF I (s) +  (r)                 bdF C +               (s + t (b, s)) dF C (s)
                              s (b)                                                s (b)             s

dM     b; F I , F C             ^   s                          ^   s (b)
                                                       t (b, s) C
                      =  (r)                 dF C (s) +  (r)   dF (s)
         db                  s (b)               s        b
                                                                  ^ s
                                            C        ds (b)     I           t (b, s)
                       - (1 - )  (r) s (b) f (s (b))        -            1-          dF I (s) .
                                                       db          s (b)      b

To simplify the notation, we often suppress the explicit dependence of s on b. We compute
M
F I
      · GI as follows:


M              M b; F I + GI , F C - M b; F I , F C
       I
    · G  lim
F I        0                          
                    ´s                                      ´s
                s (s + t (b, s) - b) d F I (s) + GI (s) -  I s (s + t (b, s) - b) dF I (s)
                 I
         = lim
           0                                       
              ^ s
         = I       (s + t (b, s) - b) dGI (s)
               s
                ^ s
                            t (b, s)
         = - I         1+              GI (s) ds.
                 s             s

where the last line follows after integrating by parts.
                      M
      We compute      F C
                            · GC as follows:


          M             M b; F I , F C + GC - M b; F I , F C
                 C
              · G  lim
          F C        0                    
                          ^ s            ^ s
                   =  (r)     bdGC (s) +     (s + t (b, s)) dGC (s)
                                         s                s
                                                                    ^     s
                                                                                  t (b, s)
                       = - (r) (1 - ) s GC (s ) +                             +            GC (s) ds .
                                                                      s             s

where the last line follows after integrating by parts.




                                                          43
                         dM
   We compute             db
                        F I
                                  · GI as follows:
                    ´s                     ´ s t                       ´s    ´s                                                    t
 dM            - I s d F I + GI +  I s b         d F I + GI - - I s dF I +  I s                                                    b dF
                                                                                                                                        I
  db    I
     · G = lim
F I         0                                          
                ^ s           ^ s
                                  t (b, s) I
          = I -     dGI (s) +             dG (s)
                 s              s   b
                                               ^ s 2
                    t (b, s (b))                    t (b, s) I
          = I  1-                 GI (s (b)) -              G (s) ds .
                        b                        s   bs

                  dM
We compute         db
                 F C
                            · GC as follows:
                        ^                                                  ^
 dM                          s
                                                                   s               s
                                                                                       t
  db
     · GC =  (r)                 dGC (s) - (1 - ) s (b) g C (s )     +                   dGC (s)
F C                      s                                         b           s       b
                                                                                                       ^       s
                                          s (b)           t (b, s (b))              g C (s (b))                     2 t (b, s) C
             = - (r) GC (s (b))                      1+                + (1 - )s (b) C             +                          G (s) ds .
                                           b                  s                     G (s (b))              0         bs

where the last line follows after integrating by parts. In the baseline model, we use the
                                            s
fact that s (b) = b, implying               b    = 1.

Proof of Proposition 3 [Differential impact of optimism by investors and
creditors]
                                                 b                 k                                                ( dM
                                                                                                                       db )
a) From Lemma 3, it follows that                 F I
                                                       · GI and    F I
                                                                         · GI will have the same sign as            F I
                                                                                                                            · GI
       M
and     · GI , respectively. From Equations (12) and (14), if investors are optimistic in a
       F I
                                                        ( dM
                                                           db )               M
hazard-rate sense, GI (·)  0, and it is immediate that F    I   · GI < 0 and F       I
                                                                                I · G > 0,
                  b                            k
and therefore     F I
                            · GI < 0 and       F I
                                                     · GI > 0.
                                     b       C and k · GC will have the same sign as
   b) From Lemma 3, it follows that F  C · G       F C
 dM
 ( )           M
  db
F C
      · GC and F      C
                 C · G , respectively. From Equations (13) and (15), if creditors are

optimistic in a hazard-rate sense, GC (·)  0, so it is sufficient to show that

                                                                  g C (s (b))
                                          1 + (1 - ) s (b)                     0.
                                                                  GC (s (b))

At an interior optimum with common beliefs, Equation (10) implies that

                 dM                                    f C (s (b))
                     =  (r) -  I -  (r) (1 - ) s (b)                 =µ0
                  db                                 1 - F C (s (b))

or, equivalently,
                                                                              f C (s (b))
                                   (r) -  I   (r) (1 - ) s (b)                              .
                                                                            1 - F C (s (b))


                                                              44
As shown in Section E.4 of the Online Appendix, hazard-rate dominance implies that
 f C (s)         C
              g (s)
1-F C (s)
             -GC (s) , so the following relation holds:



                                                                       g C (s)
                               (r) -  I  - (r) (1 - ) s (b)                    ,
                                                                       GC (s)

which implies that
                                                     g C (s)  I
                                 1 + (1 - ) s (b)                   0.
                                                     GC (s)    (r)
                                  ( dM
                                     db )                  M                                   b
It is then immediate that         F C
                                            · GC > 0 and   F C
                                                                 · GC > 0, and therefore       F C
                                                                                                     · GC > 0
      k
and   F I
            · GI > 0.
                                                                                               dM
    c) Suppose that F C = F I = F 0 . Then the effect of joint exuberance on                    db   is

                dM               dM                dM
                 db               db                db
                        ·G=             ·G+               ·G
                F 0              F I               F C
                                                                                   g (s (b))
                          = -G (s (b))  (r) -  I +  (r) (1 - ) s (b)                         .
                                                                                   G (s (b))

Since optimism in a hazard-rate sense implies that G (s (b))  0, we need to show that

                                                                  g (s (b))
                           (r) -  I +  (r) (1 - ) s (b)                      0.
                                                                  G (s (b))

At an interior optimum with common beliefs, Equation (10) implies that

                 dM                                    f 0 (s (b))
                     =  (r) -  I -  (r) (1 - ) s (b)                 = µ  0,
                  db                                 1 - F 0 (s (b))

or, equivalently,
                                                                    f 0 (s (b))
                           (r) -  I   (r) (1 - ) s (b)                            .
                                                                  1 - F 0 (s (b))
                                                                                f 0 (s)          0
                                                                                             g (s)
As shown in Section E.4, hazard-rate dominance implies that                    1-F 0 (s)
                                                                                            -G 0 (s) , so the

following relation holds:

                                                                       g 0 (s)
                                (r) -  I  - (r) (1 - ) s (b)                   ,
                                                                       G0 (s)

which implies, as required, that

                                                                    g 0 (s)
                               (r) -  I +  (r) (1 - ) s (b)                  0.
                                                                    G0 (s)



                                                     45
B        Proofs and Derivations: Section 3
We prove the results in this section in a general model that allows for monetary policy and
bailouts. Therefore, the proofs presented here also establish the corresponding results in
Sections 4 and 5. The baseline model is recovered when t (b, s) = 0 and when the discount
factor implied by monetary policy satisfies  (r) =  (r ) =  C .

Proof of Lemma 4 [Planner's problem]

The planner's objective is given by the sum of investors' and creditors' expected utility.
Formally, ignoring constant terms that depend only on endowments, we have W =
uI,P + uC,P , where uI,P and uC,P are given by
                                                      ^    s
               I,P                                I
          u              = Q (b, r) - 1 +                         (s + t (b, s) - b) dF I,P (s) k -  (k ) ,
                                                          s (b)
                                                      ^    s                         ^   s (b)
           C,P                                C                         C,P
          u              = -Q (b, r) +                            bdF         +                  (s + t (b, s)) dF C,P (s)                 k,
                                                      s (b)                          s


which imply that
               ^     s                                                      ^    s                       ^   s (b)
           I                                       I,P                  C                      C,P
W =                        (s + t (b, s) - b) dF           (s) +                         bdF         +               (s + t (b, s)) dF C,P (s)     - 1 k - (k ) .
                s (b)                                                         s (b)                      s


We define M P (b) as follows:
                         ^   s                                                            ^    s                       ^    s (b)
    P                I                                            I,P                C                       C,P
M (b) =                            (s + t (b, s) - b) dF                (s) +                        bdF           +                (s + t (b, s)) dF C,P (s) .
                           s (b)                                                            s (b)                       s


The results in Lemmas 4 and 6 follow immediately by setting t (b, s) = 0.
    Note that a planner that exclusively values the welfare of investors simply maximizes
uI,P ,   taking as given Q (b, r) as defined in Equation (26). This is as if the planner decided
to set F C,P (s) = F C (s). This observation is useful when relating our results to the Hertz
scenario on page 26. A planner that assigns different welfare weights to investors and
creditors simply maximizes a linear combination of uI,P and uC,P .

Proof of Proposition 4 [Marginal welfare effect of varying the leverage cap]

The result follows directly by totally differentiating the characterization of the planner's
                                                                                                                               db
objective in Lemma 4, applying the envelope theorem, and noting that                                                           db
                                                                                                                                      = 1 whenever




                                                                            46
the leverage cap is binding. Its general version with bailouts and monetary policy is
                                        
      dW    dM P b   d (b)                                                                        dk        b, r
          =        -        k                   b, r + M P b -  (b) - M b                                              .
       db     db      db                                                                               db
                                                                          Incentive Effect
                       Inframarginal Effect


Proof of Proposition 5 [Impact of beliefs on optimal regulation: General
characterization]

The variational derivative of Equation (16) with respect to beliefs F j for j  {I, C } is
                                                                     
       dW              dM P b        d (b)   k b
        db
             · Gj =                -              · Gj 
      F j                 db          db      F j
                                                                                                  
                                                           dk                      M b                 dk         b
                 + M P b -  (b) - M b                       db
                                                                 · Gj -                      · Gj                      .
                                                          F j                       F j                     db


Notice that we can express optimal investment as k                   b =  M b - 1 , where  (·) is
the inverse function of  (·). This implies that
                                                     
             k b                      M b                            dk b                    dM b
                   · Gj =  (·)                   · Gj          and                 =  (·)                   .
             F j                        F j                              db                       db

Hence, the last term in the variational derivative is
                                                                                              
                      M b               dk b         dM b                   M b
                                · Gj             =                (·)                     · Gj 
                       F j                 db             db                    F j
                                                                                       
                                                     dM b            k      b
                                                 =                                 · Gj  .
                                                          db         F j

Combining our results, we obtain the required expression in Equation (18), and also the
result in Proposition 4 with bailouts.
                                                                                                         dW
   Whenever the planner's objective is well-behaved in b, establishing that                             F j
                                                                                                            db
                                                                                                                      · Gj > 0
guarantees that optimal leverage regulation involves a looser leverage cap. Formally, this
                                                                                                        dW
is the case whenever (i) the planner's objective is quasi-concave in b and                             F j
                                                                                                            db
                                                                                                                  · Gj > 0
                                                                                                                  dW
evaluated at the optimal (second-best) policy or (ii) welfare takes any shape and                                  db
                                                                                                                 F j
                                                                                                                           · Gj >
0 for all b. As is standard in normative exercises, the planner's objective need not be quasi-
concave without imposing additional restrictions on primitives -- even though we find the

                                                     47
problem to be well-behaved when simulating the model for standard functional forms and
belief distributions.

Proof of Proposition 6 [Impact of beliefs on optimal regulation: Specific
scenarios]

The results in this proposition follow directly by combining the comparative statics in
Propositions 3 with the general characterization in Proposition 5 and Equation (19).29
Our conclusions about optimal policy follow directly, because those results provide signs
        dW
for     db
       F j
             · Gj > 0 for all b.


C       Proofs and Derivations: Sections 4 and 5
In Appendices A and B, we have proved the results in Sections 2 and 3 using a general
model that allows for flexible monetary policy and bailouts. Therefore, the results in
Sections 4 and 5 follow immediately from those characterizations.


D       Proofs and Derivations: Section 6
Proof of Proposition 10 [Impact of the planner's beliefs on optimal regulation:
Specific scenarios]

Each case in the proposition holds constant the beliefs of creditors and investors. Hence,
                                       dk (b)
the terms M b > 0, k b > 0, and db  0 in the marginal welfare effect dW             db
                                                                                       (see
Proposition 4) are also held fixed. It is then clear that dW
                                                           db
                                                              is increasing in the planner's
                  P
               dM (b)
marginal value db of leverage and weakly increasing in the planner's valuation M P b
of investment.
   By a parallel argument to Proposition 3, it follows that (i) M P b increases with the
                                                                                 dM P (b)
planner's equity exuberance, debt exuberance, and joint exuberance, and that (ii) db
increases with the planner's debt exuberance or joint exuberance but decreases with the
planner's equity exuberance. This establishes the claims in the proposition.




                          dk      j          dM      j       M (b)
  29
   In general, note that F  j · G
                           db
                                    =  (·) F   j · G +  (·) F j
                                              db
                                                                    · Gj . When adjustment costs are
quadratic,  (·) =  -- a scalar defined in the text -- and  (·) = 0.


                                                48
                               Online Appendix
                          For Online Publication Only

E       Additional proofs and derivations
E.1     Regularity conditions
Note that investors always find it optimal to choose non-negative leverage in equilibrium,
since
                                      dM
                                                  =  C -  I > 0.
                                       db   b=0

Therefore, for a given leverage constraint b, our problem always features a solution for
                                                                         d2 V
leverage in 0, b and a finite solution for investment, since             dk2
                                                                                = - (k ) < 0. A
sufficient condition that guarantees a finite solution without leverage regulation is that
creditors perceive the net present value of investment to be negative if there is always
default, that is,  C EC [s] < 1, since

                                      lim M (b) =  C EC [s] .
                                     b

This sufficient condition extends directly to the environment studied in Sections 4 and
5 after imposing that bailouts are bounded above, t (b, s)  t   ¯, and that investment
has negative net present value if always in distress, even under the maximum bailout,
 (r) EC [s] + t¯ < 1.
    In order to explore the quasi-concavity of the investors' objective, it is useful to
            dM
normalize    db ,   characterized in Equation (10), as follows:

                              dM
                               db                  I 1 - F I (b)               f C (b)
            J (b) =                       1-                     - (1 -  ) b             ,
                        C (1 - F C (b))            C 1 - F C (b)             1 - F C (b)

where the normalization is valid for any non-zero level of b. Therefore, it follows that
the quasi-concavity of the investors' objective can be established by characterizing the
conditions under which J (b) is negative. Note that

                     I       1 - F I (b)                   f C (b)                f C (b)
        J (b) = -                           - (1 - )               +b                         .
                      C b    1 - F C (b)                       C
                                                         1 - F (b)    b         1 - F C (b)

There are two sufficient conditions that, when jointly satisfied, guarantee that J (b) < 0.




                                                  OA-1
First, when the hazard rate of creditors' beliefs is monotone increasing, then

                                                f C (b)
                                                              > 0.
                                     b        1 - F C (b)

Second, if investors are more optimistic than creditors in the hazard-rate sense, then

                                              1 - F I (b)
                                                              > 0.
                                     b        1 - F C (b)

Therefore, when both conditions are satisfied, we have J (b) < 0, which yields the result.
We formally state this result as Lemma 7.

Lemma 7. (Single-peaked objective function without bailouts) Suppose that there
is no bailout, and:

  1. Equity investors are weakly more optimistic than creditors in the hazard-rate order;
                                f C (s)
  2. Creditors' hazard rate    1-F C (s)
                                           is increasing in s.

Then M (b) is single peaked.

   Notice that the solution for optimal leverage can be expressed in general as follows:

                                      1                      I 1 - F I (b)
                        b=                 f C (b)
                                                       1-                  .
                              (1 - ) 1-F C (b)               C 1 - F C (b)

                                       dM
Note also that whenever  I =  C ,       db b=0       = 0, but the rest of the results remain valid.

E.2    Variations and cumulative distribution functions
For simplicity, we drop the superscript j and work with F (s) and G (s) in this appendix.
Recall that a function F (s) is a cumulative distribution function if and only if it is non-
decreasing, right-continuous, and satisfies F (s) = 0 and F (s) = 1. We say a variation
G (s) of beliefs is valid if, for small enough , the perturbed belief F (s) + G (s) remains
a cumulative distribution function.

Definition 1. A right-continuous function G (s) is a valid variation of a cumulative
distribution function F (s) if G (s) = G (s) = 0, and there exists an ¯ > 0 such that
for all   [0, ¯], the following conditions are satisfied:

  1. F (s) + G (s) is non-decreasing in s;

  2. 0  F (s) + G (s)  1, s.

                                                     OA-2
The following lemma shows that our regularity conditions in the baseline model are
sufficient to guarantee that all variations are valid.

Lemma 8. (Regularity conditions on belief variations) If (i) F (s) and G (s) are
continuously differentiable, (ii) f (s) = F (s) > 0, and (iii) G (s) = G (s) = 0, then
G (s) is a valid variation of F (s).

Proof. By assumption, f (s) = F (s) and g (s) = G (s) are continuous and therefore
bounded on the interval [s, s], so that we can define f = inf { g (s)| s  [s, s]} > 0 and
g = inf { f (s)| s  [s, s]}. For all s, we have

                          F (s) + G (s) = f (s) + g (s)  f + g,

Hence, F (s) + G (s) is non-decreasing for all   f/|g|  ¯.
   Moreover, note that, for all   ¯, and for all s, we have
                                                  ^       s
           F (s) + G (s) = F (s) + G (s) +                    (f (s) + g (s))ds  F (s) = 0,
                                                      s
                                         =0                      0, ¯


and similarly,
                                                  ^       s
           F (s) + G (s) = F (s) +  G (s) -                   (f (s) + g (s)) ds  F (s) = 1.
                                                  s
                                         =0                      0, ¯


Hence, 0  F (s) + G (s)  1 for all   ¯, as required.

E.3    First-best corrective policy
The first-best problem when the planner can control both b and k is

                           max W (b, k ) = M P (b) - 1 k -  (k ) ,
                            b,k


with first-order conditions

                                      dM P b1
                                              =0
                                         db
                                   M P b1 - 1 =  k 1 ,

where we denote by b1 and k 1 the first-best leverage and investment. Formally, we consider
an equilibrium with Pigouvian taxes  = (k , b ), where investors pay k k + b b at date 0
to the government, which is then rebated as a lump sum to either investors or creditors.

                                              OA-3
Investors solve
                        V ( ) = max [M (b) - 1] k -  (k ) - k k - b b,
                                    b,k

with first-order conditions

                                       dM (b)
                                              k = b
                                         db
                                      M (b) - 1 =  (k ) + k .

It follows that the corrective policy that achieves the first-best solution is

                                          dM b1   dM P b1
                                   b =          -                  k1
                                            db       db
                                   k = M b1 - M P b1 .

E.4    Properties of hazard-rate dominant perturbations
We    often     rely   on    the    following   two    properties       of   hazard-rate   dominant
variations/perturbations.

Property 1        The hazard rate after an arbitrary perturbation of the form described in
                                                  f (s)+g (s)
Section 2 of the paper is given by h (s) =      1-(F (s)+G(s)) .   Its derivative with respect to 
takes the form

                   dh (s)           g (s)        (f (s) + g (s)) G (s)
                          =                    +                       .
                    d       1 - (F (s) + G (s)) (1 - (F (s) + G (s)))2

In the limit in which   0, for hazard-rate dominance to hold, it must be the case that
       dh(s)
lim0    d      < 0, therefore

                        dh (s)     g (s)        f (s)       G (s)
                       lim     =           +                      <0
                       0 d       1 - F (s) 1 - F (s) 1 - F (s)
                                               f (s)
                                g (s) +                G (s) < 0
                                             1 - F (s)
                                     g (s)      f (s)
                                           +             >0
                                     G (s) 1 - F (s)
                                       f (s)         g (s)
                                                >-         ,
                                     1 - F (s)       G (s)

where in the second-to-last line the sign of the inequality flips because G (s) is negative,
since hazard-rate dominance implies first-order stochastic dominance.



                                                OA-4
                                                                                                            1-F (s)
Property 2 Hazard-rate dominance implies that a perturbation increases                                      1-F (b) ,   where
s > b. This implies that

                 1 - F (s) - G (s)              (-G (s)) (1 - F (b)) - (1 - F (s)) (-G (b))
      lim                                  =                                                 0,
      0+         1 - F (b) - G (b)                             (1 - F (b))2

or equivalently
                          (-G (s)) (1 - F (b))  (1 - F (s)) (-G (b)) .                                                   (30)

E.5     Binding equity constraint
Whenever the investors' date 0 non-negativity constraint is binding, the total amount
of equity is effectively fixed to nI
                                   0 , and Lemma 1 ceases to hold. Equation (23) and
Equations (24) through (28) remain valid in that case. For simplicity, we consider here
the case without bailouts, no monetary policy, and  (k ) = 0. These assumptions imply
that s (b) = b, and allow us to focus on equilibrium leverage.
    Under those assumptions, when the date 0 non-negativity constraint binds, the
problem that investors face can be expressed as
                                                ^   s
                                            I
                                 max                         (s - b) dF I (s) k,
                                  b,k           s (b)

                  nI                                    ´s                        ´s    (b)
where k =          0
                1-Q(b)   and Q (b) =  C                 s (b) bdF
                                                                     C   (s) +     s          sdF C (s) .      Intuitively,
investors maximize the leverage return on their initial wealth                     nI
                                                                                    0.        Under natural regularity
conditions, the solution to this problem is given by the first-order condition on b
                                                    ´s                     I
                               1 - Q (b )               s (b ) (s - b ) dF        (s)
                                          =                 ´s                          ,                                (31)
                                 Qb (b )                              I
                                                             s (b ) dF (s)

                          ´s
where Qb (b) =  C          s (b) dF
                                      C   (s) - (1 - ) s (b) f C (s (b)) .                      Equation (31) is the
counterpart of Equation (11) in Simsek (2013a), after accounting for the cost of distress
associated with bankruptcy. In this appendix, to highlight the differences with Simsek
(2013a), we focus on the case of equity exuberance, although our approach can be used
to study other scenarios. Formally, we consider the case in which F C (s) = F C,P (s) =
F I,P (s).
    In order to understand whether equilibrium leverage increases or decreases in response
to a perturbation in investors' leverage, it follows from Equation (31) that it is sufficient
                                         ´s
                                               sdF I (s)  ´s          f I (s)
to characterize the behavior of T (b)  ´ss (b) I         = b (s - b) 1- F I (b)
                                                                                ds. The change in
                                                        s (b)   dF (s)




                                                         OA-5
T (b) induced by a change in investors' beliefs in the direction GI is given by
                                    ´s
                      T             b    (s - b) g I (s) 1 - F I (b) - f I (s) -GI (b)            ds
                          · GI =                                               2                       .
                      F I                                  (1 - F I (b))

     T
If   F I
           · GI is positive (negative), leverage will increase (decrease). This characterization
allows to consider any perturbation of beliefs. However, if we are interested in hazard-rate
dominant perturbations, it can be shown that when investors become more optimistic in
a hazard-rate sense and they are constrained on the amount of equity issued, leverage
                                                 T
increases in equilibrium. Formally,              F I
                                                       · GI  0 if
             ^    s                                          ^      s
                                I                I
                      (s - b)g (s) ds       1 - F (b) -                 (s - b) f I (s) ds   -GI (b)  0,
              b                                                 b


which is equivalent to
              ^      s                                      ^    s
                            I                    I
                         -G (s) ds         1 - F (b) -                  1 - F I (s) ds       -GI (b)  0,
                 b                                           b


which follows by integrating (30) over s  [b, s]. This argument is an alternative way to
formalize some of the main results in Simsek (2013a), in particular Theorems 4 and 5.
   Finally, we can consider the normative implications of this case. In this scenario, the
                                        ´s
planner's objective can be written as  I s (b) (s - b) dF I,P (s) k . With a single degree of
freedom, since b and k are connected via the date 0 budget constraint of investors, it is
straightforward to show that an increase in optimism by investors in the hazard-rate sense
calls for tightening leverage regulations.

E.6        Alternative modeling assumptions
E.6.1       Outside equity issuance

We consider an extension of our baseline model in which, in addition to investors and
creditors, there are shareholders (denoted S ) who are able to invest in outside equity
claims against investors' cash flows. The lifetime utility of a representative shareholder is
cS  S S cS (s) , where ES is the expectation under shareholders' beliefs F S (s). For
 0 + E   1
simplicity, we continue to assume segmented markets: creditors do not invest in equity,
and shareholders do not invest in bonds.
     In addition to leverage b, investors choose a share   [0, 1] of equity to retain, and
sell a share 1 -  of equity claims to shareholders. The market value of outside equity in



                                                         OA-6
equilibrium is then given by
                                                                  ^       s
                              S                               S
                          P (b,  ) = (1 -  )                                  (s - b) dF S (s) .
                                                                      b

By contrast, the market value of debt Q (b) remains unchanged from the baseline model,
since the payoff to debtholders is unaffected by inside or outside ownership of equity
shares. Repeating the steps leading to Lemma 1 in the text, we find that the following
reformulation of the investors' problem characterizes the equilibrium:

Lemma 9. [Investors' problem with outside equity issuance] Investors solve the following
problem to decide their optimal investment, outside equity issuance, and leverage choices
at date 0:

                          V b =               max        [M (b,  ) - 1] k -  (k )
                                           b,k; [0,1]

                                       s.t.    bb                                   (µ) ,

where µ denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint imposed by the
government (reformulated as bk  bk ), and M (b,  ) is given by
                              ^    s                                                    ^    s
             M (b,  ) =   I               (s - b) dF I (s) + (1 -  )  S                             (s - b) dF S (s)   (32)
                                  s (b)                                                     s (b)

                                       inside equity                                             outside equity
                              ^    s                          ^       s (b)
                    + C                   bdF C (s) +                           sdF C (s) .
                                  s (b)                           s

                                                       debt

   Lemma 9 shows that investors continue to maximize the same objective as in the
baseline model, but must first solve an auxiliary maximization problem in Equation (32),
which determines the optimal value  of the share of equity retained by insiders. The
auxiliary problem is clearly linear in  . Hence, for any given choice of b, it is either
optimal to retain all shares ( = 1) or sell all shares to outsiders ( = 0), depending on
the differences between insiders' and outsiders' discount factors and beliefs.
   This result clarifies how our main results are affected by outside equity issuance. On
the one hand, if inside and outside shareholders have the same preferences and beliefs,
then investors are indifferent between all values of  , and their problem reduces to the
exact same problem as in the baseline model. In this case, all of our positive and normative
results on the marginal effects of changes in beliefs carry over without modification.
   On the other hand, if there are differences in preferences or belief disagreements

                                                         OA-7
between insiders and outsiders, then investors' choices are affected only by marginal
changes in the beliefs of (outside) shareholders if it is optimal to sell all shares with
 = 1, and only by marginal changes in their own beliefs if  = 0. However, all of our
results on the effects of equity exuberance continue to remain true after a modification
to the definition of exuberance, namely, that both investors' beliefs F I (s) and outsider
shareholders' beliefs F S (s) become more optimistic in the sense of hazard-rate dominance.

E.6.2      Collateralized credit

In the body of the paper, we consider an environment in which creditors can seize from
investors the full gross return on investment in case of default. If we assume that capital
trades at a price q (s) at date 1, and that credit is collateralized exclusively by the market
value of the investment at date 1, we can reformulate the two relevant equations in
Equation (26) to accommodate collateralized borrowing as follows:

                     cI         I
                       1 (s) = n1 (s) + (s + t (b, s)) k + max {q (s) - b, 0} k, s
                                      ^ s                   ^ s (b)
                                                 C
                    Q (b, r) =  (r)         bdF (s) +               q (s) dF C (s) ,
                                           s (b)                  s


where s (b) now solves q (s ) = b. It is straightforward to extend our results to this case.

E.7       Uncertainty about investors' and creditors' beliefs
In the body of the paper, the planner is able to condition the optimal policy on the beliefs
F I (·) and F C (·) that investors and creditors use to evaluate the returns s to investment.
In this section, we study an extension of the model in which the planner faces uncertainty
about the beliefs of investors and creditors. Formally, we assume that the planner faces
uncertainty about some abstract random variable, which in turn drives the beliefs of
investors and creditors. That is, we introduce a random "sentiment" variable   ,  ¯
with distribution H ( ), which indexes market sentiment about investment returns and
induces beliefs F I (s;  ) and F C (s;  ) among investors and creditors. By contrast, the
planner's beliefs F I,P (s) and F C,P (s) are independent of sentiment.30 For simplicity, we
concentrate on the baseline model without bailouts and monetary policy.
       The timing of events at date 0 is as follows: First, the planner sets the leverage cap
b before observing the realization of sentiment  . Second, sentiment  is realized and
observed by investors and creditors. Third, investors choose leverage b and investment k .
  30
    Alternatively, one can consider an environment where the planner's beliefs also respond to sentiment.
By continuity, our qualitative results below all go through in this context as long as the relative
responsiveness of investors' and creditors' beliefs to sentiment is sufficiently large relative to the planner's.


                                                     OA-8
In this environment, a version of Lemma 1 applies, except for the fact that the market
valuation M (b;  ) becomes a function of sentiments:

Lemma 10. [Investors' problem with sentiments] Investors solve the following problem to
decide their optimal investment and leverage choices at date 0 when sentiment is  :

                                        V b;  = max [M (b;  ) - 1] k -  (k )
                                                            b,k

                                                     s.t.     bb                       (µ ( )) ,

where µ ( ) denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint imposed by the
government when sentiment is  , and M (b;  ) is given by
                              ^    s                                    ^    s                     ^   b
          M (b;  ) =  I                (s - b) dF I (s;  ) +  C                  bdF C (s;  ) +            sdF C (s;  ) .
                               b                                         b                         s
                                          equity                                           debt


       We let k       b;  and b             b;  denote investors' optimal choice of investment k in this
problem. Repeating the steps leading to Lemma 4 and Proposition 4 in the baseline model,
we find that the planner's problem with sentiments is
                      ^   ¯
                          
               max            W b         b;  , k           b;    dH ( )  E W b             b;  , k          b;     ,
                b,r   


where the social welfare function is again given by

                                           W (b, k ) = M P (b) - 1 k -  (k ) ,

with the planner's valuation M p (b) of investment defined as in Lemma 4. Notice that
W (b, k ) is independent of sentiments  since they do not affect the planner's beliefs.
Hence, the only source of randomness in welfare stems from the fact that the choices of
leverage and investment depend on  .
                                                                                             dW
       We now characterize the ex-ante marginal welfare effect E                              db
                                                                                                   of leverage regulation.
In order to isolate the impact of imperfect targeting, we compare the ex-ante effect to a
benchmark with perfect targeting. The benchmark is defined as the marginal welfare effect
dW 0
 db
        that would arise if investors and creditors held their average beliefs with probability
one.31     In the remaining of this section, we assume that investment costs are quadratic
                                                                        ´¯
  31
       Formally, the average beliefs are defined as F j (s) =            
                                                                             F j (s;  ) dH ( ) for j  {I, H }. The benchmark
                                                   dW 0
value of the marginal welfare effect                      is obtained by evaluating the expression in Proposition 4 at the
                                                    db
average belief.


                                                                  OA-9
                k2
with  (k ) =    2 .

Proposition 11. [Marginal welfare effect with imperfect targeting] The expected marginal
welfare impact of increasing the leverage cap is
                                     
                                       dM b; 
                                                           
                                                                    ^        ^ b; 
                                                                            dW
     dW          dW 0
   E           =      -  · Cov M b;  ,        -                                      dH ( ) ,    (33)
      db          db                     db                                   db
                                                               { :µ( )=0}


      ^ b;  , defined in the appendix, is the hypothetical level of welfare obtained by
where W
enforcing leverage b = b in states where the leverage cap is not binding.

       Equation (33) shows two differences between leverage regulation with perfect and
imperfect targeting. First, the expected welfare effect of raising the leverage cap is reduced
by the covariance between market valuations and investment sensitivity. Intuitively, when
this covariance is positive, states of the world with overinvestment (high M b;  ) coincide
                                                                       dM (b; )
with states where investment is sensitive to leverage regulation (high db ). In that case,
it is particularly valuable ex-ante to push for lower investment by lowering the leverage
cap. Second, the leverage constraint may not always be binding if there are realizations of
 for which the associated Lagrange multiplier is µ ( ) = 0. If the (hypothetical) benefit
of enforcing more leverage in these states would be positive, then the ex-ante benefit of
                         dW 0
raising b is less than    db
                              ,   which is reflected in the third term in (33).
       These effects have ambiguous implications for optimal policy. For example, consider
the case where  indexes the optimism of equity investors in a hazard-rate sense,
while creditors' beliefs agree with the planner. Equation (33) in this case implies two
counteracting effects. On the one hand, our analysis above implies that the covariance
                                                                                           dW
between valuations and sensitivity in (33) is negative, which increases E                   db
                                                                                                 and
decreases the planner's incentive to constrain leverage. On the other hand, Proposition
3 implies that incentives to take on leverage are decreasing in  , so that the constraint
                                                              dW
is slack in optimistic states. This effect decreases E         db
                                                                    because (by Proposition 6) the
welfare benefit of more leverage is greatest when investors are optimistic.
       However, we note that these effects become unambiguous when the leverage constraint
always binds.32

Proposition 12. [Welfare effects with imperfect targeting: Binding constraints] In this
proposition, we assume that adjustment costs are quadratic. We fix a value of b for which
the leverage constraint b  b binds for all realizations  of sentiment.
  32
    Equivalently, the characterization below applies to the case where the planner imposes an equality
constraint b = b on investors instead of the cap b  b that we have considered.


                                                 OA-10
    a) Equity sentiments: Assume that creditors and the planner share common beliefs
regardless of sentiments F C (s;  ) = F C,P (s) = F I,P (s),  , and investors' beliefs F I (s;  )
                                                                                dW
exhibit increasing optimism in  in a hazard-rate sense. Then, E                  db
                                                                                       is higher than in
the benchmark with perfect targeting.
    b) Debt sentiments: Assume that investors and the planner share common beliefs
regardless of sentiments F I (s;  ) = F C,P (s) = F I,P (s),  , and creditors' beliefs F C (s;  )
                                                                                dW
exhibit increasing optimism in  in a hazard-rate sense. Then, E                  db
                                                                                        is lower than in
the benchmark with perfect targeting.

    With binding constraints, the covariance in Equation (33) determines welfare effects
with imperfect targeting. In the case of equity sentiments, the covariance is negative as
argued above. In the case of debt sentiments, the covariance is positive because market
valuations and incentives to take on leverage are both increasing in creditors' optimism.
Thus, relaxing the assumption that the planner has perfect knowledge of the beliefs of
investors and creditors may have an impact on the optimal policy, depending on the type
of the belief variation.

E.7.1    Proofs

Proof of Proposition 12
                                      ´¯
Let average beliefs be F j (s) =           F j (s;  ) dH ( ), j  {I, C }, and let the market valuation
under average beliefs be M (b), as defined in Equation (7). Since M (b) and dM   (b)
                                                                                db   are
                                                                        dM (b; )
linear functionals of beliefs, we have M (b) = E M b;  and dM   (b)
                                                               db   =E    db      . Now
                           dW
consider the value of       db
                                 in the benchmark with perfect targeting, which we denote as
dW 0
 db
     . With quadratic costs, Equation (9) implies that the sensitivity of investment to
                       dk (b; )   dM (b; )
leverage regulation is    db
                                =  db . Therefore, starting from Proposition 4, we get
                                                                                                 
     dW 0    dM P b
          =         E M b;  - 1 + E M P b;  - M b;                                    E M b;     .
      db       db

Moreover, Equation (33) with imperfect targeting becomes

                                                   ^         ^ b; 
                                                            dW
                                     dW
                                 E         =                         dH ( ) ,
                                      db                       db
                                               { :µ( )>0}




                                                       OA-11
where
                                                                                       
         ^ b; 
        dW                   dM p b                                        dM b; 
                                       M b;  - 1 + M p b - M b;                        .
          db                   db                                                 db

Moreover, we can write

               ^    ¯    ^ b; 
                        dW
                                                      
                                                                dM b; 
                                                                               
                                             dW 0
                                    dH ( ) =      - Cov M b;  ,        ,
                          db                  db                  db

so that we obtain
                                      
                                       dM b; 
                                                         
                                                               ^         ^ b; 
                                                                        dW
       dW        dW 0
     E         =      -  · Cov M b;  ,        -                                    dH ( ) ,
        db        db                     db                               db
                                                            { :µ( )0}


as required.

Proof of Proposition 12

This result follows directly by noting that the third term in Equation (33) is zero when
the constraint is binding for all  , and evaluating the covariance terms in each scenario
using the comparative statics in Proposition 3.




                                              OA-12
